Title       : Dissertation Research: The Domestic Use of Mound Sites: Implications for
               Inequality in Hopewell Households
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1996    
File        : a9613890

Award Number: 9613890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11162              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Hantman JLH3X@VIRGINIA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Jeffrey Hantman, MS Adrienne Lazazzera will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. For the past year MS Lazazzera has
              conducted archaeological excavation at the site of Fort Ancient, and with NSF
              support she will obtain radiocarbon dates and contract for the analysis of
              botanical remains. She will also study comparative materials from other
              Hopewell sites. Fort Ancient is a Middle Woodland hilltop earthwork which dates
              from ca. 200 BC to 400 AD and is situated on the bluffs above the Little Miami
              River in Ohio. Over 3 miles of earthen walls enclose approximately 100 acres.
              Although it was built over several hundred years, Fort Ancient is properly
              considered monumental architecture since its construction necessitated
              extensive leveling of the hilltop itself and extending portions of the plateau
              to accommodate the site's architectural plan. Based on work at other Hopewell
              sites, most archaeologists believe that they served primarily ritual functions
              since large burial mounds and elaborate grave items are often present. While
              work at Fort Ancient has uncovered a large ossuary burial as well as stone
              covered graves and indications of other ritual activities, the researchers have
              also discovered solid evidence for occupation of the interior of the earthwork
              by domestic family groups. This finding is extremely unexpected and thus makes
              the site of great archaeological interest. Although the excavation of the site
              will, hopefully, be completed in the summer of 1996 and many of the materials
              have been analyzed, it is still necessary to obtain absolute dates for
              different features within the site and to analyze the botanical remains. These
              latter permit reconstruction of both environment and diet and provide insight
              into the seasons of occupation  The Hopewell culture has proven an enigma to
              archaeologists. It marks an early stage in the development of complex society
              in North America and it is unclear, even  with many sites excavated, how this
              prehistoric society was structured. Extensive earthworks such as Fort Ancient
              and associated elaborate burials with precious trade goods suggest the presence
              of a stratified society with chiefs or elites which could command and control
              labor. However excavation of habitation sites has not provided evidence of such
              stratification since domestic units have the same range of material present.
              Until the recent Fort Ancient research, archaeologists had believed that large
              earthwork/mound sites were not the focus for habitation and that they served
              special purpose and ritual functions only. The discovery of supposed habitation
              sites at Fort Ancient now substantially changes this picture. If  habitations
              were present this suggests that a stratified society model is correct. MS
              Lazazzera's work with help to solve this question.  This research is important
              for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists
              and shed new light on an important but poorly understood period of American
              prehistory. It will increase understanding of how complex societies develop and
              assist in training a promising young scientist.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
