Title       : Rearrangements of Carbenes and Diazirine Excited States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9613861

Award Number: 9613861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $573400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew S. Platz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Matthew S. Platz of the Department of Chemistry at Ohio State   University
              is supported by a grant from the Organic Dynamics Program to   continue his
              studies of the rearrangements of carbenes and excited states   of diazirines. 
              He will study alkyl, dialkyl, cycloalkyl, and acyl   carbenes generated by
              laser flash photolysis of nitrogenous and   non-nitrogenous precursors,
              examining the influence of carbene structure   and isotopic composition,
              temperature, and solvent polarity on the rate   of carbene rearrangement. 
              Calculational studies will address the   possible roles of quantum mechanical
              tunneling and dynamical effects in   these rearrangements.  Rearrangement and
              cleavage mechanisms of   diazirines will be probed by low-temperature high
              resolution fluorescence   spectroscopy.  New types of carbene precursors, more
              efficient than those   currently used, will be used to generate carbenes at low
              temperature,   allowing their study by UV-visible and infrared spectroscopy and
                experimentally addressing the issue of ground state electronic structure  
              for simple dialkyl carbenes.  In contrast to typical stable organic compounds,
              which are based on   carbon atoms connected to four other atoms, carbenes,
              which contain   carbon bonded to only two other atoms, are high-energy
              compounds.    None-the-less, carbenes appear to be formed in a large number of
              chemical   reactions, and development of an understanding of their properties
              and   chemistry remains an important research goal.  Professor Platz will study
                the influence of several critical variables on the reaction chemistry of  
              carbenes and will couple these studies with calculational work in order   to
              assess the influence of electronic structure and quantum mechanical   effects
              on these reactions.  He will prepare organic compounds which   serve as
              precursors to carbenes, allowing the formation of ordinarily   reactive
              carbenes under conditions which permit their experimental study,   and will
              analyze the chemistry of other carbene precursors, widely used   throughout the
              world research community, which appear to display more   complex chemistry than
              generally appreciated.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
