Title       : Cycloaddition Chemistry of Cyclic Oxyallic Cations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9613822

Award Number: 9613822
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Harmata harmatam@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Professor Michael Harmata's studies of the cycloaddition chemistry of   cyclic
              oxyallylic cations are supported by the Organic Synthesis Program.    Dr.
              Harmata, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of   Missouri -
              Columbia, is studying (4+3) cycloaddition reactions, focusing   on several
              novel aspects of this class of reactions.  Cycloaddition   reactions of
              substrates containing halogen substituents provide products   which may be
              elaborated into more complex structures, particularly   through quasi-Favorskii
              rearrangements.  Use of chiral bases to mediate   the (4+3) cycloadditions,
              particularly in substrates designed to permit   intramolecular delivery of the
              chiral base, will impart chirality to the   cycloadducts.  Representative
              members of the cyclooctanoid class of   natural products, dactylol and
              11-hydroxyjasionone, will be prepared   through synthetic routes highlighting
              the efficacy of the (4+3)   cycloaddition reactions of oxyallylic cations. 
              Synthesis of the often-complex molecules forming the basis of modern   chemical
              and pharmaceutical science requires the formation of   carbon-carbon bonds in a
              highly selective manner.  `Cycloaddition`   reactions, in which two (or more)
              reacting molecules add to one another   to form a cyclic product, represent a
              particularly powerful way in which   to achieve such selective bond formation. 
              Dr. Harmata studies   cycloaddition reactions which result in the formation of
              compounds   containing seven carbon atoms in a ring, exploring ways to
              introduce   additional selectivity and versatility into these reactions.  He
              will   exploit an unusual ring transformation reaction which allows the  
              conversion of these seven-membered ring compounds into products   containing
              eight-membered rings.  These studies will culminate in the   synthesis of
              several specific compounds, including 11-hydroxyjasionone,   which displays
              antibacterial and antifungal activity, and will serve as a   general platform
              for the synthesis of other eight-membered ring compounds   of known or
              potential biological or medicinal activity.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
