Title       : Theoretical Investigation of Geochemical Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2001   
File        : a9613753

Award Number: 9613753
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393096             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold C. Helgeson brogie@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9613753  Helgeson     The objectives of this project over the next five years
              include  1)  chemical and thermodynamic assessment of the interdependence of
              thermobarophilic microbial metabolism, petroleum generation and maturation,
              reversible and irreversible diagenetic reactions, and the organic chemistry of
              interstitial fluids in sedimentary basins,  2)  comprehensive calculation of
              chemical affinities and Gibbs free energy minima to quantify the chemical
              parameters that control the biochemical and organic-inorganic reactions that
              take place in hydrocarbon reservoirs, and  3)  determination of the
              thermodynamic behavior of thermophilic biomolecules at elevated temperatures
              and pressures in order to better characterize reaction pathways and the role of
              microbes in diagenetic processes.  The methods to be employed consist of
              thermodynamic calculations and computer experiments carried out with the aid of
              equations of state using compositional and thermodynamic data reported in the
              literature to characterize the causes and consequences of microbial activity in
              diagenetic processes.  The significance of the proposed research to the
              advancement of knowledge is to improve our understanding of the effect of
              hydrocarbons and mineralogic substrates on microbial metabolism and the
              biogeochemical role of thermophilic microbes in catalyzing irreversible
              reactions among minerals and organic and inorganic aqueous species and
              biomolecules in diagenetic processes.   It has become increasingly apparent in
              recent years that understanding the biogeochemistry of the organic-inorganic
              interface and the role of thermophilic microbes in catalyzing diagenetic
              reactions in sedimentary basins is critical to accurate description and
              interpretation of phase relations in these basins.  A myriad of reversible and
              irreversible reactions occur among biomolecules and other organic aqueous
              species, minerals and inorganic aqueous species, and hydrocarbon solids,
              liquids, and gases in diagenetic processes, all of which are in prin ciple
              amenable to thermodynamic analysis.  This approach can be used to assess
              reaction pathways and the energy, carbon, and nutrient sources used by
              thermophiles in mediating diagenetic reactions.  It can also be used to
              quantify the relative stabilities of extracellular enzymes and other
              biomolecules required to support life at high temperatures.  Experimental data
              reported in the literature indicate that biomolecules become increasingly
              sensitive to their chemical environment with increasing temperature.  However,
              if the chemical potentials of H2 (and therefore O2), H2O, CO2, NH3, and H2S are
              favorable, biomolecules may persist at high temperatures for periods of time
              well in excess of those required for regeneration of the molecules by
              thermophilic microbes.  Calculation of the relative stabilities of biomolecules
              in the interstitial fluids of sedimentary basins as a function of the
              fugacities of these gases can be carried out with the aid of group additivity
              equations of state developed in this laboratory with prior NSF support. 
              Combining these equations with thermodynamic data and equations of state
              parameters permits investigation of the chemical and thermodynamic consequences
              of reactions among biomolecules and a wide variety of minerals, gases,
              hydrocarbon liquids, and both organic and inorganic aqueous species at elevated
              temperatures and pressures.  These include irreversible reactions which provide
              an energy source for microbial metabolism, as well as reversible reactions
              representing local and partial metastable or stable equilibrium states such as
              those described by Shock (1987, 1988, 1989, 1990a), Helgeson et al.  (1993,
              1995), Helgeson and Amend (1994), Seewald (1994, 1996), and Schulte and Shock
              (1996).  The purpose of this proposal is to request long-range support for
              continuation of this research in order to investigate and quantify
              thermodynamic constraints on the biogeochemical role of microbes in diagenetic
              processes.
