Title       : State Resolved Dynamics of Metal Atom-H2/CH4 Reactive Collisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1996  
File        : a9613751

Award Number: 9613751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Kleiber paul-kleiber@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth M. Sando  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the  
              Chemistry Division, Professors P. Kleiber and K. Sando of the University   of
              Iowa will continue their investigations of state-resolved molecular   dynamics
              using `half-collision` methods.  They pioneered the application   of the 
              technique known as scattering state spectroscopy in order to   study inelastic
              (including chemically reactive) collisions.  In this   project they will extend
              these experiments to collisions of metal atoms   with the molecules H2 and CH4.
               Another, new technique involves   `fractional collisions,` in which scattering
              resonances in a   metal-ion/molecule collision complex are detected using
              orbital-following   models.  These are somewhat complementary techniques which
              help describe   different aspects of the collision process.  %%%  Theoretical
              models exist for the photodissociation of alkali diatomic   molecules, but such
              theories are often not amenable to simple physical   interpretation and can not
              easily be applied to complex dissociation   processes.  In some cases of
              current interest, such as collisions between   ultra-cold atoms, the underlying
              physics is not understood well enough to   allow application of theoretical
              methods with confidence.  The results of   these experiments on reactions
              between excited metal atoms and molecules   in relatively simple systems will
              allow theoretical dynamical models to   be tested before applying them to more
              complicated problems in the domain   of collision and photodissociation
              dynamics.  Practical applications   include a better understanding of chemical
              vapor deposition processes                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
