Title       : A Joint Research Effort between UMCP and UNAM: "Environmental Risk of Arsenic:
               Geochemical Processes and Speciation"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9613706

Award Number: 9613706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104524             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alba Torrents alba@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen P. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1179,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9613706  Torrents  Understanding the sources and sinks of heavy metals in the 
              environment is critical to developing technologies to  prevent pollution from
              these elements.  The proposed  research addresses the physical and chemical
              interactions of  arsenic with soils and sediments before it ultimately finds 
              its way into ground or surface water.  This topic is of  particular importance
              in all Latin American countries and  especially Mexico. Arsenic pollution of
              groundwater and  surface waters leads to human health problems such as  cancer,
              and is particularly problematic in mining areas  where complex geochemistries
              determine its fate.  To help  understand how the reactions of various minerals
              interact  under natural conditions and how the site geochemistry  influences
              the migration of As metals and metalloids, the  research will study As
              speciation and sorption as a function  of soil mineral composition, pH, Eh, and
              the presence of  dissolved organic and inorganic ions. The major objective is 
              to quantify the relative importance of the different  processes on As mobility.
               Specific objectives include:  developing meaningful laboratory leaching tests
              to assess  how labile As and As-rich-tailings are;   developing  analytical and
              extraction techniques to determine As-  speciation in soils;  quantifying the
              importance of Fe and  Mn oxides in As retention;   quantifying factors
              controlling  As dissolution.  An understanding of As geochemistry can  lead to
              better means of  pollution prevention, especially  from mining sources.  The
              proposed work is part of an ongoing collaboration  agreement between University
              of Maryland College Park (UMCP)  and Universidad Autonoma de Mexico (UNAM) to
              build a program  in Environmental Engineering which will facilitate the  visits
              by students/researchers,  develop an infrastructure  to facilitate "sandwich'
              degrees (students from UMCP to  conduct field work in Mexico and students from
              Mexico to  participate in courses at UMCP),   train Mexican students in  topics
               of interest to their own country, and identify and  establish new areas of
              common interest between the two  universities.  The proposed research will use
              both surrogate  contaminated soils spiked with different levels of  As under
              different pH and redox conditions, and  real As-rich tailings and will include
              a mixture  of laboratory and field work.   Well controlled  laboratory studies
              will be designed to elucidate  mechanisms.  The field studies, conducted in 
              Mexico, will elucidate the relative importance of  the different mechanisms
              from both a kinetic and a  thermodynamic approach.  The approach taken in  this
              proposal and the knowledge gained will not  only benefit the environment
              surrounding mining  communities but also extensive geothermal and  agricultural
              areas where arsenic concentrations  are often high.  Knowledge gained will
              provide a  basis upon which pollution control technologies  may be
              established.***
