Title       : Salish Kootenai College-Rural Systemic Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0086159

Award Number: 0086159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1356000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith M. Gobert judy_gobert@skc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salish Kootenai Coll
	      P O BOX 117
	      Pablo, MT  598550117    406/675-4800

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Salish Kootenai College Rural Systemic Initiative (SKC RSI-Phase II) will
              result in a
transformation of the educational experience for both teachers and
              students. Professional
development for teachers, adoption of effective
              assessment strategies, and promotion of 
community involvement in the
              educational process will enhance the quality and quantity of the
learning
              experience for students in science, mathematics, and technology within and
              beyond the
school walls.  The classroom teacher is the key to the
              effectiveness of the delivery of curricular
changes to the individual student.
              In the SKC RSI project, the primary goal is to have every
teacher achieve the
              status of "master teacher" and to have every student achieve the status 
of
              "master learner."  It is important to understand that the journey of the
              educational experience 
Is a balanced effort between teachers and
              students.

The overall goal of this proposal is to implement a comprehensive,
              sustainable, adaptable
system-wide reform of science, mathematics and
              technology instruction and learning on the
Flathead Indian Reservation in
              Montana. This will lead to increased achievement for all students
and
              specifically emphasizes greater achievements for two groups of under-served
              populations in
this rural setting: Native American students and girls. 
              

SKC is the resource identifier for science, mathematics, and technology
              areas and has
already developed coursework in biology, chemistry, physics, and
              earth sciences. SKC will, in
effect, become a "mini clearinghouse" for
              science, mathematics, and technology (SMT) areas
using American
              Indian-specific teaching and learning materials in professional development
in
              SMT areas for teachers and students. SKC is currently preparing assessment
              strategies
and activities that will be shared with other TCRSI
              projects.

Other major goals are the improvement of science, mathematics, and
              technology education
on the Flathead Indian Reservation including access to
              high quality, standards-based 
instruction for all students, innovative use of
              educational technologies for interactive delivery
and the training of the
              teaching workforce to meet the demands of a new instructional
paradigm.
              Rigorous, standards-based instruction for all students will be implemented on
              the
Flathead Indian Reservation and the curriculum, professional development,
              and assessment
systems to support that instruction. The development of the
              policy changes and resource
allocations to support these efforts are the
              long-term goal of the SKC RSI Program.



