Title       : PGE/SEP: Improving the Mathematical Skills of Deaf High School Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0086345

Award Number: 0086345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77836              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dianne Brooks dkbnca@rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Menchel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to increase the number of high school deaf
              girls who take mathematics classes in high school, with an ultimate goal of
              increasing the numbers who major in science, mathematics, engineering and
              technology (SMET) in college and who eventually enter careers in SMET.  At
              present, very few deaf girls think of careers in SMET because they are not
              encouraged to take mathematics and science courses while in high school.  Deaf
              girls generally are not encouraged by teachers or counselors to consider
              careers in SMET.  Part of the reason for the lack of deaf women in SMET is due
              to stereotyping and partly due to the historical perspective about deaf in
              general.  This project, through a partnership between the National Technical
              Institute for the Deaf (NTID) and Mt. Holyoke College, will integrate deaf
              female high school students into a well established and successful summer
              mathematics program at Mt. Holyoke.  Through their summer experience in this
              program, it is expected that the deaf girls will gain confidence in their
              ability to handle mathematics and will consider careers in SMET.

The deaf
              girls in this project will be integrated into the Mt. Holyoke Summermath
              program with full support of interpreters and other services funded by this
              grant.  This will be the first time that deaf girls will be able to attend one
              of many summer math programs for high school girls presently offered at many
              colleges in the United States.  These programs have been closed to deaf
              students.  By forming a partnership between NTID and Mt. Holyoke, pre-training
              in deaf strategies can be provided to the faculty and staff at Mt. Holyoke,
              pre-training in deaf education strategies can be provided to the faculty and
              staff at Mt. Holyoke, and needed support services will be provided to the deaf
              girls.  Through this partnership, it is expected that the girls' self esteem,
              confidence, problem solving abilities toward mathematics and science will be
              strengthened, and that the girls will be more willing to take science and
              mathematics courses in high school and be better prepared to enter
              postsecondary programs in SMET.

This project will have a very powerful
              impact on deaf education, since these initial eight students can become role
              models for other deaf high school girls.  Furthermore, this project should help
              to change teachers', administrators', and parents' perspectives on the career
              opportunities for deaf females.  It is expected that this project will also
              open the doors of other SMET summer programs for high school students at
              postsecondary programs, and will provide real gender equality to a group of
              students that have been shut out from these opportunities because of their
              deafness.

