Title       : PGE/SEP: Gender Differences in the Perception and Use of Informal Science
               Learning Website
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0086338

Award Number: 0086338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela R. Aschbacher pama@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the potential to promote understanding and interest in
              science among middle school girls on an informal science learning web site
              called Whyville.  Whyville provides an environment for students to explore
              scientific phenomenon, together with other students, and participate in both
              scientific and design activities.  Preliminary studies of the current Whyville
              users show that over 60% of the users are girls, most from grades 4-8.  Because
              Whyville is successful in attracting girls to a science oriented site, it is
              poised to be a potentially powerful tool for motivating and educating girls in
              science.

The proposed project would use several methodologies to investigate
              Whyville characteristics, participants, and effects.  A survey of the current
              Whyville users (N=600) will gather data on science interest, demographics, and
              background.  Focus groups with current users (N=20) will be conducted on-line,
              within Whyville, to gather information on site use.  A group of first time
              users (N=60) will be recruited from local schools and given a science interest
              and background survey, as well as a pre-assessment before entering Whyville. 
              Then, using a tracking program, a subset of the current users (N=60) and all
              first time users will have their movements on the site monitored for three
              months in order to determine the activities of greatest interest and appeal.  A
              subgroup (N=20) of new and current users will "visit" Whyville in a lab setting
              where their use of the site will be tracked in depth.  They will also
              participate in a "think aloud" session with an interviewer while using Whyville
              and will explain their perceptions and understanding of the science content. 
              The new users will also be asked to complete an interim assessment at the end
              of their "think aloud" session.  Finally, any subsequent voluntary use of
              Whyville by these new users will be tracked for three months and they will be
              asked to complete a post-assessment to provide a third comparison point for the
              impact of Whyville exposure on science concept knowledge.

The research
              proposed should provide a number of benefits.  Its examination of Whyville
              characteristics, participants, and effects may provide a model for researchers,
              evaluators and site developers in future work.  The findings should suggest
              guidelines for improving the effectiveness of educational websites in
              attracting your girls' interest in science and technology, and they may have
              important implications for improving school-based learning as well.


