Title       : New Technologies for the Environment: Continuous Belt Air to Vacuum to Air (AVA)
               Technology for Remanufacturing and Recycling in High Technology Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0086666

Award Number: 0086666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99843              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. S. Sampath sampath@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt Barth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1605,1669,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this New Technologies for the Environment project is to adapt
              the air to vacuum (AVA) conveyor system to meet the needs of recycling and
              remanufacturing.  It is expected that the recycling and remanufacturing of
              printed circuit boards (PCBs) and solar cells can be enhanced and made more
              cost effective if the AVA system can be introduced into the process. The
              manufacturing of PCBs is a very large industry ($20 billion globally) and there
              is a very large growth (20% annually) in the solar cell industry. High
              technology industries contribute significantly to the economy. Most of the
              products of the high technology industries are manufactured in systems where
              the air has been removed (vacuum environments).  At the present time, recycling
              and remanufacturing is extremely limited in the high technology industries.
              Many of the products at the end of their life cycle end up in landfills and
              contribute to the pollution. Many of the same vacuum processes used for
              manufacturing can also be used for recycling and remanufacturing.  These
              processes which offer great environmental benefits are not currently used due
              to the low throughput and high cost of vacuum processing. In order to reduce
              the cost of vacuum processing of thin films, a unique belt conveyor system has
              been developeda that transports discrete objects from air to vacuum for
              processing and then back to air. 

The environmental impact of this study
              will be to reduce the waste going into the landfills and the associated water
              pollution. The recycling and remanufacturing will also reduce the overall
              pollution from the manufacturing of these products.



