Title       : Field Testing & Monitoring of Structural Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0086596

Award Number: 0086596
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3421680            (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Wallace wallacej@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel P. Conte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah L. Estrin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan P. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
              Program is a project funded under the NSF Major Research Equipment Program. 
              This cooperative agreement, under the NEES Program, establishes at the
              University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), a NEES equipment site for field
              testing and monitoring of structural performance.  UCLA will design, construct,
              install, commission, and operate a mobile field laboratory for forced-vibration
              testing and earthquake aftershock monitoring of full-scale structures.  This
              equipment will be operational by September 30, 2004 or earlier and will be
              managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment site, with teleparticipation
              capabilities, to provide new earthquake engineering research capabilities
              through field experimentation and monitoring through 2014.  This NEES equipment
              site will be connected to the NEES collaboratory through the University's
              Abilene Internet2 connection, with 1 Gb/sec capabilities.  Shared-use access
              and training will be coordinated through the NEES Consortium.  This award is an
              outcome of the peer review of proposals submitted to program solicitation NSF
              00-6, "NEES: Earthquake Engineering Research Equipment." The following
              equipment is provided under this award:  (1) four state-of-the-art forced
              vibration sources that include one omni-directional eccentric mass vibrator
              with maximum force of 10 kips (continuous operation) and 20 kips (intermittent
              operation) over a frequency range of 0.1-4.2 Hz, two uni-directional eccentric
              mass vibrators with maximum force of 100 kips and frequency range of 0-25 Hz,
              and one linear inertial shaker with maximum force of 5 kips and programmable
              arbitrary force (or acceleration) time histories over a wide frequency range
              (0-60 Hz), (2) wireless sensor and data acquisition system (accelerometers,
              LVDT's, fiber optic gage readout unit, digitizers, routers, and workstations),
              (3) a cone penetration truck, equipped with a seismic piezocone, 20-ton
              hydraulic push capacity, side augers, and in situ soil vibration sensors, and
              (4) networking equipment (data concentrator, satellite uplink station) to allow
              for real-time data acquisition, processing, and world wide web broadcasting of
              experimental results.  Large arrays of sensors will be placed in buildings and
              the surrounding foundation soils to obtain high spatial and temporal resolution
              response data at levels of detail that have not been previously possible. 
              These structures will be excited in the linear and nonlinear range using linear
              and eccentric shaker systems, or in some cases, using quasi-static loading with
              actuators.  The data obtained will lead to a better understanding of linear and
              nonlinear response mechanisms (including damage localization,
              soil-structure-foundation interaction effects, and nonstructural
              participation), and will aid in the development and verification of improved
              numerical models indispensable for the full realization of the
              performance-based earthquake engineering paradigm. The equipment can also be
              used for forced vibration experiments and aftershock monitoring of structures
              in the event of a large earthquake. UCLA will integrate this field testing
              facility into its undergraduate and graduate curricula and research program,
              post-earthquake reconnaissance involving students under the guidance of a
              mentor, and provide training opportunities for outside researchers.
