Title       : ITR: A Petabyte in Your Pocket
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0086002

Award Number: 0086002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4610000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Dewitt dewitt@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey F. Naughton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1655,1661,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In 2015, for a few hundred dollars a year, everyone will have a personal
              petabyte database (PetDB) that can be accessed from any point of connection,
              with any device from a high-powered workstation to a PDA.  Each individual's
              PetDB will be their evolving and customized view of all the on-line digital
              data that exists anywhere. It will store and organize any kind of digital data,
              without losing structure or information. All this data will be queryable and
              arranged by type, content, structure, association and multiple categorizations
              and groupings. The PetDB is an example of what could be done with a new
              generation of software infrastructure we term Net Data Managers (NDMs). The
              object of this research is not to build a PetDB per se; but to design and
              implement the NDM technology upon which PetDBs and other applications could be
              readily built. NDMs are a departure from current database management systems.
              They focus on data movement, rather than data storage and must handle data of
              arbitrary types, without necessarily having a matching database schema. They
              must execute queries over tens of thousands of information sites, while
              monitoring possibly millions of triggers over rapidly changing information
              sources.  The first exploratory steps have been taken towards NDMs with initial
              work on XML querying, text in context indexing and searching, multi-trigger
              planning and data stream processing. This work has demonstrated some of the
              basic capabilities of NDMs.  Continued research will address the challenging
              fundamental problems that must be solved to extend these capabilities to
              exploit the full capabilities of NDMs.  At the same time, the scale at which
              NDMs operate will be extended, in terms of numbers of users, tasks and sites,
              as well as data volumes, through distributed and parallel implementations. 
