Title       : New Functionalized Mesoporous Silicas for Adsorption of Heavy Metal Ions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  2000  
File        : a0086512

Award Number: 0086512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mietek Jaroniec jaroniec@columbo.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS- 0086512
"New Functionalized Mesoporous Silicas for Adsorption of Heavy
              Metal Ions"

Mietek Jaroniec
Kent State University

ABSTRACT

This
              research project is focused on the development of heavy-metal-ion adsorbents
              that would exhibit high loading capacities and could be readily regenerated and
              reused without any appreciable loss of the loading capacity.  More
              specifically, the effort is to synthesize new mesoporous silica-based
              adsorbents for removal of mercury ions and other heavy-metal ions from aqueous
              solution. The porous silica surface is being functionalized with ligands such
              as 1-benzoyl-3-[3-(triethoxysilyl)propyl]thiourea and
              1-allyl-3-[3-(triethoxysilyl)- propyl] thiourea, which are expected to bind
              mercury and other heavy metal ions less strongly than in the case of commonly
              used 3-mercaptopropyl ligands.  Thus, it should be possible to regenerate these
              new adsorbents under milder conditions (i.e., without using concentrated
              acids), and consequently, to prevent the loss of adsorption capacity upon
              regeneration. These adsorbents are being prepared by a direct functionalization
              of self-assembled silica/surfactant mesostructured materials and by
              functionalization of surfactant-free mesoporous silicas of high specific
              surface areas, large pore volumes, and readily accessible porous structures.
              The performance of the resulting heavy-metal- ion adsorbents are critically
              evaluated, and the best combination of support, functionalization procedure,
              and ligand for water treatment is being sought.

	The immediate impact of the
              proposed research will be the availability of novel, easy-to- regenerate
              adsorbents for selective adsorption of harmful heavy-metal ions from waters. 
              This study promises to provide valuable insight into important and yet largely
              unresolved problems of the influence of confined geometry and pore size on
              adsorption of ionic and molecular species and to reveal a potentially useful
              correlation between the structure and type of bonded layers with their
              performance in metal-ion adsorption. The interdisciplinary nature of the
              proposed research provides a unique educational opportunity for training
              graduate and undergraduate students for a range of careers in academia and
              industry. Also, students will have an excellent opportunity to participate in
              the international collaborations established by PI in the area of synthesis,
              functionalization, and application of nanostructured materials. 


