Title       : Improving Institutional Research in Post Secondary Educational Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0086139

Award Number: 0086139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Tsapogas                           
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3635540            (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence R. Russell trussell@mailer.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc for Inst Res
	      114 Stone Building
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064462    850/644-4470

NSF Program : 8807      HUMAN RESOURCES STATISTICS PGM
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This five-year project will support a variety of activities designed to promote
              the use of national databases of the National Center for Education Statistics
              (NCES) and the National Science Foundation (NSF).  The grantee, the Association
              for Institutional Research (AIR), will organize and administer a program to
              support several types of awards to investigators using these data bases.  The
              project will consist of eight components.  The first three components include
              continuing support from the previous award.  The first component would support
              fellowships to individuals to support on-site work in Washington, DC providing
              professional experiences to the fellows using NSF and NCES databases.  The
              second components would support research work at the awardees home institution
              on NSF or NCES databases.  The third component would provide support for
              communicating and disseminating information about the content of the NSF and
              NCES databases and techniques for utilization of these databases for analysis. 
              The fourth component of the project includes dissertation fellowships.  This
              program will provide fellowships to conduct dissertation research on
              postsecondary education using NSF and NCES databases.  The fifth component of
              the program includes an interdisciplinary certificate program operated at U. S.
              universities.  This program will allow students or professionals to enroll and
              obtain a certificate in institutional research.  The programs will use NSF and
              NCES databases in their training and course work.  The sixth component of the
              program is the support of senior fellows.  The fellows will be selected and are
              expected to serve in residence at NCES or NSF during an academic year to gain
              experience on the operations of Federal statistical agencies regarding the
              organization and collection of postsecondary institutional data.  The seventh
              component of the project includes national collaborative training on IPEDS
              data.  Workshops will be designed to train staff from postsecondary
              institutions in the actual web based collection of IPEDS data using newly
              designed analytical tools from NCES and in dealing with common data base and
              organizational problems that are part of the implementation of a new
              technology.  The eighth component of the project includes the design and
              development of a Voluntary Institutional On-Line Information Network.
