Title       : NTE: Ultraviolet (UV) Light Surface Treatment of Polymers and Metals - An
               Environmentally Benign Manufacturing Process for Enhanced Paint and Adhesive
               Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a0086826

Award Number: 0086826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98637              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence T. Drzal DRZAL@EGR.MSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1605,1669,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              There is a growing need for a fast, robust, efficient and environmentally benign
              surface treatment process for plastics and metals that can be easily
              incorporated into the manufacturing environment.  This New Technologies for the
              Environment project  will emphasize high risk/high return, exploratory
              feasibility study into the ability to use UV light, in air, to clean and
              surface treat polymer and metals surfaces as a replacement technology for
              abrasion, solvent and detergent based cleaning methods to prepare surfaces to
              painting and/or adhesive bonding.  The UV source will illuminate a surface with
              photons of sufficient energy and intensity in air to create atomic oxygen and
              ozone to both decompose surface contaminants and oxidize and increase the
              surface energy of the surface being illuminated.  If this process could be
              accomplished, it would result in a reduction in VOCs; a reduction in detergent
              fouled waste water; and a reduction in fine particulates. This technology also
              has the potential to be very cost effective through its energy efficiency. 


              Preliminary research being conducted has shown the potential ubiquitous nature
              of this process to a large variety of polymer and metal surfaces.  Research in
              this portion of the project will be directed at the fundamental scientific and
              engineering aspects of this process which would allow life-cycle considerations
              for costs and efficient materials reuse in a sustainable materials stream.
