Title       : Engineering Functionalized Mesoporous Materials for Selective Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0086777

Award Number: 0086777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73772              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Maginn ed@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1605,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0086777
Edward  J. Maginn
U. of Notre Dame
 
This project
              concerns the synthesis, characterization and evaluation of functionalized
              mesoporous silica-based materials for adsorption-based separations critical to
              environmental applications. Specifically, we seek to develop high performance
              adsorbents for two applications: the remediation of aqueous streams
              contaminated with heavy metals, and the separation of paraffin/olefin gas
              mixtures.

Heavy metal contamination is a major source of environmental
              concern, and existing technologies are not always adequate for meeting
              stringent regulatory limits. There has been renewed interest recently in
              developing highly selective adsorbents for the removal of heavy metals such as
              mercury from aqueous streams, but most of the attention has focused on
              optimizing the selectivity of materials. Many practical engineering concerns
              such as stability, regeneration capability and mass transfer issues have been
              largely ignored.

Olefin/paraffin separation represents another opportunity
              where advanced adsorbents can play a large role in environmental protection.
              Due to the high capital costs associated with distillation of these mixtures,
              many chemical production facilities flare recycle purge streams containing
              valuable olefin species. This results in a significant waste of feedstock as
              well as increased emissions. A low capital adsorption-based process that could
              separate these mixtures is highly desirable, but requires the development of
              new types of adsorbent materials.

Using molecular modeling as a guide, we
              will follow a strategy in which mesoporous silicas from the M41S family of
              materials are tailored for either heavy metal remediation or olefin/paraffin
              separation by functionalizing the pore walls with ligands. The ligands will be
              chosen so as to tune the pore diameter and interaction strength between the
              target species and the ligand to achieve desirable separation performance. This
              means that the interaction strength must be great enough to achieve high
              selectivity and capacity, but weak enough so that the material can be easily
              regenerated. We will also engineer the material to achieve optimum mass
              transfer characteristics. Our synthetic strategy will build on some of our
              recent work in which we have attached organosilane ligands onto the pore walls
              of mesoporous silica. These materials can be made in powdered form using
              conventional techniques. We have also been able to synthesis self-supporting
              functionalized "macrostructures" using an emulsion process.

The project
              involves three main components. Detailed molecular modeling studies using Monte
              Carlo and molecular dynamics techniques will be conducted to probe fundamental
              issues pertaining to the way in which ligands interact with guest species to
              change the adsorption thermodynamics and diffusion properties of the system.
              Using these results as a guide, we will then incorporate different ligands into
              mesoporous silica and characterize the materials using a range of techniques,
              including X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, transmission
              electron microscopy and nitrogen adsorption. For the heavy metal adsorbents, we
              will initially investigate the use of amine-terminated alkoxysilane ligands and
              sulfonated ligands with exchangeable cations. For the olefin/paraffin
              adsorbents, we will test whether metal cations such as silver can be used with
              the sulfonated ligands to selectively adsorb olefins. The performance of the
              materials will then be evaluated by measuring mixture isotherms to obtain
              selectivities and adsorption capacity. Importantly, we will also perform
              breakthrough curve analyses and regeneration tests using a packed bed. These
              tests will help determine the feasibility of using these materials for
              industrial and consumer applications.

