Title       : Upgrading, Development and Integration of Next Generation Earthquake Engineering
               Experimental Capability at Rensselaer's 100 g-ton Geotechnical Centrifuge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0086555

Award Number: 0086555
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2380579            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo Dobry dobryr@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tarek H. Abdoun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mourad Zeghal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Zimmie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed-W. M. Elgamal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0086555
Dobry

The Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
              Program is a project funded under the NSF Major Research Equipment Program. 
              This cooperative agreement, under the NEES Program, establishes a NEES
              centrifuge earthquake engineering research equipment site at Rensselaer
              Polytechnic Institute (RPI).  RPI will design, purchase, construct, install,
              commission, and operate new equipment for, and upgrades to, its existing 100
              g-ton Geotechnical Centrifuge. The upgraded Centrifuge will be operational by
              2004 or earlier and will be managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment
              site, with teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to provide new
              earthquake engineering research testing capabilities through 2014.  This NEES
              equipment site will be connected to the NEES collaboratory through a high
              performance network.  Shared-use access and training will be coordinated
              through the NEES Consortium.  This award is the outcome of peer review of this
              proposal submitted to program solicitation NSF 00-6, NEES: Earthquake
              Engineering Research Equipment. RPI's Geotechnical Centrifuge has been
              successfully used by RPI faculty and students and other researchers since 1991.
               The Centrifuge is located centrally on the RPI campus in the Jonsson
              Engineering Center.  This award provides the following equipment:  (a) one 2D
              in flight shaker (two prototype horizontal components) and associated 2D
              laminar box container to allow for more realistic 2D modeling, (b)
              modifications to the Centrifuge to enable safe operation of the 2D shaker, (c)
              one four degree-of-freedom robot, robot tools, and associated software, capable
              of performing in flight operations such as construction and excavation, pile
              driving, ground remediation, cone penetration, and static and cyclic loading
              tests without stopping the Centrifuge, (d) a networked data acquisition system
              with Internet teleobservation/teleoperation capability, to be linked to the
              high-speed RPI Gigabit Ethernet Backbone, (e) two high-speed cameras, image
              processing software, and commercial sensors, (f) advanced sensors for better
              resolution of the measured model response, and (g) additional instruments,
              special containers, and other equipment.  This upgraded Centrifuge will provide
              capabilities to investigate three important problems in earthquake engineering:
              lateral spreading and flow failure due to soil liquefaction, soil-structure
              interaction and foundation response due to liquefaction and lateral spreading,
              and the seismic behavior of innovative slope stabilization systems. This award
              includes a subaward to the University of California, San Diego, for a pilot
              project during the development of the Centrifuge's
              teleobservation/teleoperation capability.   RPI will integrate experimentation
              with the upgraded Centrifuge into its research program and undergraduate and
              graduate curricula and provide training opportunities for outside
              researchers.

