Title       : CISE Educational Innovation: A Tool-Supported Programming Languages Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2000  
File        : a0086255

Award Number: 0086255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anita J. LaSalle                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328989             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Waite William.Waite@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amer S. Diwan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michele H. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2888,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0086255
Waite, William M.
University of Colorado at Boulder 

CISE
              Educational Innovation: A Tool-Supported Programming Languages
              Curriculum

This project integrates research and development in software
              tools development into the undergraduate computer science program at this
              institution with special emphasis on computer-supported cooperative work and
              decision support. The project strategy involves "scaffolding" content-related
              problem solving skills and process-related group interaction skills by
              integrating a suite of tools, developed by the research community, into a
              three-course sequence required of all computer science majors. The key idea is
              that students are involved in realistic projects, beginning with their
              introductory courses, but an infrastructure selectively hides complexity from
              students. As students progress to more advanced courses, more of the complexity
              is revealed, until finally, students are involved in realistic projects
              involving significant collaborative work. The project has two components: (i) a
              software infrastructure that manages the complexity that students are exposed
              to, and (ii) a collection of tools that allow students to undertake larger
              projects than would normally be possible in a classroom setting. Students also
              use a web-based journal tool to keep track of significant milestones, problems,
              and other issues related to tasks assigned to them. The backbone of the
              collaborative system used in this project consists of a repository that
              contains code and implementation monitors for student projects, tools that
              students use when interacting with the materials in the repository, and a set
              of policies that control how students can interact with the repository
              contents. This project addresses the national need of educating software
              practitioners who can work on large, complex software systems in teams.

