Title       : Appalachia Rural Systemic Initiative (ARSI)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0086188

Award Number: 0086188
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10822306           (Estimated)
Investigator: Wimberly C. Royster royster@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kentucky Sci & Tech Coun
	      PO Bpox 1049
	      Lexington, KY  40588    606/259-0986

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Appalachian RSI (ARSI) has submitted a plan for another five years of
              support that is built upon the successes and experiences, as well as the
              programmatic infrastructure, of the first award.  The second phase is geared
              toward ensuring sustainability, although significant work in that area has
              already taken place, and on broadening the scope of the Teacher Partners' work
              to have a greater districtwide impact.  In addition to continuing to work
              toward the goals of Phase I (i.e., develop knowledge and skills in the teaching
              workforce; develop a sustainable system to support teachers and students; and
              develop the leadership and ancillary support to sustain the project), ARSI will
              promote the following specific Phase II goals:
Document the effectiveness of
              the program
Develop a research base for math and science reform in rural
              communities
Establish rural math and science education sites at
              Appalachia-serving universities

ARSI will promote these goals through a
              variety of activities and restructurings, such as:
Resource collaborative
              directors (RCDs) will assist participating districts with systemic reform
              strategies, as they have done during Phase I.  However, the emphasis will be
              more on district-wide rather than individual school development.

RCDs will
              also work with their sponsoring institutions to get the services that ARSI has
              provided institutionalized in the universities.  The ultimate objective for
              this activity is to evolve universities that are service-oriented to the
              Appalachian districts in their regions.

RCDs will continue and expand their
              efforts to engage State Departments of Education to support and promote the
              ARSI model, in non-participating as well as ineligible districts.

RCDs will
              continue to develop and nurture the Teacher Partners as instructional leaders
              in the region.  This is crucial as TPs expand their roles to a district
              scope.



