Title       : Development of Non-Clinker Based Cement for Hazard Reduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0086819

Award Number: 0086819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Surendra P. Shah s-shah@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kejin Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sankar Bhattacharja  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1605,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Concrete has been the material of choice for the nation's $1.4 trillion
              infrastructure. The rapid growth of human population, industrialization, and
              urbanization has led to more cement being used in concrete materials to meet
              the increasing needs of infrastructure. As a result, the environmental concerns
              related to portland cement clinker production, such as greenhouse gas (carbon
              dioxide, CO Z) emission and disposal of cement kiln dust (CKD), a by-product of
              cement manufacturing, have become increasingly important. The United States
              cement industry generates about 80 million tons of CO 2 and 5 million tons of
              CKD every year. The disposal of waste CKD is not only associated with the
              problem of land use but also with the contamination of ground water from
              leaching of chemicals (especially heavy metals) in the material. Similarly,
              another industrial by-product, fly ash, collected from the stack gases of power
              plants burning pulverized coal, is also commonly considered an extensive waste
              material. About 59 million tons of fly ash are generated annually in the United
              States and 80% is placed in landfills. The goal of the proposed research is to
              explore an effective way to substantially utilize CKD and fly ash by developing
              an environmentally friendly, sufficiently performing, and cost effective
              cementitious product (without portland cement clinker) for future concrete
              materials.

CKD and fly ash have been used as a supplementary cementitious
              material in concrete in small amounts. Usage is limited due to deficiencies of
              the two materials. For example, CKD contains an excessive amount of fine
              particles and a high alkali content, which often impart a,,,,erse effects on
              concrete workability and durability. Most fly ash hydrates slowly and some
              contain a high unburned carbon content. These inadequacies are unacceptable for
              strength development and volumetric stability of cement and concrete materials.
              However, if the two materials are blended together, the alkalis from CKD may
              activate hydration of fly ash. The proposed research involves properly blending
              CKD with fly ash to create a cementitious material in which the material
              deficiencies will be converted into benefits.

The proposed research program
              includes six major tasks: (1) raw material characterization, (2) statistical
              design and optimization of blend proportions, (3) the grinding process, (4)
              testing and evaluation for effectiveness of chemical and mechanical activation
              of the blends, (5) developing criteria for acceptance of new products, and (6)
              testing and evaluation for performance of concrete made with the new products.
              Task 2 contains four successive steps: design, preliminary optimization,
              refinement, and conformation, thus developing optimal blends orderly. A series
              of chemical, physical, and mechanical experiments will be used to evaluate
              product performance at each step of optimization, thus leading to the next
              optimal step of blend proportioning continuously. A systematical study of
              different grinding processes and their affect on alkali activation and cement
              hydration will be conducted along with the curing conditions that promote such
              hydration. Thus, four key issues, (a) alkali activation, (b) high-energy
              grinding, (c) proportion optimization, and (d) product performance, are brought
              together into the proposed development of a non-clinker CKD-fly ash cement. The
              new product performance is engineered by tailoring the chemistry,
              microstructure, and manufacturing process.

An interdisciplinary
              collaborative research team has been formed, consisting of members from the
              Center for Advanced Cement-Based Materials (ACBM) at Northwestern University
              (NU), Evanston, Illinois, and Construction Technology Laboratories, Inc. (CTL
              ), Skokie, Illinois. The team members have complementary strengths needed for
              the proposed research, with expertise in the areas of concrete material
              science, statistical design and analysis, cement chemistry, manufacturing,
              guideline development, and concrete testing and properties. Working together,
              they expect the successful conversion of CKD and fly ash from a current
              environmental burden and industrial profit "thief' into a viable construction
              material.

