Title       : Educational Innovation: Integrating Intelligent Agent and Wireless Computing
               Research into the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2000 
File        : a0086260

Award Number: 0086260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anita J. LaSalle                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329915             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane J. Cook cook@cse.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sajal K. Das  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Farhad A. Kamangar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence B. Holder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh Yerraballi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2888,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA- 0086260
Cook, Diane J.
University of Texas at Arlington

CISE
              Educational Innovation:  Integrating Intelligent Agent and Wireless Computing
              Research into the Undergraduate Curriculum

The research-base for this
              project is Artificial Intelligence (AI), in particular, rational agent
              development. The project provides undergraduate students with access to a
              large-scale distributed mobile agent laboratory containing both real and
              simulated agents. The focus of the project is new curriculum material for AI,
              mobile computing, multimedia, and robotics courses that allow students to test
              their knowledge in a real and virtual environment as well as new courses in
              human-computer interaction and wireless-multimedia computing. The PIs have
              demonstrated successful research and development of AI simulators that provide
              students with environments for testing agent design ideas in decision making,
              multi-agent cooperation, and learning.  The PIs expanded agent environment
              includes real-world tasks involving distributed decision-making, cooperation
              with both human and computer agents, and wireless communication. The project
              increases students' interest and expertise in this area through hands-on
              experiences with physical and simulated collaborative environments.  In
              particular, the project uses a wireless communication system, called Wireless
              Intelligent Simulator Environment (WISE), in this institution's Computer
              Science area that permits human, software, and robot agents to interact over a
              distributed environment. The WISE environment, in addition to supporting new
              features of this university's existing courses (in AI, Mobile Networking and
              Computing, Multimedia, Robotics, and Senior Capstone Design Courses), supports
              new courses in Human-Computer Interaction and Wireless Multimedia Computing. 

