Title       : Acquisition of Paleomagnetic Equipment for the Department of Earth Sciences,
               University of New Hampshire
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a0086672

Award Number: 0086672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50950              (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Clyde will.clyde@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0086672
Clyde

This grant provides partial funding for the development of a
              paleomagnetic laboratory at the University of New Hampshire.  This laboratory
              will strengthen research activities at UNH in three general ways.  It will (1)
              support the PI's research into magnetostratigraphy, (2) augment other
              University of New Hampshire faculty research programs in geophysics, tectonics,
              and stratigraphy, and (3) enhance the undergraduate and graduate curriculum. 
              The laboratory will be outfitted with a SQUID-based spinner magnetometer, a
              dual-chamber thermal demagnetizer, an alternating-field demagnetizer, and a
              three-dimensional field compensation coil system in which to house and operate
              this equipment.
At present there is no paleomagnetic facility in northern New
              England that is capable of measuring the remanent magnetization of weakly
              magnetized sediments.  This laboratory will provide this capability to
              researchers at UNH and surrounding institutions.  The primary research of the
              PI focuses on investigating the role that climatic and tectonic changes play in
              the evolution of mammals.  This research requires the ability to make precise
              chronostratigraphic correlations among continental sections and between
              continental sections and marine sections.  Magnetostratigraphy is the most
              reliable and applicable method to carry this out.  Other faculty at UNH will
              use the facility to augment their research into magnetic surveying, Appalachian
              tectonism, eustatic sea-level changes, and the stratigraphic architecture of
              paleoaquifers.  Several undergraduate and graduate classes will also use the
              facility for hands-on laboratory exercises.

***

