Title       : Thermally Responsive Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2000  
File        : a0086961

Award Number: 0086961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Paul drp@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS- 0086961
Thermally Responsive Membranes
Donald R. Paul
Univerisity of
              Texas Austin

Abstract

Polymer membranes for separation of gases and
              liquids are well known; however, this research addresses a new set of
              applications, such as seed coatings and membranes for modified atmosphere
              packaging that require  membranes with an abnormal increase in penetrant
              permeability as temperature is increased.  The basis for these so-called
              "thermally responsive membranes" is polymers having long alkyl side-chains that
              can crystallize.  The melting point of the side-chain provides a switch effect
              for properties like flow, adhesion, or permeation; the temperature of melting
              can be adjusted by the length of the alkyl unit attached to a polyacrylate or a
              polymethacrylate backbone.  In their simplest form, membranes formed from such
              polymers exhibit a dramatic change in permeability to gases, water, and other
              penetrants by a factor of 10 to 100-fold over a narrow temperature range, i.e.,
              a permeability switch.  One objective of this research is to develop a better
              understanding of how the chemical and physical structure of such membranes must
              be manipulated in order to achieve a desired switch effect.  A fundamental
              problem relates to how the chemical structure and processing of the polymer
              affects the crystalline morphology of the membrane and, in turn, how the
              presence of the crystallites alters the solubility and mobility of the
              penetrant in the amorphous phase.  A second objective is to develop methods to
              spread the permeation switch effect over a broader range of temperature to
              achieve a membrane whose permeability depends more strongly on temperature than
              is found for most polymers.  This aspect of the research involves combining a
              distribution of alkyl side-chain lengths into a single membrane using
              copolymerization, blending, and lamination. 

The scientific results of this
              work will have impact in at least two growing technologies.  The first is a
              coating for seeds that ties their germination to the temperature of the soil by
              the permeability switch effect; water must enter the seed for germination to
              occur.  Prevention of premature germination has been shown to improve crop
              yields among other benefits for farmers. This research will provide a better
              understanding of how to formulate such coatings.  The second application
              involves modified-atmosphere packaging, where polymer membranes are now being
              used to control the oxygen and carbon dioxide concentration in packages
              containing fruits and vegetables so they remain fresh longer than normally
              possible.   The membranes must transmit these gases at rates that match the
              respiration rate of the produce.  Unfortunately, the permeability of
              conventional polymers does not change with temperature as rapidly as the
              respiration rate of produce does; hence, there is a need for more thermally
              responsive membranes of the type suggested above.

