Title       : Workshop: Comparative Functional Genomics: A Short Course, Salisbury Cove,
               Maine, August 27 to September 9, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0086524

Award Number: 0086524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Crawford   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie F. Oleksiak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Desert Island Biol Lab
	      
	      Salsbury Cove, ME  04672    /   -

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological sciences are entering an exciting new era:  the ability to measure
              patterns of gene expression for all the genes in an organism.  This approach is
              known as functional genomics, and it seeks identifying interesting patterns of
              gene expression: patterns that influence how an organism is formed, how it
              deals with environmental challenges, and how it adapts.  One of the major
              advances in this field is the use of MICROARRAYS to measure the expression of
              thousands of genes simultaneously.  Microarrays are thousands of
              micro-formatted DNA samples printed on a small glass slide.  Each DNA spot
              represents a unique gene that is used to measure gene expression. 
              

Examining the patterns of gene expression is just the first step. 
              Additional research will be required to determine how changes in gene
              expression cause physiological, morphological or other phenotypic change.  If
              we are seeking to understand the functional importance of how patterns of gene
              expression affects the biology of organisms, one of the more productive
              approaches is to follow August Krogh's principle (Krogh 1929):  for many
              problems there will be an animal for which it can be most conveniently studied.
               Thus, functional genomics will be enhanced by examining a diversity of
              organisms in which physiological, developmental or biochemical traits are
              readily studied. 

Unfortunately, many biologists believe that a functional
              genomics approach is beyond their reach:  their ability to acquire the
              necessary molecular tools (e.g., all or most cDNAs expressed in a tissue) or
              the funding to acquire these tools.  This is far from the truth and is the
              reason for a short course on Comparative Functional Genomics.  Participants in
              this course will produce 1000s of sequenced and identified cDNAs, microarray of
              many of these cDNAs and a simple analysis of gene expression.  Although this is
              not a completed microarray for their organism, it does represent a large step
              toward the completion of one of the fundamental tools for functional genomics: 
              the production, printing, and analysis of many expressed genes.  The most
              important attribute of this course is that it will provide the knowledge on how
              to produce the necessary molecular tools for functional genomics from any
              organism simply and inexpensively.  

These objectives of the Comparative
              Functional Genomic course will accelerate the utilization of functional
              genomics among non-model species and thus enhance our understanding of how the
              variation in gene expression affects biological processes.


