Title       : Fort Peck Rural Systemic Initiative in Science, Mathematics and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a0086175

Award Number: 0086175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115210             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Shanley JimSh@fpcc.cc.mt.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janette Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fort Peck CC
	      P.O. Box 398
	      Poplar, MT  592550398    406/768-5551

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Rural Systemic Initiative proposed by Fort Peck Community College for the
              
next five years will build on the accomplishments of the previous High Plains
              program.
Fort Peck Community College will serve as the catalyst for
              establishing common goals for the
new program. Systemic change in science,
              mathematics and technology education will be
implemented throughout the
              reservation school system K-12 and Fort Peck Community
College. Members of the
              collaboration include the five public school districts, Fort Peck
Community
              College, the Fort Peck Tribal Education program, the Montana Office of
Public
              Instruction and other collaborators.

Objectives

Objective 1. By August
              2000, each of the five reservation schools will implement
vigorous,
              standards-based instruction for all students and the curriculum,
              professional
development and assessment systems to document systemic
              change.

Objective 2. By June 1, 2001, each leadership team will establish a
              unified set of
policies to facilitate and enable Objective 1.

Objective 3.
              By July 1, 2001, each instructional leadership team will insure that
all
              resources (school and grant funded) are uniformly applied.

Objective 4. By
              September 2001, the Project Coordinator and leaderships teams
will mobilize
              the full community stakeholders in order to facilitate Objective
              1.

Objective 5. By August 2002, the instructional leadership teams will
              insure that
all schools increase student attainment in science, mathematics
              and technology.

Objective 6. By August 2005, the systemic approach will
              result in a reduction in
attainment differences between those traditionally
              underserved and their peers.

Methodology

The Principal Investigator and
              Project Coordinator will administer the project.
The Project Advisory
              Committee composed of major stakeholders, will be responsible
for policy
              development, change process, dissemination of information about the project
to
              the community, strategic planning and project evaluation. The instructional
              leadership
teams, composed of all Fort Peck public school teachers who
              regularly teach
mathematics, science and technology, school administrators,
              and Fort Peck Community
College advisors, will be responsible for systemic
              change in instruction, curriculum and
evaluation.


Potential Impact

The
              project will result in a reduction in attainment differences between
              students
traditionally underserved and their peers. The degree of student
              attainment will be
documented by the Core Data Elements. Project achievement
              will be measured by
documenting the degree to which the objectives have been
              achieved.
 
	

