Title       : Biophotonics: Integrated Optical Coherence Tomography and Multi-Photon
               Microscopy for Microfluidic System Analysis and Molecular Beacon Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0086696

Award Number: 0086696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Boppart boppart@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Brady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michal Balberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lutgarde Maria Raskin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1606,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0086696
Boppart
The applicants propose to develop an integrated microscope
              capable of optical coherence tomography (OCT) and multi-photon microscopy (MPM)
              for simultaneous acquisition of microstructural and functional image data in
              microfluidic systems.  This microscope will be used to investigate the design
              and performance of microfluidic mixing systems and to non-invasively monitor
              molecular beacon hybridization in real-time for the detection of specific
              nucleic acids from microbial pathogens and microorganisms in the
              environment.

The microscope will enable the complementary use of OCT to
              provide microstructural and flow information and MPM to visualize the spatial
              distribution of fluorescent molecular beacons with respect to the
              microstructure.  Optical coherence tomography is an emerging high-speed
              high-resolution imaging technology which has largely been applied to medical
              and biological applications.  OCT performs optical ranging with micron-scale
              resolution in a manner similar to ultrasound, except reflections of
              near-infrared light are detected rather than sound.  Optical Doppler OCT, a
              technique analogous to laser Doppler velocimetry, can acquire image-based data
              of fluid flow profiles and make quantitative measurements of flow velocities. 
              The capabilities are ideally suited for diagnostic monitoring of
              three-dimensional microfluidic systems, which typically have microstructural
              dimensions of 10-100 mm.  Molecular beacons, oligonucleotides that fluoresce
              only upon hybridization to a nucleic acid target site, are promising optical
              probes for the detection of microbial pathogens and other microbial
              populations.  The optical sectioning capability of MPM will be used to
              simultaneously monitor the three-dimensional spatial distribution of
              fluorescing molecular beacons within microfluidic systems.


