Title       : New Technologies for the Environment: Composite Resins from Soyoil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0086833

Award Number: 0086833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Wool wool@ccm.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1605,1669,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop high performance, low cost,
              composite resins from soy oil and other natural oils for liquid molding and
              sheet molding manufacturing applications.  The proposed new technology for the
              environment project will examine the fundamental issues pertaining to the
              cost-effective synthesis and manufacture of soy-based high modulus resins using
              chemically modified triglycerides.  The research significantly expands on
              recent patented inventions of the Principal Investigator and is expected to
              develop the fundamental science to support the bio-based products by providing
              an affordable replacement for petroleum based materials.  The focus of the
              research will be on:   (1) the optimization and synthesis of liquid molding
              resins designed for mass-production manufacturing such as Resin Transfer
              Molding, VARTM and SCRIMP (This will be accomplished by chemical modification
              of model triglyceride and monoglyceride systems involving hydroxylation,
              glycerolysis, maleinization, epoxidation and acrylation of oils with known
              fatty acid distribution functions and degrees of unsaturation.), and  (2) the
              development of Sheet Molding Compound (SMC) from these reactive liquids.  The
              resulting SMC, when blended with glass and natural fibers forms the equivalent
              of sheet metal that is extensively used for mass production in the auto,
              trucking and ag-equipment industries. Computer simulations of network structure
              evolution during reactions will be conducted to provide insight into the
              fractal structure of the crosslinked molecular networks obtained.  

It is
              anticipated that the thermal, mechanical, and durability property analysis of
              the resulting bio-based materials, coupled with their low cost will provide
              suitable commercialization incentives for industrial partners in the subsequent
              research.

