Title       : Versatile High Performance Shake Tables Facility towards Real-Time Hybrid
               Seismic Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0086612

Award Number: 0086612
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6160785            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michel Bruneau bruneau@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrei M. Reinhorn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Thevanayagam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Whittaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Constantinou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eddy M. Rojas  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
              Program is a project funded under the NSF Major Research Equipment Program. 
              This cooperative agreement, under the NEES Program, establishes a NEES
              earthquake engineering shake table research equipment site at the University at
              Buffalo, The State University of New York, Buffalo, NY.  The University at
              Buffalo will design, construct, install, commission, and operate two six degree
              of freedom (DOF) shake tables for geotechnical and structural earthquake
              engineering experimentation.  This equipment will be operational by 2004 or
              earlier and will be managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment site, with
              teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to provide new earthquake
              engineering research testing capabilities for large/full-scale and long span
              structures through 2014.  This NEES equipment site will be connected to the
              NEES collaboratory through the University's vBNS connection, with Gigabit
              Ethernet capabilities.  Shared-use access and training will be coordinated
              through the NEES Consortium.  This award is an outcome of the peer review of
              proposals submitted to program solicitation NSF 00-6, "NEES: Earthquake
              Engineering Research Equipment."   The following equipment is provided under
              this award:  (1) upgrade of the existing 3.6 m x 3.6 m, 50 metric ton, shake
              table from 5 DOF to 6 DOF by adding a transverse DOF, (2) a new, movable 3.6 m
              x 3.6 m, 50 metric ton, 100 Hz shake table, (3) upgrade and expansion of the
              existing data acquisition system to accommodate teleobservation, teleoperation,
              teletransmission, and telestorage, (4) data management and processing system to
              accommodate real-time systems, data acquisition, storage, distribution and
              analysis, and test instrumentation, (5) equipment for teleobservation and
              teleoperation capabilities so that experiments on the equipment will be
              observable and controllable via high performance network connections, (6) video
              imaging equipment with the eventual goal of streaming real-time video, and (7)
              sensors and measurement devices.    The new shake table can be rapidly
              repositioned from immediately adjacent to the existing shake table to 30 m
              linearly from it.  Together these two tables can host specimens of up to 100
              metric tons, as long as 36 m, and subjected to fully in-phase or totally
              uncorrelated dynamic excitations. The University has committed $4 million for
              expansion and infrastructure improvements of the Structural Engineering and
              Earthquake Simulation Laboratory in Ketter Hall on the University at Buffalo
              campus to house the upgraded and new equipment.  This expansion includes a new
              research laboratory area with a strong floor and reaction walls, control room
              and offices for training and data processing, service areas, storage and office
              spaces, and a new 40 metric ton crane.  The University at Buffalo will
              integrate this shake table equipment into its research program and
              undergraduate and graduate curricula, provide training opportunities for
              outside researchers through on site courses, host visiting scholars, and
              develop a web-based teleoperation simulator of the NEES equipment. 
