Title       : Studies of Solar Atmosphere and Magnetic Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2002  
File        : a0086999

Award Number: 0086999
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $778553             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Goode pgoode@tesla.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Haimin Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will conduct an extensive program of solar physics research at
              Big Bear Solar Observatory (BBSO) through the maximum of solar cycle 23. The
              main effort is to make synoptic, calibrated, comprehensive, and continuous
              observations of the whole sun at the highest possible resolution and cadence,
              as well as to come to a scientific understanding of the implications of the
              data obtained. The research plan emphasizes high resolution and high cadence
              studies of solar activity and magnetic fields. New Jersey Institute of
              Technology (NJIT) took over operation of BBSO on July 1, 1997. Since that time,
              the observatory has undergone fundamental changes marked by significant
              achievements in science, instrumentation and education. The investigators have
              solved the long-standing dome seeing problems at BBSO, so that the observatory
              is now one of only two observatories in the US capable of high-resolution
              observations of the sun. They will use the new capability to conduct sub-arc
              second resolution studies of active regions and the quiet sun including
              comprehensive studies of vector magnetic fields in flare-producing active
              regions. They will also develop and deploy new instruments and facilities, such
              as a new generation vector magnetograph system employing state-of-the-art
              digital cameras, a parallel computing system for real-time speckle
              reconstruction, and near infrared magnetograph and imaging systems. These will
              employ a unique, narrow band Lyot filter and an infrared Fabry-Perot filter. As
              a service to the community, they will also continue the successful BBSO
              Activity Reports and Warnings (www.bbso.njit.edu/cgi-bin/ActivityReport), and
              make daily full-disk data and data from the 25 cm telescope available by
              anonymous ftp (ftp.bbso.njit.edu).

