Title       : Calcium-Independent Steps in Guard Cell Regulation by Abscisic Acid: The Kinase
               Connection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0086315

Award Number: 0086315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313087             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah M. Assmann sma3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	The plant epidermis contains microscopic pores called stomata through which
              gas exchange with the environment occurs. Through the stomata, carbon dioxide
              is taken up for photosynthesis and water vapor and oxygen are lost. Stomatal
              apertures are regulated by pairs of guard cells which border and define the
              stomatal pores. Guard cells regulate stomatal apertures by osmotic swelling and
              shrinking, driven by uptake of ions and production of organic solutes (stomatal
              opening) or loss of ions and catabolism of organic solutes (stomatal closure).
              The plant hormone abscisic acid (ABA) inhibits stomatal opening and promotes
              stomatal closure when plants are droughted or otherwise stressed. A few years
              ago, the PI's laboratory used biochemical methods to identify in guard cells an
              ABA-activated, Ca2+-independent kinase (ABA-activated protein kinase; AAPK).
              This serine/threonine kinase is activated within one minute by physiological
              concentrations of ABA and is detected in guard cells but not in epidermal or
              mesophyll cells (Li and Assmann (1996) Plant Cell 8: 2359-2368). These
              characteristics suggested that AAPK could play an important role in triggering
              the rapid changes in guard cell solute content that drive stomatal closure upon
              ABA exposure.
This project represents a request for additional funding for
              research related to that of PI's current NSF grant MCB 98-74438, initiated in
              March of 1999. Under the first year of funding of MCB 98-74438, the PI's
              laboratory succeeded in cloning the cDNA encoding AAPK, starting from AAPK
              peptide sequence obtained by mass spectrometric analysis of the purified guard
              cell protein. The PI's group has shown that biolistic transformation of guard
              cells with a dominant negative version of AAPK ("AAPK(K43A)") blocks
              ABA-induced stomatal closure. The PI's laboratory also has shown that
              AAPK(K43A) inhibits ABA-activation of a class of guard cell anion channels
              through which anion loss normally occurs during ABA-induced stomatal closure.
              This research has been published (Li et al., (2000) Science 287: 300-303). The
              research for which funding is sought under this request is the identification
              of proteins that interact with AAPK. The following approaches are proposed and
              prioritized: interaction cloning with labeled AAPK; yeast two-hybrid analysis;
              immunoprecipitation; and use of mass spectrometric analysis to identify the
              covalent modification of AAPK that occurs when ABA activates the kinase.
              Elucidation of the AAPK signal transduction pathway by these methods will
              increase understanding of hormonally-activated cellular signaling in plants and
              may provide an entry-point for biotechnological manipulation of stomatal
              responses to enhance ABA-induced stomatal closure when water is limiting, or to
              reduce ABA-induced stomatal closure and thus stomatal limitation of
              photosynthesis when water is abundantly available (e.g. during
              irrigation).



