Title       : ITR: Active Information Spaces based on Ubiquitous Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0086094

Award Number: 0086094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy H. Campbell rhc@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin Kravets  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Kriegman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Klara Nahrstedt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Garland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1658,1661,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The project researches a new form of operating system to manage a model
              of
computing called an Active Space. It integrates physical spaces that
              contain
ubiquitous computers into a computational environment that supports
              human
activity and applications. With anytime/anywhere ubiquitous devices,
              the
users' view of the computational environment is extended beyond the
              physical
limits of a computer and is placed into the surrounding physical
              space,
augmented with computers that sense and affect that space around the
              user.
Applications become mapped not just to views associated with
              specific
windows in a monitor but instead to the physical environment. 
              Therefore,
the physical space, augmented with communicating computer devices,
              becomes a
distributed computing system.
Active Spaces have the potential for
              creating multi-billion dollar
industries.  Automated surgery, collaboration
              and engaged learning are a few
of the compelling examples. Gaia, an operating
              system for Active Spaces,
will accommodate diversity by exploiting standards
              for interoperation and
cooperation.  System services track, authenticate and
              support mobile users
with reconfigurable graphics, multimedia and Active Space
              applications.   A
unifying object bus, component model, and adaptive stream
              model extends plug
and play to distributed mobile ubiquitous computers
              cooperating to support a
computational environment within physical spaces like
              cities, buildings and
rooms.


