Title       : Mesospin Conference, Cortona Italy - 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2000       
File        : a0086304

Award Number: 0086304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aron Pinczuk aron@phys.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5914,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is in support of an international conference on Spintronics in the
              form of a travel grant. Spintronics is the control of electron flow by means of
              magnetic fields (acting on the spin-magnetic moments of the electrons) rather
              than by conventional electric fields. Thanks to the spectacular development of
              growth and fabrication methods, the body of experimental, theoretical and
              conceptual knowledge of new spin states and coherent spin processes in
              artificial quantum structures has grown enormously in recent years.  The field
              has reached a stage where the active control and manipulation of electron spin
              is possible.  The conference will bring together leading scientists and young
              researchers working in different areas of spin physics in mesoscopic systems,
              to stimulate the exchange of ideas and to facilitate the dissemination of the
              most recent results. The conference covers the most intriguing and innovative
              aspects of spin effects in systems of reduced physical dimensions. Its aim is
              the highlighting of general concepts and the exploration of new directions of
              research.
%%%
This project is in support of an international conference on
              Spintronics in the form of a travel grant. Spintronics is the control of
              electron flow by means of magnetic fields (acting on the spin-magnetic moments
              of the electrons) rather than by conventional electric fields. Thanks to the
              spectacular development of growth and fabrication methods, the body of
              experimental, theoretical and conceptual knowledge of new spin states and
              coherent spin processes in artificial quantum structures has grown enormously
              in recent years.  The field has reached a stage where the active control and
              manipulation of electron spin is possible.  The conference will bring together
              leading scientists and young researchers working in different areas of spin
              physics in mesoscopic systems, to stimulate the exchange of ideas and to
              facilitate the dissemination of the most recent results. The conference covers
              the most intriguing and innovative aspects of spin effects in systems of
              reduced physical dimensions. Its aim is the highlighting of general concepts
              and the exploration of new directions of research.  The conference is
              international in scope.  This project will provide funding to support the
              travel and local expenses of advanced graduate students, postdoctoral research
              associates and junior faculty from universities and colleges in the United
              States. The benefits that derive from this support include up-to-date
              information to our young investigators on the most advanced research conducted
              in the world in nano-science and technology.

