Title       : Cankdeska Cikana Community College Rural Systemic Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0086158

Award Number: 0086158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1250000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John Lohnes lohnesj@cankdeska.little-hoop.cc.nd.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erich Longie  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cankdeska Cikana Community
	      P.O. Box 269
	      Fort Totten, ND  583350269    /   -

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Cankdeska Cikana Community College was part of cohort 3 of the Tribal
              College
Rural Systemic Initiative (TCRSI). Programs in this cohort received
              planning support in
the first year, with the subsequent two years used to
              implement systemic reform. As a
result of this initial funding, 100% of the
              teachers at the target schools were trained and
began to implement standards
              based curriculum in their classrooms. Strategies for Phase
II were selected
              based on extensive research on high poverty schools that scored highly
on
              standardized achievement measures. Effective reform efforts have been shown
              to
provide professional development programs of high quality, be well
              coordinated with
desired instructional outcomes results oriented, and have
              consistent policies throughout
the system. Successful schools carefully
              assessed student performance in comparison
with standards and created
              additional time for academic instruction. Based on this
research, the C4
              Initiative will expand on the following three fronts.

PROFESSIONAL
              DEVELOPMENT

Standards Based Curriculum training offered twice
per year will
              acquaint new hires and provide current developments for experienced
teachers.
              Additional training sessions will focus on standards based assessment,
              including
objective, standard alternative assessments to standardized tests.
              C4 will coordinate a
Summer Science Institute during which teachers pilot
              lesson plans using independent and
guided research in mathematics and science,
              and alternative assessment. With the
coordination of C4 this curriculum will
              be piloted, evaluated and revised by the teachers
involved in implementing it.
              This teacher-as-researcher model is anticipated to
contribute to the
              scientific training of the workforce, and increase school commitment to
the
              curriculum. An innovation in this area is the inclusion of a second strand of
              training
for paraprofessionals, with a separate Summer Institute for teacher
              aides.

CONSISTENT POLICIES 

The existing RSI Council of reservation
              programs aimed at
improving SMET at the k through 14 level will be expanded to
              include Title I and RSI
programs on other reservation. This committee will
              meet monthly to coordinate activities
that will leverage resources, maximize
              teacher participation and have the optimal impact
on student achievement. The
              Project Director will be appointed a member of the
curriculum committee at
              each of the target schools. These committees are charged with
adoption,
              implementation and publication of policies supporting standards
              based
curriculum and other aspects of systemic reform. Extensive use of
              telecommunications
will facilitate coordination with off-reservation
              programs.

COORDINATED RESOURCES

Examples of resource coordination
              outcomes are dual
high school-college credit course to increase advanced
              opportunities in mathematics and
science, and training at the state Indian
              Education Association conference supported
jointly by all North Dakota
              reservation RSI projects. RSI staff and Council will
coordinate the
              development of after-hours instruction in mathematics and science, funded
by
              resources from private and federal grant funded programs already on the
              reservation.
Training for these programs and policy development will be
              provided with RSI funds and
by the RSI Council respectively.

Cankdeska
              Cikana can draw upon three years of successful collaboration with the
              school
districts and an experienced RSI Project Director who is an enrolled
              tribal member and
also a former middle school mathematics and science teacher.
              As such, the project begins
with a high level of credibility with the target
              school administrators and teachers.

		

