Title       : Use of Fractal Analysis for the Discrimination of Volcanic Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0086963

Award Number: 0086963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69485              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Carey scarey@gso.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Carey
EAR-0086963

Juvenile volcanic particles form an important component of
              pyroclastic rocks in recent and ancient volcanic terrains. The identification
              of volcaniclastic deposits often relies on an analysis of such particles.
              Although significant progress has been made in linking qualitative aspects of
              particle morphology to different types of source eruptions and fragmentation
              processes, a quantitative method of particle classification has remained
              elusive. We propose to investigate the use of fractal geometry as a
              quantitative method of volcanic particle discrimination. Volcanic particles are
              particularly well suited for the application of fractal analysis owing to their
              complex shapes and presence of re-entrants on their boundaries. We have
              developed a new technique based on the quantification and statistical analysis
              of discrete fractal elements in the outlines of volcanic particles. Preliminary
              work on this technique has shown excellent potential for quantitative
              discrimination of different volcanic particles. We propose to carry out fractal
              analysis on a suite of well-characterized samples to build up a matrix of
              fractal characteristics that will be representative of a wide variety of
              volcaniclastic deposits. The samples will encompass magma types from basalt to
              rhyolite  and fragmentation mechanisms that include primary volatile degassing,
              phreatomagmatism, and granulation by quenching with seawater. In addition,
              samples will be analyzed from deposits produced by different transport
              mechanisms such as pyroclastic fall, flow and surge.  

We anticipate that
              the results of the study will provide significant advances in the
              quantification of volcanic particle morphology and lead to the means of
              statistically discriminating particles of different origin. Such a technique
              will be valuable to workers seeking to interpret the nature of ancient volcanic
              activity from the characteristics of their resulting deposits. Furthermore, the
              detailed quantitative analysis of particle morphology may lead to new insights
              about the roles of various fragmentation processes during complex explosive
              eruptions involving both the degassing of primary volatiles and the interaction
              with external water.


