Title       : Biophotonics: Directed Evolution of GFP-based Probes for Glucose
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0086920

Award Number: 0086920
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal W. Woodbury NWoodbury@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aileen K. Taguchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1606,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0086920
Woodbury
The applicants proposed to develop a glucose biosensor using
              a directed evolution approach based on the green fluorescent protein (GFP).  A
              library of DNA sequences encoding glucose binding motifs will be inserted into
              an appropriate position in the gene for GFP and directed evolution methods will
              be applied to generate a bioprobe that fluoresces much more brightly when bound
              to glucose than in the unbound state.  High throughput screening of
              fluorescence from microcolonies will be performed using a high resolution CCD
              camera.  The selection of individual microcolonies will then be performed using
              a novel photolithography based approach in which a digital light processor is
              used to image UV light onto bacterial plates with high resolution (patterned
              cell growth).  The remaining live bacteria will be grown, plasmids isolated and
              subsequent rounds of directed evolution will be initiated using a combination
              of error prone PCR and DNA shuffling to generate additional variation in the
              gene sequence.  Screening of colonies in later stages of the directed evolution
              will also take advantage of fluorescence lifetime imaging using a scanning
              confocal microscope and a mode-locked laser.  This will help to discriminate
              between variations in the glucose binding constant and changes in the GFP
              fluorescence lifetime upon binding.  GFP-based probes generated in this way
              have the advantage that they can either be expressed in E. coli, purified and
              used directly for biosensor applications without modification, or they can be
              expressed in modified host cells generating a living biosensor that constantly
              replenishes the sensor molecule.  This procedure for generating GFP-based
              bioprobes is general and can be applied to a large number of potential target
              molecules.

