Title       : Conference: The Vestibular Labyrinth in Health & Disease Conference: November
               16-18, 2000: Eric Newman Center, Washington University Medical School: St.
               Louis, MO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a0086573

Award Number: 0086573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda M. Kennedy                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Highstein highstein@wums.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel A. Goebel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Vestibular research has seen recent major advances with the advent of new
              tools,
techniques and ideas.  These advances have been realized in studies of
              both the
central and peripheral vestibular systems and in studies performed in
              both
terrestrial and micro-gravity.  Advances have been made in the
              understanding of
the contributions of biomechanics, including
              intralabyrinthine pressure and the
stiffness and elastic restoring forces of
              the stereocilia and cupula to the
formation of the response dynamics of the
              semicircular canal nerves
	The conference should be of interest to broad areas
              of neuroscience,
including developmental biology, physiology and pharmacology,
              space biology,
bioengineering, and the medical fields of neurology,
              otolaryngology, and
neurosurgery. The conference will be held in the Eric P.
              Newman Center for Continuing
Education of the Washington University School of
              Medicine from Thursday November
16 through Saturday November 18, 2000 under
              the direction of Drs. Stephen M.
Highstein, Chair and Joel Goebel, Co-Chair. 
              Speakers have been chosen by Drs.
Highstein and Goebel with the advice of the
              advisory panel and others prominent
in vestibular research.  While many of the
              speakers have national and
international reputations as leaders of their
              fields, an emphasis has been
placed on the contributions of younger workers
              wherever possible.  Women are
also represented to the maximum extent possible.
               We are interested in bringing
existing controversies to light, and adequate
              time will be provided for
discussion and resolution of differing viewpoints. 
              An effort has been made to
provide an outlet for research that is new and on
              the cutting edge in a poster
session.


