Title       : SGER: Liquid Crystals as Stimulus-Responsive Media for Dynamic Mediation of
               Chemical Separations, Application to Carbon Mitigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0086598

Award Number: 0086598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50001              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Alan Hatton tahatton@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT



Proposal No.:			CTS-0080915
Proposal Type:		Investigator
              Initiated- SGER
Principal Investigator:	T. Alan
              Hatton
Institution:			Massachusetts Institute of Technology


SGER: Liquid
              Crystals as Stimulus-Responsive Media for Dynamic Mediation of Chemical
              Separations


This project explores new concepts for the dynamic mediation
              of chemical separations by use of liquid crystals as adsorbents.  With these
              materials small changes in external stimuli can cause
major changes in fluid
              or interfacial structure that change significantly the capacity of the
              separations media for targeted solutes.  Specifically, the influence of
              changing electric or magnetic fields on thermotropic liquid crystals near their
              smectic/nematic/isotropic transition regions is exploited to control the
              capacity and selectivity of gas separations.   This work is intended to provide
              an initial assessment of the feasibility of such an approach, primarily in
              determining what factors affect solubilization capacity and release profiles
              and to determine the sensitivity and robustness of the method to temperature
              fluctuations.  Consideration is given to strategies for
implementation of this
              concept in large-scale chemical processes.

Tunable separation media could
              find major implementation in tackling global problems associated with
              greenhouse gas mitigation and in performing sensitive chemical separations in
              the fine-chemical and pharmaceutical areas.   The ability to vary electric and
              magnetic fields rapidly and
dynamically could provide additional process
              flexibility beyond the usual temperature and pressure changes used to drive
              many gas separation processes, and a greater degree of control over process
              operations is anticipated.  A second area of potential applications is in the
              control of separations in
microchemical devices, where the sub-millimeter
              dimensions are such that high electric fields and sensitive temperature control
              can be readily attained.




