Title       : ITR: Simulation of Flows with Dynamic Interfaces on Multi-Teraflop Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0086093

Award Number: 0086093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3113665            (Estimated)
Investigator: Omar Ghattas oghattas@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guy E. Blelloch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Noel J. Walkington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1661,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Project will develop advanced parallel algorithms and software for
              simulating complex flows with dynamic interfaces. The development of scalable,
              parallel high-accuracy algorithms for simulating such flows poses enormous
              challenges in computational science. The project will use these algorithms for
              microstructural simulation of blood flow. This application provides an
              excellent testbed for the methods: it is extremely computationally challenging
              and of critical medical importance.

Blood flow belongs to a class of flow
              problems with dynamic interfaces. Blood is a mixture of interacting gel-filled
              solid sells and fluid plasma. Current blood flow models are macroscopic,
              treating the mixture as a homogeneous continuum. Microstructural models resolve
              individual cells deformations and their interaction with the surrounding
              plasma. Because of the computational difficulties of resolving tens of
              thousands of dynamically deforming cells, no one to date has simulated
              realistic blood flows at this level. Yet such simulations are necessary in
              order to gain a better understanding of blood damage - which is central to
              improved artificial organ design - and for the development of more rational
              macroscopic blood models.

Simulating flows with dynamic interfaces is much
              more difficult than flows in well-understood fixed domains. The central
              challenges are to develop numerical algorithms that stably and accurately
              couple the moving fluid and solids, and geometric algorithms for computing the
              resulting dynamic meshes. This project takes the approach of treating both
              fluid and solid domains as collections of grid points, with associated meshes,
              that evolve over time and devising numerical algorithms that couple the domains
              seamlessly. It will attack the difficulty of creating and managing the evolving
              mesh by developing scalable parallel algorithms for the convex hull, Delaunay
              triangulation, and mesh partitioning components. With careful attention to
              fundamental algorithmic issues, these cheap geometric computations will enable
              these dynamic flow simulations to scale to thousands of processors as on
              mult-teraflop systems.

This research will benefit a wide community of
              scientists and engineers. The computational algorithms will be widely
              applicable to a variety of fluid-solid and fluid-fluid interaction problems.
              More generally, the core parallel computational geometry kernels will provide
              generic support for the geometric computations underlying many dynamic
              irregular problems. The project will distribute a portable library of efficient
              implementations of these algorithms. Also, the project will undertake a
              broad-based, interdisciplinary program integrating research and education. It
              will be part of a new program in Computational Science and Engineering, serving
              as the archetype of how applications, computational, computer, and mathematical
              scientists can work together to tackle societal problems that cannot be solved
              solely by any one discipline.

