Title       : GK-12 Graduate Fellows for Science and Math Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0086354

Award Number: 0086354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1343560            (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia J. Moore cjmoor1@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jenny D. Grogg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Hunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program will train and support graduate students in science and mathematics
              to provide resources for middle and high school students and teachers. Fellows
              will participate in workshops that focus on interdisciplinary science and math
              curriculum and effective teaching. University faculty and K-12 teachers will
              provide a background in inquiry-based techniques and activities, emphasizing
              national and state learning standards. Fellows and teachers will form
              school-based teams that will formally assess the science, mathematics, and
              technology needs at each site. They will collaborate to compile and present
              curriculum enhancement mini-units, emphasizing inquiry-based activities. The
              fellows will also adapt the computer technology available at school sites to
              the needs of
specific classrooms. Fellows will provide science resources for
              students through e-mail communication, an 'Ask-a-Scientist' network, Saturday
              Science workshops, and collaboration with the Children's Discovery Museum of
              Central Illinois. University faculty, fellows, and staff members of the Center
              for Mathematics and Science Education will plan and present professional
              development programs for classroom teachers. The project will address issues of
              scientific literacy, equity, and attitudes toward science and math among middle
              and high school students. It will integrate research and teaching, as well as
              enhance teaching
and curriculum selection/development skills for all
              participants through collaboration.

