Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Factors and Y-Chromosome Variation in
               the Yanomamo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a0086557

Award Number: 0086557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Weiss kmw4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Small-group social structure, cultural practices, and demography have shaped the
              amount of human genetic variation throughout most of human history.  This study
              examines Y-chromosome variation among a group of native South Americans, the
              Yanomamo.  This population provides a model of the demographic history of early
              human society (though this is by no means perfect, as the Yanomama, like all
              groups, have been affected by their broader context, including agriculture and
              contact - often detrimental contact - with the outside world).  Still, small
              group dynamics have been the most important factor shaping modern human genetic
              diversity.
This study uses genetic markers on the Y chromosome, which is
              unique to males, in order to understand the evolutionary patterns that have
              lead to the low variability found on the human Y chromosome.  Specifically,
              this study will examine how differential reproductive success among  males and
              the demographic processes of population growth and village social structure
              effect the distribution of Y-chromosome variation.  In addition, this study
              will examine how cultural contact has changed the native distribution of
              Y-chromosome variation.  
This study uses and builds on the work of cultural
              anthropologists who precisely documented village histories, genealogies and
              demographic patterns during fieldwork conducted over the last three decades. 
              The data generated by this project will be combined with this earlier data as
              well as with the data from other current studies on mitochondrial and autosomal
              DNA to produce one of the most comprehensive studies of a tribal population in
              the history of anthropology.  The overall result will be a deeper understanding
              not only of the genetic patterns of the Yanomamo, but also of the processes
              that have shaped the genetic variation of all human beings.  In particular,
              this study will examine aspects of the way that social and cultural factors
              affect human variation in the small-group circumstances in which most human
              populations throughout our history as a species have lived.

