Title       : US-Brazil Cooperative Research: Gut Microclimate in Neotropical Armored Catfish
               (Loricariidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a0086474

Award Number: 0086474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12431              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay A. Nelson jnelson@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5913,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Americas Program award will support a US-Brazil research project between
              Dr. Jay A. Nelson, Towson University, and Dr. Francisco Tadeu Rantin, Federal
              University of Sao Paulo.  The goal of the project is to investigate the
              digestive system and gut environment of the loricariid catfish.  These
              researchers will use large loricariids to test the null hypothesis that the
              lumen of the loricariid gastrointestinal tract is anaerobic as in other
              vertebrates.  They will investigate the environment of the gastrointestinal
              tract and the blood draining it in animals that are breathing either water only
              or both water and air.

Unlike the guts of most animals, which are highly
              anaerobic, loricariid catfishes use their digestive tracts to uptake oxygen
              from air gulped in with water, so that the gut may be an aerobic environment. 
              Our current understanding of the digestive physiology of herbivorous fishes is
              poor, and given the evidence that loricariids have a strange and unique
              digestive physiology, it is important that we broaden this knowledge.  In this
              work Nelson will combine his knowledge of respiratory physiology with Rantin's
              capabilities for studying the physiology of large loricariids.  The results of
              this study should aid in understanding the respiration and digestion of these
              fish, which constitute a highly diverse and ecologically important group of
              herbivorous fishes that has received little scientific attention.

