Title       : LBHC RSI SMT Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2002   
File        : a0086170

Award Number: 0086170
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anselm Davis, Jr.                       
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1249996            (Estimated)
Investigator: David Yarlott   (Principal Investigator current)
              Janine Pease Pretty on Top  (Principal Investigator former)
              Beverly Snell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carlene H. Old Elk  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Mary Cummins-Bear Cloud  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Little Big Horn College
	      Box 370
	      Crow Agency, MT  590220370    /   -

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Little Big Horn College (LBHC) proposes to build upon Phase I activities to
              develop and maintain a comprehensive and sustainable reform effort in
              mathematics, science and technology education for schools on or adjacent to the
              Crow Tribe Reseravtion in southeastern Montana.  LBHC will utilize the lessons
              learned from Phase I activites and continue to promote the NSF drivers while
              implementing strategies to assist in their effort to provide a program that
              will catapult the schools serving their students to meet the National
              standards.  Special emphasis will be placed on a holistic approach to community
              reform using RSI activities to promote a comprehensive approach for systemic
              reform.

First, it is recognized that the vision held by stakeholders must be
              changed to accomplish systemic reform.  Through the stages of implementation,
              the various groups must be increased to shape the purpose and goals of the new
              system.  LBHC will invite all stakeholders to participate in this process.   As
              the vision develops and is translated into practice, the support of the public
              and of the political leadership at all levels of the system must
              expand.

Several isssues will be addressed during Phase II to ensure that the
              stakeholders are in careful collaboration.   The following will guide this
              effort:

A common language and purpose will be develop and will resonate for
              the RSI to all stakeholders.  Training and orientation will help all sites to
              envision the total picture and each will be better positioned to take action
              and support the reform effort.
A strategy will be implemented to move reform
              forward with a clear plan and related objectives.
An evaluation process will
              be implemented to measure the progress and guide the project.

For systemic
              change to occur,  key participants will be included in all activities
              throughout the reform process.  The proposed systemic reform effort will impact
              the required fundamental, comprehensive and coordinated changes for MST
              systemic change.  The changes will reflect policy, financing, governance,
              management, content and conduct.  All essential features of the school systems
              and LBHC will be engaged and operating as a seamless entity in promoting a
              comprehensive, standards-based curriculum and instructional materials for all
              students.  Special emphasis will be placed on assessment of effort and on
              assessment practices.  Activities will be aligned with the NSF drivers.

