Title       : PGE/SEP: Women Engineers*Changing Attitudes Now (WE*CAN)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0086370

Award Number: 0086370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stacy S. Wilson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen Matthew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Kentucky Univ
	      Sponsored Programs, 106FB
	      Bowling Green, KY  421013576    270/745-4652

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
There are three major barriers to increasing female involvement in science,
              mathematics, and technology:  1) inequitable treatment of females in
              classrooms, 2) lack of self-confidence, and 3) lack of successful mentors.  The
              WE*CAN (women Engineers * Changing Attitudes Now) grant will address these
              barriers through extensive modeling, direct teaching, and mentoring.

In
              WE*CAN grant there are four objectives and ten activities which will address
              engineering and gender equity concerns.  The objectives include:

1)
              mentoring young women from elementary school to undergraduates,
2) informing
              young women about engineering careers and providing them opportunities to
              experience engineering activities,
3) informing teachers, counselors, and
              parents about engineering and gender equity issues, and,
4) disseminating
              information about gender equity and engineering through the WE*CAN program and
              future WE*CAN activities.

The activities included in this grant are as
              follows:

1) establishing a WE*CAN mentoring program,
2) establishing a
              WE*CAN web page,
3) presenting information about the field of engineering
              while modeling gender equity to K-12 groups,
4) teaching engineering to
              elementary students in the Super Saturday program,
5) teaching engineering to
              middle school students in the Summer Camp for Academically Talented Students
              (SCATS) program,
6) conducting a WE*CAN engineering day
7) creating an all
              female team for the BEST (Boosting Engineering, Science and Technology) robotic
              competition,
8) teaching elementary girls in an engineering enrichment
              program,
9) providing a workshop for teachers and counselors in the field of
              engineering and gender equitable teaching and counseling strategies, and
10)
              disseminating information at conferences and events about gender equity and
              engineering.

Participants from the first grade through the university level
              will experience a hands-on and minds-on approach to the field of engineering in
              gender equitable environment.  Participants will experience support through the
              WE*CAN mentoring program.  A strong focus will be placed on mentoring young
              women as a way on increasing self-esteem.

Several activities in the WE*CAN
              grant are integrated with existing programs in an attempt to make the seeds of
              this program sustainable in future years

