Title       : Biophotonics: Gold Superparticles as Raman-active Nanoprobes of Molecular
               Transport Across Cell Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0086804

Award Number: 0086804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439229             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Wei   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Hockerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1606,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0086804
Wei
The objective of this proposal is to develop a minimally
              intrusive, Raman-based sensor for monitoring changes in intracellular ion and
              neurotransmitter concentrations.  These will be used to address outstanding
              questions in transporter function.  Gold-silica 'superparticles' (shell of gold
              particles around a silica core) 100-200 nm in diameter will be prepared by
              self-assembly techniques and used as substrates for surface-enhanced Raman
              scattering (SERS).  The surfaces of the superparticles will be functionalized
              with non-fluorescent receptors designed to recognize inorganic or organic
              cations.  These nanoprobes will be introduced into cells via picoliter
              injection and will be monitored for SERS using near-infrared laser excitation. 
              Sampling will be performed using a micro-Raman instrument with high spectral
              resolution coupled to an inverted microscope stage.  The vibrational spectra
              will enable specific binding events to be detected by direct assignment of
              analyte group frequencies or by modulation of receptor spectral profiles. 
              Detection limits can be in the low nanomolar range with resolutions on the
              order of milliseconds.

Raman-active nanoprobes will be employed to
              investigate two transport systems of fundamental importance to neuron activity.
               First, the influx of Zn2+ ions will be monitored by SERS in a time-dependent
              fashion to provide insight into the mechanism of Zn2+ transport by Ca2+ ion
              channels.  This will be correlated to electrophysiological measurements of
              total ion influx by patch clamp recording techniques.  Second, novel reverse
              transport activity by the serotonin transporter (SERT) will be investigated by
              monitoring intracellular levels of serotonin and the amphetamine--like drug
              MDMA.  Third, the mode of SERT transport will be elucidated by correlating
              intracellular neurotransmitter concentrations with changes in ion current
              caused by Na+ co--transport, again by the concurrent use of SERS and patch
              clamping techniques.  This may reveal valuable insights into the mode of action
              behind amphetamine and related psychoactive drugs. These studies are
              representative of the myriad molecular transport issues that can be addressed
              by intracellular monitoring, such as actively coupled transport of
              carbohydrates and amino acids, efflux pumps in multidrug resistant cells, and
              viral infections.

The mutual exchange of ideas from traditionally unrelated
              disciplines will provide fertile ground for student training.  Students will be
              exposed to issues in supramolecular and materials chemistry (organic synthesis,
              colloid science, design principles in molecular recognition), photonics
              (microscope and laser optics, Raman theory and applied spectroscopy, signal
              processing), and molecular and cellular neuroscience (cell transfection and
              cultures, transporter function, electrophysiology).  Their intimate involvement
              in the proposed project will make them experts in one or more of these areas,
              and have a working knowledge of the others by their active participation in
              project-related discussion groups and conferences.



