Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research for a National Center for Empirical Software
               Engineering Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0086078

Award Number: 0086078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2108454            (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor R. Basili basili@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin V. Zelkowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1658,1661,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A necessary step towards the goal of building more reliable software systems, on
              time and within budget, is to establish an institutionalized empirical
              discipline for understanding causal relationships among the processes,
              components, and technologies that affect the building of systems. As in the
              physical and natural sciences, experimentation in software engineering requires
              a community with support for collaboration, experimental replication and
              refinement, and sharing of experimental data and results.
For these reasons
              the Center for Empirical Software Engineering Research (CESER) undertakes
              original empirical research and is developing a prototype system for sharing
              and evolving the results of such research with a community of affiliated
              researchers and practitioners. CESER develops and refines techniques to
              increase the descriptive and predictive power of empirical models, and studies
              specific software development technologies to enable industrial organizations
              to understand the benefits and drawbacks of those technologies in their
              specific context. The Center provides courses and symposia on empirical
              methodologies and results, and assists the use of empirical knowledge in
              software engineering education. The Center's initial focus is on empirical
              studies of software COTS integration and software quality improvement
              phenomenology.
The center is initially organized as a collaborative effort
              among the University of Maryland, the Fraunhofer Center - Maryland, the
              University of Southern California, the University of Nebraska at Lincoln, and
              Mississippi State University. 

