Title       : Extended Environmental Monitoring via Intelligent, Autonomous Airships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2001       
File        : a0086931

Award Number: 0086931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjiv Singh ssingh@ri.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cliff I. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Ostrowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Wettergreen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1605,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Environmental scientists who develop policies for the effective management of
              human activity are
often thwarted by a lack of accurate information about the
              state of the environment. In some
cases, the correct policy is not clear
              because the relationship between human activity and the
environment is not
              well understood. Additional environmental data could improve such
              under-standing
and provide the means to develop effective policies. In other
              cases effective policies
have been proposed but additional data is required to
              justify the political and economic costs of
implementation. However, more data
              by itself is not the solution. The human resources neces-sary
to parse and
              analyze the data are scarcer than available data. What is necessary is
              intelli-gence
to actively sample in such a way as to maximize the useful
              content in the data.
The proposed inter-disciplinary program will investigate
              means of extended-term environmental
monitoring. Specifically, this project
              seeks to endow a solar-powered airship with the intelligence
to conduct
              extended-duration, autonomous environmental sampling. We will explore issues
              of
configuration and design, path planning and control in the presence of
              weather patterns, and
algorithms necessary for intelligent environmental
              monitoring. The intended result is an instru-mented
platform for efficiently
              gathering accurately tagged environmental data that can stay
              aloft
indefinitely.
Airships are well suited for environmental monitoring
              tasks, however their potential in this capac-ity
remains unfulfilled. As
              aerial monitoring platforms, they exhibit numerous advantages over
fixed wing
              aircraft and helicopters. They are safer, more stable, and less expensive. They
              con-sume
less power and are capable of extended operation. Given the
              intelligence to operate auton-omously
and the proper sensing hardware, an
              airship provides a sensing platform that would be
an asset to a diverse range
              of environmental scientists who seek to understand, remediate, and
manage the
              environment. Potential applications of this technology include forest and crop
              man-agement,
wetland surveys, land use assessment, monitoring of hazardous
              waste sites, and ero-sion
quantification.
Through a cost-sharing provision
              with Carnegie Mellon University, we will demonstrate our
results on a
              prototype, instrumented airship to generate a characterization of air
              pollution. Work-ing
together with a recently funded EPA Supersite in
              Pittsburgh, this project will employ an airship
to generate 3-D profiles of
              air pollution and ambient particulate matter. The resulting data set
              will
provide new insights into the vertical distribution and transport
              mechanisms of air pollution.
New technologies cannot turn back the ecological
              clock but they can help environmental scien-tists
push back the frontiers of
              knowledge and help ordinary citizens grasp the urgency of pre-serving
our
              natural world. It is now possible to use previously classified images from
              spy
satellites that show the extent of environmental degradation at a macro
              scale. This proposal will
create a means of gathering dense environmental data
              at a much finer resolution, in a more effi-cient
manner.
