Title       : ITR: Wireless Networking Solutions for Smart Sensor Biomedical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0086020

Award Number: 0086020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1797351            (Estimated)
Investigator: Loren J. Schwiebert loren@cs.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pepe Siy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory W. Auner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond Iezzi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandeep Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1661,4095,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Implanted biomedical devices have the potential to revolutionize medicine.
              The types of procedures that are being proposed could greatly improve the
              health and vitality of persons in ways previously not possible. Information
              technology is a critical component of this endeavor, requiring both novel
              hardware and software design. The limited power and computational capabilities
              of these biological implants present challenging research issues. As progress
              is made on these topics, there is great promise of long-term benefits.
              Multidisciplinary research, drawing on the expertise of researchers in a wide
              array of areas is required. This proposal assembles a multi-institutional team
              of researchers in computer science and engineering, solid state devices, and
              medicine. The combined talents of this team will be required to realize the
              goal of this proposal - small biomedical devices composed of smart sensors that
              are implanted for long-term use. These devices require the ability to
              communicate with an external diagnostic computer system via a wireless
              interface.
     A large-scale research program on smart sensors is on-going at
              Wayne State University, covering all aspects from materials characterization
              through integrated circuit design and simulation to hybrid device fabrication.
              This major research initiative requires a multidisciplinary team involving
              faculty, researchers, and students from the Colleges of Engineering, Science,
              and Medicine. All are members of the Smart Sensors and Integrated Microsystems
              (SSIM) research group. The research in this proposal adds a new dimension to
              the currently funded research of the SSIM program by providing wireless
              communication capabilities to the implanted microsensors. This additional
              capability is possible because of the close collaboration among researchers at
              Wayne State University and Colorado State University.
     The proposed work
              will take an integrated hardware and software approach to developing solutions
              for wireless networking of human-embedded microsensors. These solutions will be
              bio-compatible, energy-efficient, fault-tolerant, and scalable. In addition,
              they would support continuous operation and provide diagnostic capabilities.
              The proposed work will address several fundamental questions for the wireless
              networking of embedded microsensors, including those arising due to the need
              for low-powered, low-maintenance, highly-reliable, and scalable solutions. As a
              demonstration of our proposed techniques, an artificial retina prosthesis and
              related visual cortical implant will be developed.  The goal is to design
              wireless network protocols for energy-efficient communication between multiple
              retinal sensor array/cortical implants and an external base station. The
              research in this proposal provides the building blocks for this wireless
              network. The severe limits on the computational and memory capabilities of the
              smart sensor implants place tight constraints on the communication protocol.
              For this reason, an external communication device, contained in a pair of
              eyeglasses, for example, will provide the additional resources necessary for
              protocol-compliant communication, and increased range and bandwidth. Software
              to display the message contents will be developed in order to validate the
              network protocols and the sensor communication. The software to perform image
              analysis and recognition will be also be developed by our research team. The
              developed solution will be evaluated, through both simulation and pro-totyping,
              for various performance and functionality criteria including bio-compatibility,
              energy-efficiency, reliability, and scalability
     Upon completion, the
              proposed work will have several benefits in the area of wireless networking of
              low-powered microsensors, which are suitable for biomedical applications. Other
              biomedical applications where this technology are useful is limited only by our
              imagination. For example, patients with Parkinson's disease and epilepsy could
              benefit from the ability to implant sensors in the neural pathways of the brain
              to alter the undesired signals and restore proper functioning. Existing
              technology is very crude and not suitable for chronic implanted devices or
              complex signal stimulation and detection. Another example is acoustic and
              optical biosensor arrays for blood analysis currently under development at
              Wayne State University. Similar sensors are being developed to detect cancer
              cells by implanting a smart sensor in the body of a recovering cancer patient.
              One of the main contributions of this project would be a framework for
              developing scalable wireless networking and powering solutions for biomedical
              applications.
     The integration of advances in wireless networking and
              smart sensor technology have great potential in several other applications such
              as the monitoring of distributed environmental sensors. It is envisioned that
              networked smart sensors will revolutionize our world in ways beyond our current
              imagination. Besides the technical benefits there will be several societal and
              educational benefits. Societal benefits include improved quality-of-life for
              many individuals and the accompanied benefits to society of their increased
              vitality and longevity. The educational component of this project will train
              information technology personnel in this very important interdisciplinary area.
              In particular, the PIs plan to develop a wireless networking of distributed and
              embedded sensors, to integrate the course in the existing curriculum at Wayne
              State and Colorado State, to develop tutorials centered around the theme of the
              proposal, and to work towards increasing the involvement of minorities and
              women in interdisciplinary research.
