Title       : PGE/SEP: Bioinformatics Initiative for High School Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2000   
File        : a0086360

Award Number: 0086360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92656              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Cronin scronin@immaculata.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charlotte R. Zales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Immaculata College
	      
	      Immaculata, PA  19345    215/647-4400

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              



		
Abstract
	
     This summer initiative will familiarize selected
              high-school
students with Bioinformatics, an increasingly important field with
              strong
potential for growth in the coming decades. This course is oriented
              toward
female high school students. This program will be offered in the summer
              of 
2001, and will be open to qualified young women who have
just completed
              their third year of high school. Particular encouragement
will be given to
              young women who are members of minority groups; who are
from low-income
              families; and who lack strong role models in science and
technology. 
	
    
              Upon conclusion of the program, the participants will be able to:
- Describe,
              apply, and analyze principles of molecular biology; 
- Use the Internet,
              Microsoft Office, and Bioinformatics tools; 
- Use problem-based learning
              techniques; 
- Distinguish the outcomes of their data entries and
              manipulations; 
- Comprehend Bioinformatics as a field of study; 
- Know the
              roles that women can achieve in science and information 
    technology; and
              
- Value group process as a means of learning .
	
     In the program,
              participating young women will live on campus during
the five-week program
              period; take courses during the day; participate in
hands-on lab work; work
              together as members of small teams; benefit from
presentations from and
              discussions with working professionals in the field;
and travel to
              pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, government
laboratories, and other
              sites to complement their coursework, and learn how
Bioinformatics is used in
              the scientific field. The program will use the
NSF-funded Biology Student
              Workbench (BSW) program as the part of the
curriculum, and the program
              organizers will work closely with the staff of
that project in order to
              implement it appropriately. Using a problem-based
learning approach, the
              investigators will teach via student-centered group
interaction, and will
              create specific scenarios for student research. 

     The program will be
              designed to encourage young women to pursue 
Bioinformatics as a field of
              study, and ultimately as a profession. Participants 
will strengthen their
              general computer skills and their ability to use the
Internet as an
              interactive tool. By working in teams they will increase
their problem solving
              abilities, communication skills and ability to
interact with others. 

    
              Upon conclusion of the program, information will be
disseminated to encourage
              the replication of the program at other sites
nationwide through presentations
              and publications, as well as work with
BioQuest and the Biology Student
              Workbench team. The program organizers
except to extend the benefits to other
              high school students and teachers,
and encourage many young women to enter
              computer technology, mathematics,
and science fields.




