Title       : Expansion of the Center for High Resolution Neutron Scattering (CHRNS) at NIST
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0086210

Award Number: 0086210
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Hugh M. Van Horn                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan A. Neumann dan@nist.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles J. Glinka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NIST
	      Building 226 Rm B226
	      Gaithersburg, MD  20899    301/975-2000

NSF Program : 1743      NATIONAL FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The NSF/NIST Center for High Resolution Scattering (CHRNS) at the NIST Center
              for Neutron Research (NCNR) operates and develops state-of-the-art neutron
              scattering instrumentation for use by the general scientific community. Over
              the past decade, research carried out on the CHRNS instruments has had a major
              impact on U.S. science and industry in fields as diverse as polymer science,
              colloid chemistry, biology, porous materials, and magnetism and
              superconductivity. More than 250 scientists, post-doctoral fellows, and
              graduate students currently use the CHRNS instruments each year. 

This award
              from the National Facilities and Instrumentation program supports the expansion
              and associated operations of the Center for High Resolution Neutron Scattering
              at NIST. The NCNR has recently commissioned three cold neutron spectrometers: a
              spin echo spectrometer, a backscattering spectrometer, and a disk chopper
              time-of-flight spectrometer that are now incorporated into CHRNS. These new
              instruments extend the time scale that can be probed using neutron scattering
              in the U.S. by more than three orders of magnitude allowing scientists to probe
              dynamic processes from 10-7 to 10-13 seconds. This provides an opportunity to
              create an entirely new subfield of neutron spectroscopy in America with
              applications ranging from, for example, polymers, micelles, biomaterials, ionic
              conductors and fuel cell materials, new tailored catalysts, membranes and
              molecular sieves as well as a wide variety of magnetic phenomena. This
              cooperative agreement provides the scientific community with increased access
              to these spectrometers. Proposals for the use of these facilities are peer
              reviewed and allocated measurement time by a Program Advisory Committee in a
              manner approved by the NSF. 
 
In addition to the three new instruments, this
              project enhances user support in the areas of complex sample environments and
              improved data acquisition, reduction, and analysis software. Moreover, it is
              anticipated that the creation of the first world-class capabilities for cold
              neutron spectroscopy in the U.S. will have considerable impact on graduate
              research and education. Just as the CHRNS instruments now welcome over 150
              graduate students and postdoctoral researchers each year, this project allows
              many more to visit CHRNS in order to pursue training and research in high
              resolution cold neutron scattering methods thereby producing a large contingent
              of informed young users for the future. 

