Title       : PGE/SEP: Afterschool and Summer Science Camps for Young Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2000   
File        : a0086440

Award Number: 0086440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87822              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvia A. Oliver olivers@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Trevisan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              WSU will implement a young women's afterschool and summer science camp program
              to determine what type and degree of contact is most effective in increasing
              their understanding of, and interest in, the areas of science, math and
              technology.  Three types of science camps are proposed for middle school girls:
               eight-week afterschool camps (two days/week); week-long summer camps (six
              hours/day); and week-long residential summer camps.  Each camp provides 30
              hours of instruction.  The theme of the camps in "Science at the Summit."  This
              mountaineering theme covers many fields of science, mathematics and technology
              related to popular Northwest outdoor experiences.  Camps are taught by a
              certified teacher, assisted by local outdoors experts, with support from women
              science professionals.  A mentoring program brings together women professionals
              and students through regular E-mail contact over six-month period immediately
              following the camp experience.  Girls also have program contact through
              CityLab's website and with CityLab's monthly newsletter.  Program evaluation
              will determine whether or not the mode of delivery of content material, in
              combination with a strong mentoring program, significantly affects middle
              school student's interest in, and intent to pursue courses and experiences in
              science, math and technology.
