Title       : PGE/SEP: TechGirl: A Website for Middle School Girls Interested in Science and
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  2000   
File        : a0086452

Award Number: 0086452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99805              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary R. Anderson-Rowland mary.anderson@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James B. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria Reyes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Wagner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              TechGirl will be a fun and dynamically evolving website dedicated to helping
              middle school girls learn about science and engineering. It is intended to help
              them develop an appreciation for the beneficial impact of science and
              engineering on society, and to encourage them to consider possible careeers in
              science and engineering. This site will contain four major parts:

1)
              Biographical sketches of women at different stages of their careers, including
              high school, college, beginning their careers, and at the peak of their
              careers, including a short bio and a fun/interesting description of a specific
              event in their career.

2) Advice on developing their careers, from choosing
              courses and activities in high school to picking a college and major to finally
              choosing a career.

3) Puzzles/Brainteasers designed to challenge the girls
              and expose them to different aspects of science and engineering.

4)
              Engineering Encounters, a role-playing game where the girls simulate how their
              life could develop through high school, college, and their career. This game
              will present them with a series of choices, and then they choose a response
              which then results in different events occurring in their lives.

TechGirl
              will be developed in close collaboration with two major programs at Arizona
              State University, the Women in Applied Science and Engineering program and the
              MInority Engineering Program. The design of TechGirl is based on extensive
              discussions with middle and high school girls, their teachers and counselors,
              college girls in WISE, engineers who mentor for WISE, and college students in
              the OMEP program. Those groups will continue to play a critical role in the
              development and assessment of TechGirl, so that it is designed as much as
              possible by girls and women for girls.
