Title       : Dull Knife-Northern Cheyenne Rural Systemic Initative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a0086156

Award Number: 0086156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1250000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Littlebear   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dull Knife Memorial Col
	      P.O.Box 98
	      Lame Deer, MT  590430098    406/477-6215

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Dull Knife Memorial College (DKMC) Rural Systemic Initiative will be a
              five year effort                      that will sustain and amplify the
              transformations already begun in the educational experiences of                
              the K-14 students on and the Northern Cheyenne Reservation.  The quality and
              quantity of the
learning experiences in science, mathematics and technology
              within and beyond the school
walls will be enhanced by professional
              development for teachers, adoption of effective
strategies, and promotion of
              parental and community involvement in the educational
process.

An advisory
              committe to the principal will provide input on program direction,
              objectives
and activities, policy decisions and special requests by program
              participants.
The creation of fonnal "personal professional growth" plans for
              each individual teacher will 
be initiated with plans that are reviewed and
              updated annually but extended forward for
a five-year period.  Professional
              development activities will be structured around cohorts 
teachers based on
              closely related job and interest factors that the teachers identify and 
a
              regional professional development committee will be formed to make training
              programs
self-determined by the area teachers.  Emphasis will be placed on
              making the school site
a place to learn for teachers and parents as well as
              students.

Alternative assessment methods and implementation will be included
              as a component
of the professional development for school administrators and
              teachers.  Staff will include
a local community member who will be employed to
              actively seek public and political support
for educational priorities within
              the reservation community, one educational professional
              in
mathematics/physical sciences and one in biological sciences who will work
              with area K-14 
teachers. 



