Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research: Real-time Capture, Management and Reconstruction of
               Spatio-Temporal Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0086124

Award Number: 0086124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharad Mehrotra sharad@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1655,1661,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With the advances in embedded processors, low cost sensor technologies, and
              wireless communication, unprecedented amounts of diverse types of information
              about the real world and its activities are being generated. Much of the
              information is spatio-temporal in nature; concerning objects dispersed in space
              and time, and interacting and communicating with each other and their
              surroundings. An infrastructure that facilitates real-time capture, storage,
              processing, display, and analysis of the information generated will truly
              revolutionize a wide variety of application domains. Examples of domains that
              will benefit from this technology include avionics, ground traffic, commercial
              applications such as ship-ping and transportation, emergency response and
              disaster relief operations, physical phenomenon such as weather and storm
              tracking, forest fire tracking, migration patterns of animals/birds, command
              and control, smart environments, etc. Applications in the above domains require
              real-time monitoring, tracking and analysis of objects/events/phenomena in
              space and time. 

An integral component of such sensor enriched communication
              and information infrastructure is a database management technology that allows
              seamless access to information dispersed across a hierarchy of storage,
              communication and processing units - from sensor devices, where data
              originates, to large data banks where the information generated is stored for
              analysis and mining. This research will explore next generation database
              management system technology that provides effective support for information
              processing in highly distributed and dynamic sensor-enriched environments. The
              approach taken will be end-to-end - that is, research will be conducted on all
              aspects of the system ranging from representation, data modeling, query
              languages, data structures, query optimization, query processing, distribution,
              and concurrent accesses. A prototype database management infrastructure that
              supports highly dynamic geographically dispersed spatio-temporal data,
              multi-resolution representation of data, and provides effective support for
              visualization and analysis will be developed. 

