Title       : Tribal College Rural Systemic Initiative- Development Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0086294

Award Number: 0086294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra Davis debrad57@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Blackfeet Community Col
	      P.O. BOX 819
	      Browning, MT  594170819    406/338-5441

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Blackfeet Community College (BCC) proposes to examine past activities of Phase
              I, look at
what was learned, and continue into Phase II as a development
              grant. Phase I efforts in
developing and maintaining a comprehensive and
              sustainable systemic reform effort in
mathematics, science, and technology
              fell short of expected activities and BCC has learned
from its past
              activities.
BCC will utilize the lessons learned from Phase I activities and
              will continue to promote
the NSF drivers while at the same time seek current
              strategies to assist in their effort
to have a comprehensive program that will
              catapult Blackfeet Indian reservation and its
students to meet the National
              standards. Special emphasis will be placed on a holistic
approach to community
              reform using RSI activities as a springboard for a comprehensive
reform
              effort.

There are fourteen K-8 schools (1,814 students) and two high schools
              (563 students) in the
service area of BCC. BCC will work with eight of these
              schools in a comprehensive effort
for systemic reform, impacting 1,777 (98%)
              in the K-8 area and 563 (100%) of the High
School students. BCC will work with
              mathematics and science teachers and administrators
through existing channels
              established during Phase I in setting goals and objectives for
Phase I
              implementation activities. A task force made up of reservation
              school
administrators will be chaired by the BCC college administrator and
              will include all
school administrators of schools served. A mathematics task
              force will be developed and
will include area mathematics instructors
              (recommended by school site administrators) and
BCC mathematics instructors.
              It is this group that will examine, recommend, and assess
efforts in
              mathematics. Another task force in the sciences will be formed composed of
              all
service area science teachers and BCC science instructors. They will work
              closely with
the science curriculum of area schools and look at how they are
              involved in the overall
reform effort.

The Phase II developmental efforts
              will continue to promote systemic reform in math
and science education at two
              school districts consisting of six different school buildings
located in rural
              Montana. The utmost goal of the program is to develop and maintain
              a
population that is prepared to meet the needs of a technologically competent
              work force.


