Title       : Biophotonics: Frequency-modulated Raman Spectroscopy of Biological Specimens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0086797

Award Number: 0086797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222295             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Berger ajberger@optics.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1606,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0086797
Berger
Vibrational Raman spectroscopy is a precise tool for the
              identification and quantification of molecular species. Because the spectral
              bands are narrow, signals from many compo-nents can be resolved and analyzed
              simultaneously.  Consequently, Raman spectroscopy provides a method for
              analyzing multiple components' concentrations in complex sam-ples accurately,
              non-invasively, and non-destructively.  These attributes are valuable in the
              medical field for both in vivo and in vitro measurements.

Acquisition of
              Raman spectra is limited by the effects of intrinsic sample autofluor-escence. 
              For most biological samples, the spectral background from fluorescence will
              typically be much (greater than100 times) larger than the Raman signal, and
              fluorescence shot noise can be the limiting source of noise.  Consequently, 
              fluorescence limits Raman spec-troscopy from being a more widely applicable
              technique for biomedical purposes.

The investigators propose to develop a
              novel Raman spectroscopy system based upon wavelength shifting to suppress
              these fluorescence effects.  Such a system would be able to acquire
              fluorescence-corrected Raman spectra with unprecedented speed and accuracy. 
              The technique uses a laser whose wavelength is varied over a range of < 1 nm at
              kHz fre-quencies. Because Raman spectra shift with the laser wavelength while
              fluorescence re-mains stable, the fluorescence background can be efficiently
              rejected; at the same time, detection in the kHz regime reduces the fluoresence
              shot noise significantly relative to DC detection.  To date, the published
              implementations of wavelength-shifted Raman spectroscopy have used either
              steady-state detection, in which the noise-suppression advantage is lost, or
              single-wavelength scanning, which makes them too slow to com-pete with present
              multipixel systems.  The proposed system would combine all of the ad-vantages
              and should significantly improve concentration predictions.  In addition,
              sup-pression of fluorescence signal and noise could open new avenues for
              biomedical Ra-man spectroscopy, such as visible-excitation experiments (avoided
              because of extremely high fluorescence) and higher-contrast Raman
              imaging.

This proposal is broken into four Specific Aims, which are (1) to
              assemble the above Raman system and acquire a first round of spectra; (2) to
              optimize the signal-to-back-ground and signal-to-noise of the system and
              compare values to other Raman modali-ties; (3) to increase the optical
              throughput of the spectrometer via spatial Fourier-trans-form techniques; and
              (4) to conduct experiments to detect clinically relevant analytes in biological
              samples and phantoms.

This proposal combines basic spectroscopy with
              advanced instrumentation, provid-ing a solid platform for training graduate and
              undergraduate students in biomedical optics.  Through Raman spectroscopy,
              discussion of related topics in absorption, fluo-rescence, and diffuse photon
              migration will arise.  Conference attendance and presen-tations by graduate
              students (for which funding is explicitly requested) will further in-crease
              exposure to the field.  Within the laboratory, students will gain direct
              experience assembling lasers, optics, spectrographs, and detectors into a
              functioning system and also programming computers to control the system.  This
              will nurture broadly applica-ble skills for future use in both academic and
              industrial laboratory settings.


