Title       : NTE: The Use of Ionic Liquids for the Remediation of Wastewater Contaminated by
               Organic Halogens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a0086725

Award Number: 0086725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory D. Botsaris gregory.botsaris@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ru-Ying Qian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dionysios Dionysiou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1605,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0086725
Botsaris, G.
Tufts University

This investigation
              deals with the coupling of a novel emerging technology and a serious
              environmental problem.  The technology is based on the use of the minimally
              explored class of solvents, the room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs).  In
              contrast to the molten inorganic salts, that have a high melting point, RTILs
              are melts of salts that are liquids at or below room temperature.  These
              solvents are comprised entirely of ions and constitute a new class of solvents
              that are different in properties from the two classes of molecular solvents
              currently in use:  water and organic liquids.

The environmental problem
              concerns industrial wastewater effluents and groundwaters contaminated by
              halogenated organic compounds.  These pollutants are highly toxic
              polychlorinated organics, such as polychlorinated phenols, dioxins, furans,
              PCBs, chlorobenzenes, etc.  They are usually in low concentrations in the
              contaminated water, nevertheless they need to be removed with high efficiency. 
              This investigation examines the selective extraction and concentration of these
              organic halogens by an RTIL.  The unique properties of ionic liquids provide
              high selectivity and the large partition coefficients necessary for a very
              efficient extraction and concentration.  In one of the subsequent options to be
              considered, the extracted contaminants are removed by back extraction to a
              concentrated aqueous phase or by adsorption onto a solid, where they are
              destroyed by known advanced oxidation techniques (AOTs).

The most
              interesting idea to be studied, however, is the in situ destruction of the
              pollutants inside the ionic liquid, either by AOTs or electrochemically.  The
              unique properties of the ionic liquids may provide a particularly favorable
              environment for these destruction processes.  It is expected that the funding
              of this investigation will have ramifications beyond this particular
              application to other environmental problems.    

