Title       : Reconfigurable Reaction Wall-based Earthquake Simulator Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0086621

Award Number: 0086621
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4268323            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack P. Moehle moehle@peer.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Mahin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Khalid M. Mosalam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bozidar Stojadinovic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
              Program is a project funded under the NSF Major Research Equipment Program. 
              This cooperative agreement, under the NEES Program, establishes a NEES
              reconfigurable reaction wall-based earthquake simulator facility at the
              University of California, Berkeley (UCB), California. UCB will design,
              construct, install, commission, and operate a modular and highly flexible
              dynamic testing facility that will enable experimental and analytical
              model-based simulation of interactions among substructures that form a single
              structure.  The knowledge gained from such simulations will help develop a new
              generation of performance-based design guidelines and implement them in
              practice to improve the safety and reliability of civil infrastructure.  This
              equipment will be operational by September 30, 2004, or earlier and will be
              managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment site, with teleobservation and
              teleoperation capabilities, to provide new earthquake engineering research
              testing capabilities for large structural systems through 2014.  This NEES
              equipment site will be connected to the NEES collaboratory through the
              University's Abilene connection, with 1-2 Gb/sec Ethernet capabilities. 
              Shared-use access and training will be coordinated through the NEES Consortium.
               This award is an outcome of the peer review of proposals submitted to program
              solicitation NSF 00-6, "NEES: Earthquake Engineering Research Equipment."  The
              equipment will be installed in Building 484 at the Richmond Field Station of
              UCB and will make use of the existing strong floor, existing four-million-pound
              axial compression-tension testing machine, and an array of existing static and
              dynamic actuators.  The following equipment is provided under this award:  (1)
              reconfigurable reaction wall, with post-tensioning bars and couplers,  (2)
              seven dynamic and static actuator assemblies: four dynamic, two rated at 50
              kips (222 kN) with 40-in (1016 mm) stroke minimum and two rated at 150 kips
              (667 kN) with 40-in (1016 mm) stroke minimum, and three static, one rated at
              446/600 kips (1984/2669 kN) with 40-in (1016 mm) stroke and two rated at
              216/328 kips (961/1459 kN) with 72-in (1829 mm) stroke,  (3) one hydraulic
              distribution system, (4) one high-performance accumulation system,  (5) one
              digital control system with real-time hybrid control packages and integrated
              data acquisition channels, comprising hardware for 8 control channels and 16
              additional data acquisition channels and software development kits, (6)
              advanced data acquisition system with a modular 128-channel data acquisition
              system with A/D converter, (7) digital video teleobservation system including a
              system of digital cameras, digital video recorders and a digital video Internet
              server, (8) instrumentation that includes potentiometer-based displacement
              sensors, MEMS-based accelerometers, load cells, tilt-meters, cabling, and
              connectors, and (9) network interface hardware.  The reaction wall consists of
              concrete modules, hollow-core blocks designed to be mated at the top and bottom
              and postensioned into a monolithic unit.  The same postensioning will be used
              to connect the reaction wall to the strong floor.  At least 14 blocks will make
              it possible to configure a single 42-ft (12.8 m) reaction wall or two 21-ft
              (6.4 m) tall walls.  Numerous combinations of walls and arrangements will be
              possible with this modular strong wall concept.  A network interface will
              enable cooperative hybrid testing between an existing shaking table and the
              reaction wall.  Furthermore, a network interface to the University of
              California Millennium cluster will provide access to a massively parallel
              computation facility necessary to implement the multiply substructured
              pseudo-dynamic testing method.  The experimental facility is designed to
              support the development of a new generation of hybrid testing methods that
              smoothly integrate physical and numerical simulations.  Portions of the
              structure, expected to behave in a predictable manner, are modeled numerically,
              while one or more complex subassemblies and the boundaries on which they
              interact are modeled using scaled physical models.  Using numerical integration
              algorithms, the physical and numerical substructures can be analyzed as a
              single structure.  The substructures, physical or numerical, involved in such
              hybrid testing can be at different geographic locations connected by the NEES
              network.  UCB will integrate this reconfigurable reaction wall-based earthquake
              simulator into its research program and undergraduate and graduate curricula
              (including making the material widely available in online web-based course
              modules), and provide training opportunities for outside researchers through
              on-site courses and web-based materials.
