Title       : Biophotonics: Biophysical Approaches Towards Probing Defects in Calcium Dynamics
               in Animal Models of Epilepsy and Ataxia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a0086643

Award Number: 0086643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen W. McEnery mwm4@cwru.po.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0086643
McEnery
In the past few years, several inherited neurological
              disorders in mice and human have been identified as arising from mutations in
              voltage-dependent calcium channel (VDCC) subunits. VDCC are assembled from
              component alpha1, gamma and other accessory subunits and impart temporal and
              spatial specificity to the influx of calcium across the membrane in response to
              changes in the transmembrane potential.  The goal of this project is to expand
              our fundamental knowledge of how alterations in calcium expression and hence,
              calcium homeostasis, lead to disease. The information derived from this
              research will contribute to the identification of perturbations in calcium
              dynamics within neurons and so will aid in the identification of new
              therapeutic targets in the management of these diseases in human populations. 
              At the foundation of this study is our detailed biochemical and
              immunohistochemical diagnosis of epileptic (petit mal seizures) and ataxic
              stargazer (gamma-2 null), tottering (alpha1A point mutation) and engineered
              mice that have had the alpha1A gene eliminated (alpha1A knock-out mice). We
              have identified a reoccurring pattern of cellular defects in hippocampal
              neurons of these three strains of mice.  The altered expression and
              localization of gamma and alpha1A subunits evidence this defect.  Hence, we
              have, as a fundamental starting point, the hypothesis that calcium entry will
              be altered in hippocampal neurons of these animals compared to controls.  An
              important aspect of our proposal is the quantitative modeling of the calcium
              dynamics in mutant neurons.  This will give the localization of the sites of
              calcium flux, the magnitudes of calcium influx, the degree of calcium
              buttering, and the assessment of calcium diffusion.  The experimental data to
              be used in the quantitative modeling will be obtained by employing a variety of
              techniques (biochemical, immunohistochemical, and optical) analyzed by
              contemporary fluorescent microscopic instrumentation (fluorescent microscopy,
              confocal microscopy, and two-photon microscopy).  For calcium imaging studies,
              we will employ conventional small-molecule calcium indicators with different
              calcium affinity (Oregon green 488 BAPTA-5N (20 uM), fura-2 (high affinity 145
              nM) indo-1 (230 nM) and compare these results with those obtained using a novel
              calcium indicator, termed cameleon YC3.1 (4 uM).  Cameleons are proteins can be
              expressed in neurons and have the advantage of functioning as cytosolic calcium
              indicators when expressed as soluble proteins or functioning as strategically
              placed calcium indicators when attached, by molecular cloning techniques, to
              VDCC subunits.  A long term objective is to mate mice that have been engineered
              to express cameleon YC3.1 as transgenes with our experimental animals (control,
              stargazer, tottering and the alpha1A knock-out) to establish strains of mice
              that offer the opportunity to visualize possible defects in calcium homeostasis
              in living animals.


