Title       : Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative, Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2002      
File        : a0086194

Award Number: 0086194
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8200070            (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond J. Barnhardt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank W. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oscar A. Kawagley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alas Federatn of Natives
	      1577 C St., Suite 300
	      Anchorage, AK  99501    907/274-3611

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The underlying purpose of the AK RSI has been to implement a set of
              initiatives to document
the indigenous knowledge systems of Alaska Native
              people and develop pedagogical practices
and curricula that appropriately
              incorporate indigenous knowledge and ways of knowing into
the formal education
              system. The systemic reform focus of the AKRSI reform strategy is
              the
fostering of connectivity and complementarity between two interdependent
              but historically
disconnected, alienated complex systems - the indigenous
              knowledge systems rooted in the 
Native cultures that inhabit rural Alaska,
              and the formal education systems imported to serve 
the educational needs of
              rural Native communities. Within each of these evolving systems is 
a rich
              body of complementary scientific and mathematical knowledge that can serve to
              
strengthen the educational experiences and improve the academic performance
              of students 
throughout rural Alaska. The following initiatives constitute
              AKRSI educational reform strategy: 

Culturally Aligned Curriculum/Cultural
              Standards
Village Science Applications and Careers/ANSES Chapters, Camps and
              Fairs
Indigenous Science Knowledge Base/Multimedia Cultural Atlas
              Development
Native Ways of Knowing/Parent Involvement
Elders and Cultural
              Camps/Academy of Elders

The initiatives above will be implemented on a
              region-by-region basis, building on Phase I
to integrate the reform process
              into the everyday workings of the schools and districts
to a sustainable level
              by the end of Phase Il.  Also an array of statewide intiative will be
              
implemented to support the activities at the local and regional
              levels.
Following is a summary of the statewide initiatives relative to the
              implementation of the 
Regional initiatives during Phase II.

Math/Science
              Performance Standards and Assessments
Alaska Standards for Culturally
              Responsive Schools
Cultural Frameworks for Curriculum
Native Educator
              Associations
Alaska Native Knowledge Network
Consortium for Alaska Native
              Higher Education

The experience and academic achievement successes gained
              during Phase I, are 
the basic strategy for Phase II, but will be continued
              with greater intensity and delineation. 
of emphases. The locus of activity
              will be in the same 20 rural school districts as partners 
in those schools
              with the primary differences during Phase II being the concentration of
              
effort and increased emphases on sustainability of the initiatives.

