Title       : Wind River Rural Systemic Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0086165

Award Number: 0086165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1250000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl A. Berlin kberlin@fremont21.k12.wy.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fremont County School Dist
	      90 Ethete Road
	      Fort Washakie, WY  825140000    307/332-5983

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Wind River Rural Systemic Initiative (WRRSI) has been promoting quality
RSI
              programs for the Wind River Indian Reservation students for the past five
              years.
Phase II funding will allow WRRSI to expand its focal area and serve
              approximately
2,150 students, of which 95% are Native American.

The need
              for science and math systemic reform on the Wind River Indian
Reservation is
              documented by test scores showing Native students still score below the
state
              average. WRRSI's Phase I data shows that their programs have made a
              difference,
however, as Wyoming has now adopted statewide standards and has
              begun to require
statewide standardized tests, WRRSI must continue to work to
              improve these
traditionally under served students' scores.

Phase II
              programming will include:

On-going professional development opportunities
              for teachers on the
       Wind River Indian Reservation;
Summer school and
              after school activities for K-8 students;
Summer institute for 9-12 grade
              students;
An integration of culture into the curriculum; and
Career awareness
              and job shadowing programs.

Data collection over the next five years will be
              extensive. WRRSI will develop
databases for both students and teachers.
              Teacher databases will document professional
development opportunities and
              courses taken. The student database will document
student achievement and
              participation in program offerings; track students after they
leave high
              school; and allow WRRSI to determine program effectiveness by
              comparing
students participating in programs to those not
              participating.

WRRSI's underlying goal is to provide Native American
              students with a solid
base in science and mathematics to provide opportunities
              and choices to compete 
at the college level. 




