Title       : Upgrading Oregon State's Multidirectional Wave Basin for Remote Tsunami Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0086571

Award Number: 0086571
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4775832            (Estimated)
Investigator: Solomon C. Yim solomon.yim@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry H. Yeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel T. Cox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cherri M. Pancake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles K. Sollitt  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
              Program is a project funded under the NSF Major Research Equipment Program. 
              This cooperative agreement, under the NEES Program, establishes a NEES
              tsunami/wave basin research site located at the O.H. Hinsdale Wave Research
              Laboratory (WRL) on the Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, campus.  
              This award is an outcome of the peer review of proposals submitted to program
              solicitation NSF 00-6, "NEES: Earthquake Engineering Research Equipment."  The
              following equipment is provided under this award:  (1) long-stroke, high
              velocity, directional, solitary wave generator, (2) velocity transducers, (3)
              video workstations, (4) database and file server, (5) expansion of the existing
              data acquisition system to accommodate teleobservation, teleoperation,
              teletransmission, and telestorage, and (6) equipment for teleobservation and
              teleoperation capabilities so that experiments on the equipment will be
              observable and controllable via high performance network connections.  To
              accommodate the new wave generator and tsunami experimentation, Oregon State
              University will expand its existing 3-D wave basin facility at the WRL to 26.5m
              x 48.8m x 2.0m deep and provide a bridge crane over the wave basin.   The basin
              will be equipped with electro-resistive wave gauges to provide accurate, local
              wave measurements and to validate other imaging techniques (video, laser, radar
              and acoustic) to increase aerial coverage of wave diffraction and refraction
              patterns.  This equipment will be operational by 2004 or earlier and will be
              managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment site, with teleobservation and
              teleoperation capabilities, to provide new earthquake engineering research
              testing capabilities for test and validation of advanced analytical and
              numerical models of tsunami-wave/structure interactions for a full range of
              ocean, coastal, and harbor studies through 2014.  Shared-use access and
              training will be coordinated through the NEES Consortium.  This NEES equipment
              site will be connected to the NEES collaboratory via a Gigabit Ethernet link to
              the information management facilities located at the Northwest Alliance for
              Computational Science and Engineering (NACSE).  The transmission of data to
              remote sites will take place via Internet2's Abilene Network. Digital cameras
              will be used to enhance the physical model experience by providing multiple,
              simultaneous frames of reference and fields of view for both local and remote
              investigators.  In addition, full-motion cameras, a new data acquisition
              system, and a comprehensive Information Architecture will allow local and
              remote users to rapidly examine selected data channels at various levels of
              analysis. A Tsunami Experiment Databank will be established so the broader
              earthquake engineering research community can study the results of tsunami
              experiments, reducing the need for experimentation and providing data for
              validating numerical models. The University will integrate this tsunami/wave
              basin equipment into its research program, undergraduate and graduate
              instruction, and K-12 and community outreach.  The University will also provide
              training opportunities for outside researchers through on-site courses and
              workshops, and web-based materials that will assist university faculty at other
              institutions to incorporate tsunami test experiences in undergraduate and
              graduate courses. 
