Title       : CISE Educational Innovation: Introducing Fundamental Concepts and Evaluation
               Methods for Distributed Systems and Applications in the Computer Science
               Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0086251

Award Number: 0086251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anita J. LaSalle                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ratan K. Guha guha@cs.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erol Gelenbe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mostafa Bassiouni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2888,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0086251 
 Guha University of Central Florida
Guha, Ratan K.

CISE
              Educational Program:  Introducing Fundamental Concepts and Evaluation Methods
              for Distributed Systems and Applications in the Computer Science Undergraduate
              Curriculum

This CISE Educational Innovation award supports the development
              of innovative curricula for teaching contemporary concepts of distributed
              computer systems, computer network technologies, and principles of distributed
              applications to undergraduate students at the University of Central Florida and
              three collaborating institutions. The focus of the project is on the
              development of modules, course materials, courses, a delivery infrastructure,
              faculty enhancement workshops, and web-based data collection. Module topics
              include: networks and the Internet, mobile and wireless computing, network
              management, concepts of distributed systems, network security, performance
              evaluation, distributed applications, and parallel and distributed simulation.
              This project provides a web and CD-ROM based mechanism for distribution of
              modules, courses, support-software and evaluation instruments. A one-week
              workshop for faculty, government, and industry covering these topics will be
              conducted in 2002 and 2003. In addition to transferring current research in
              distributed systems into the undergraduate curriculum at the University of
              Central Florida, the project also enables three partner institutions with
              underrepresented student populations (Grambling State University, Florida A&M
              University, and the University of Houston) to actively participate in the
              project. The collaborating institutions are involved in development and
              evaluation of the instructional modules and use them in their programs either
              as new courses or thread the modules through existing undergraduate courses.

