Title       : US - Czech Collaboration on the Role of Cytokinin Conjugation in Leaf Senescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0086731

Award Number: 0086731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26127              (Estimated)
Investigator: Machteld C. Mok mokm@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. S. Mok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5930,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

This is an international collaborative research project between Oregon State
              University and the Institute of Experimental Botany of the Czech Republic
              focusing on the regulation of senescence by a plant hormone (cytokinin). The
              research will lead to a better understanding of the processes leading to
              cessation of growth in annual plants at the end of the season. The
              collaboration is a continuation of a previous COBASE project between Machteld
              Mok/David Mok and Radomira Vankova and the research is an extension of a
              NSF-funded project to the Mok lab (9981974). The collaboration combines
              research expertise of the two labs to address a classical topic in plant
              physiology with molecular tools.
Cytokinins are hormones promoting cell
              division and regulating many phases of whole plant development. Zeatin is the
              most common and active natural cytokinin. Of the wide spectrum of zeatin
              metabolites, those derived from modifications of the N6-isoprenoid side-chain
              are of particular interest since biological activity is largely dependent on
              side-chain configuration. O-Glucosides of zeatin and ribosylzeatin occur in
              most plant species examined and are particularly abundant at the onset of leaf
              senescence. By virtue of their resistance to cytokinin oxidase attack and ready
              conversion to zeatin via b-glucosidase hydrolysis, O-glucosides are considered
              to be storage and transport forms of active cytokinins. However, their precise
              function has not been defined. Molecular tools, genes encoding the zeatin
              O-glucosyltransferase (ZOG1) and a b-glucosidase (Bgl4), are now available to
              examine this question. Gene expression, enzyme activity and distribution of
              zeatin, ribosylzeatin, and their O-glucosides will be determined in tobacco at
              specific stages of leaf development. The effects of modifying O-glucosylation
              and sugar hydrolysis on maturation and senescence will be examined by
              generating transgenic plants harboring the ZOG1 and Bgl4 genes in sense and
              anti-sense orientations. As few cytokinin-related genes have been isolated, the
              proposed study offers a unique approach to examine the control of a specific
              metabolic step on a single developmental process, and should bring new
              perspective to the hormonal regulation of leaf senescence.  

