Title       : Development of a biaxial multiple shake table research facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0086624

Award Number: 0086624
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4919152            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian G. Buckle igbuckle@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmad Itani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mehdi Saiidi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Sanders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Emmanuel Maragakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
              Program is a project funded under the NSF Major Research Equipment Program. 
              This cooperative agreement, under the NEES Program, establishes a NEES biaxial
              multiple (3) shake table research equipment site at the University at Nevada
              Reno, Reno, Nevada.  The University of Nevada Reno will design, construct,
              install, commission, and operate one new biaxial shake table and the upgrade of
              two existing shake tables for large-scale geotechnical and long, linear
              structural and lifeline earthquake engineering experimentation.  This equipment
              will be operational by 2004 or earlier and will be managed as a national
              shared-use NEES equipment site, with teleobservation and teleoperation
              capabilities, to provide new earthquake engineering research testing
              capabilities for large structural systems through 2014.  This NEES equipment
              site will be connected to the NEES collaboratory through the high-performance
              Nevada Research Network that serves as the University's connection to
              Internet2's Abilene Network, with Gigabit Ethernet capabilities.  Shared-use
              access and training will be coordinated through the NEES Consortium.  This
              award is an outcome of the peer review of proposals submitted to program
              solicitation NSF 00-6, "NEES: Earthquake Engineering Research Equipment."  The
              following equipment is provided under this award:  (1) one new, relocatable,
              4.3 x 4.5 m, 445 kN payload, +1 g, + 300 mm displacement (longitudinal and
              lateral) shake table, (2) upgrades to two existing, moveable, 445 kN shake
              tables from uniaxial to biaxial (longitudinal and lateral) capability, to be
              identical to the new table, (3) new hydraulic distribution lines, (4) new
              blowdown bank with the same capacity as the existing banks, (5) upgraded
              hydraulic power supply, by addition of a third pump (720 lpm), (6) digital
              control system for three tables, (7) expansion of existing data acquisition
              system to accommodate teleobservation, teleoperation, teletransmission, and
              telestorage, and (8) equipment for teleobservation and teleoperation
              capabilities so that experiments on the tables will be observable and
              controllable via high performance network connections.  The facility will
              consist of three biaxial shake tables, which will be relocatable on the strong
              floor of the Large-Scale Structures Laboratory on the University of Nevada Reno
              campus.  A variety of table configurations will be used to meet present and
              future research needs. Furthermore, each table may be operated independently of
              the other two tables, in-phase with the other two tables (thus forming a single
              large table), or differentially with the other two tables for the simulation of
              spatial variation effects in earthquake ground motions.  The facility will be
              the only one of its kind in the United States and will enable next generation
              experiments to be conducted.  These include studies of spatial variation in
              earthquake ground motion on critical extended-in-plan lifeline systems, the
              biaxial response of long structural systems and their components, and the
              behavior of very large-scale systems that are either physically too large for
              existing, single-table facilities, or too heavy, or both.  Together the three
              tables can host specimens up to 1.35 MN in total weight, with the tables
              separated up to a maximum of 36 m centerline-to-centerline.  The total cost of
              the equipment requested in this proposal is $7,017,200.  The University has
              already obtained $2,618,750 towards this goal from the U.S Department of Energy
              ($1,000,000) and the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
              ($1,618,750) reducing the budget request to NSF to $4,398,450.  The University
              will integrate this shake table equipment into its research program,
              undergraduate and graduate assistantships and internships, high school summer
              camps, and K-12 outreach.  The University will also provide training
              opportunities for outside researchers through on-site courses and workshops.
