Title       : Feasibility Study for Carnap Collected Works
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a0086581

Award Number: 0086581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22695              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Creath creath@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 00-86581 - Richard Creath (Arizona State University)
"Feasibility Study for
              'Carnap Collected Works'"

Something odd has happened recently in the world
              of philosophy of science. Just as it seemed that the work of Rudolf Carnap and
              other logical empiricists was being rescued from near oblivion, the most
              important and illuminating of Carnap's publications have largely gone out of
              print. 

Carnap was an enormously influential mid-twentieth century
              philosopher of science and logician. Although his work had gone out of fashion
              by the 1970s, its historical and substantive importance was being recognized
              anew -- slowly in the 1980s and more strongly in the 90s. Oddly, at the same
              time virtually all of his major works were going out of print. Thus, they are
              now unavailable for classroom use, unavailable for younger scholars, and often
              unavailable in any form (including electronic form) even in research libraries.
              To remedy this situation Carnap scholars have proposed the publication of a
              "Carnap Collected Works," to include first all of the published material and
              second the most important parts of the unpublished work. Until now this goal
              had seemed impossible.  The Carnap family's agent had seemed uncooperative, the
              copyrights were uncertain, presses were unwilling, and no one was eager to
              fight all this to undertake the editing of at least 12 to 15 volumes. Within
              the last year (and in some respects within the last weeks) the situation has
              changed. The literary advisor to the Carnap family died, and the PI has taken
              on that role. Many, but not all, of the copyrights have been clarified. A major
              press has agreed in principle to undertake publication in whatever form or
              forms seems most appropriate. A small group of prominent scholars has agreed in
              principle to serve as an editorial board. And the PI has agreed, again in
              principle, to serve as the general editor. 

None of this will happen unless
              feasibility plans (scope, timetable, and budget) for the project can be
              developed fairly quickly. For this purpose we must explore existing models for
              collected works projects including, for example, the Goedel papers, the Peirce
              papers, and the electronic Edison edition. As this short list of examples
              suggests, we will also explore electronic and web-based publication in order to
              see what sort of publication makes the most sense. This Small Grant for
              Exploratory Research supports this exploratory study, designed to lead to a
              publication plan for the "Carnap Collected Works."

