Title       : Investigation of Room Temperature Ionic Liquids as Environmentally Benign
               Solvents for Free Radical Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2000  
File        : a0086874

Award Number: 0086874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jimmy W. Mays   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin D. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher S. Brazel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1605,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: Jimmy W. Mays 
Institution: University of Alabama at
              Birmingham
Proposal Number: 0086874

Room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs)
              are emerging as replacements for environmentally dangerous volatile organic
              compound solvents (VOCs) traditionally used as industrial solvents.  RTILs
              offer a solvating medium in which a number of organic and inorganic compounds
              can be dissolved.  They are non-volatile, non-flammable, have high thermal
              stabilities, and are inexpensively and easily manufactured.  The polymer
              industry is a major segment of the chemical industry and VOCs are used as
              solvents in polymerization as well as polymer isolation and purification
              processes.  This industry could benefit by replacing VOCs with RTILs in polymer
              production.

This project will be a study of the feasibility of conduction
              free radical addition polymerizations in RTILs.  It will be a collaborative
              study between a polymer chemist, an inorganic chemist and a chemical/polymer
              engineer.  The group, also working with industrial collaborators, will evaluate
              a number of different RTILs and different vinyl and acrylic monomers.  Special
              emphasis will be placed on developing processes that completely avoid the use
              of VOCs throughout the polymer synthesis and isolation process.  In addition to
              conventional free radical polymerization, living free radical polymerization in
              RTILs will also be studied.  These living polymerization processes offer the
              potential to produce tailored polymer and copolymer architectures and limit
              polydispersity, while avoiding the high cost associated with ionic
              polymerization processes.  Fundamental engineering and toxicity date will also
              be generated for the RTILs used.

