Title       : Mixed Electronic and Optical Computing Platforms for Portable Surface Plasmon
               Resonance Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0086947

Award Number: 0086947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129969             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl S. Booksh booksh@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1605,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0086947
Booksh

The environmental sensing goal of this project is to develop
              and demonstrate new engineering capabilities associated with optical
              computational methods for improving the design and performance of optical
              sensors for convenient, user-friendly, and field-portable environmental
              analyses. Optical computational methods and novel systems integration
              approaches promise reduction in  power requirements for field portable sensors,
               simplification of electronics and optical train of field portable sensors,
              optimization of signal collection and processing for field portable sensors,
              and adaptation to changing calibration models by updating the programmable
              memory in the sensor controller. Thus, compared to traditional sensors that
              rely in discrete digitization of optical signals, smaller, lighter, and less
              power-hungry sensors with superior detection limits are to be developed using
              these new engineering technologies. 

The proposed novel optical
              computational methods will be incorporated in the design and construction of
              hand held surface plasmon resonance (SPR) sensors for determination of a range
              of environmental pollutants at superior detection limits and sensitivities. In
              Phase 1, application of the sensor will be limited to quantitation of
              polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in ground water. PAHs are carcinogenic
              EPA priority pollutants that largely enter the environment through fuel and oil
              spills or as a byproduct of incomplete combustion. In Phase 2, this sensor will
              be expanded to a massively parallel array of SPR sensors designed for
              multi-analyte detection. The scope of target analytes will be expanded to other
              (EPA) priority pollutants. One key area of progress to the sensors designed for
              both Phase 1 and Phase 2, will be the increasing ability of the system to
              account for environmental changes that affect the SPR spectrum.

In Phase 1
              of the proposed research, these optical computations will be integrated into a
              novel, fiber optic, surface plasmon resonance sensor design. The goals of Phase
              1 are to demonstrate the improvements in sensitivity, power, space, and
              signal-to-noise ratio achievable with integrated optical computation in the SPR
              sensor, to improve system concentration sensitivity in isolated but integrated
              photodetectors, to demonstrate programmability for ease of calibration and
              referencing to environmental changes, and to increase greater than 12 hours of
              battery life capable of determining to +/- 1% PAH concentration down to ppb
              levels in a changing environment. The fiber optic SPR sensor will have two
              sensing areas: one responsive to the target analyte and any environmental
              changes, the other responsive to only environmental changes.

