Title       : Electronic DNA Sequencing with Ion Channel Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a0086178

Award Number: 0086178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin H. White mhw0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This SGER proposal describes exploratory research into the technology and
              techniques required for fabrication of 'nanopores' (e.g. 5 to 100 nm).  These
              nanopores will become part of a unique planar nanopipette for the study of
              single ion channels in biological cells - cells that need to form a gigaseal
              around the opening of the nanopore.  In the future we will locate low-noise
              amplifiers and sensors millimeters from these nanopore openings formed in a
              multi-well chip.  In the field of single channel recordings from individual ion
              channels the recording noise is an important limiting factor in characterizing
              the behavior of ion-specific channels in the presence of drugs.  We plan to
              investigate nanopore techniques, such as E-beam, focus-ion beam (FIB) and field
              emission from a scanning transmission electron microscop.  The results of our
              ion-channel research may be applied to the 'threading' of a polynucleotide,
              single-strand, DNA molecule through a nanopore under an applied electric field.
               As the DNA passes through the limiting aperture of an open nanopore, the flow
              of ions in the nanopore should be 'blocked' in a manner indicative of the
              molecular size and chemical properties of each nucleotide in the polynucleotide
              chain.  Thus, we hope to utilize single channel recordings to determine
              electronically the direct sequence of the individual bases in a single-stranded
              DNA molecule, thereby opening the door to sequencing the human genome in hours
              rather than years as with capillary electrophoresis (CE) and ultra-thin slab
              gel techniques.  Ion channel research will play an increasingly important role
              in understanding numerous diseases and processes in the cardiovascular system
              and the central nervous system.  Diseases and disorders such as migraine,
              epilepsy, Alzheimer's, cardiac arrhythmias, cystic fibrosis, and hypertension
              have all been found to have ion channel involvement and drug therapies directed
              at these and other disorders are focused on ion channels.
