Title       : Electrochemical Oxidation in Room Temperature Ionic Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0086818

Award Number: 0086818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Matthews matthews@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Weidner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1605,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

The objective of this project is to demonstrate environmentally-acceptable
              methods for complete oxidation of chlorinated solvents for environmental
              remediation.  The active oxygenation species will be superoxide ion, which will
              be generated in an aprotic room temperature ionic liquid using a suitable
              cathode.  In addition to demonstrating complete oxidation of chlorinated
              pollutants, partial electrochemical oxidation using the same superoxide
              chemistry will provide a route for synthesis of organic molecules that are
              functional derivatives of carboxylic acids.

The PI will conduct
              low-temperature oxidation of wastes via electrochemical generation of
              superoxide ion in novel ionic liquid solvents.  Low-temperature oxidation of
              waste solvents will provide a much-needed alternative to high temperature waste
              incinerators, whose use is greatly complicated by regulatory requirements and
              locating suitable sites.  Such superoxide chemistry has previously been
              demonstrated in volatile and environmentally-suspect aprotic solvents such as
              dimethyl formamide and acetonitrile.  However, ionic liquids are non-volatile
              and non-flammable, and should minimize the problems of secondary solvent waste
              and separation of products from solvent.  Assuming the basic electrochemistry
              of superoxide is successful, it is further proposed to conduct organic
              synthesis by electrochemical activation of carbon dioxide (CO2) and oxygen,
              followed by carboxylation of appropriate substrates.  The classes of molecules
              to be synthesized are carbamides, which are valuable intermediates in the
              production of consumer products such as pharmaceuticals and agrichemicals. 
              Present commercial processes may require organic solvents, expensive catalysts,
              or even phosgene in the synthesis of these intermediates.  There is thus a
              strong motivation for better, sustainable approaches to manufacture of these
              intermediates.

This project supports the development of a clean and
              environmentally friendly technology for both waste remediation and chemical
              manufacturing, based on superoxide chemistry.  The project will involve a
              graduate student, a post-doctoral student, and undergraduate students through
              an existing NSF REU program in the Department of Chemical Engineering at the
              University of South Carolina.


