Title       : Workshop on Autoadaptive Media in Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2000    
File        : a0086164

Award Number: 0086164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62108              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen M. Rathje e.rathje@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon L. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1634,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Autoadaptive media are systems, materials, and/or devices that respond to
              external stimuli by changing their characteristics.  This change in
              characteristics or properties can be used to modify the response of the system,
              or to monitor the health or condition of the system.  Currently, autoadaptive
              media are used in the aeronautical, automotive, and medical industries. 
              Although researchers have pointed to the many opportunities for using
              autoadaptive media in civil engineering, little research has focused on civil
              engineering applications, and virtually none has been directed to geotechnical
              engineering.  This lack of applications in civil engineering is a reflection of
              the lack of information within this community regarding available autoadaptive
              media and their possible applications.  Consequently, the major goals of this
              workshop are to introduce the concept of autoadaptive media to leading
              researchers in the field of geotechnical earthquake engineering, to describe
              some of the current applications of autoadaptive media, and to stimulate
              creative discussions on possible uses in geotechnical earthquake
              engineering.

Examples of autoadaptive materials are shape-memory alloys
              whose properties change based on temperature and stress; piezoelectric
              composites that convert electric current into mechanical force or vise versa;
              magneto-rheological and electro-rheological fluids that change from a viscous
              liquid to a solid in the presence of a magnetic or electric field,
              respectively; magneto- and electro-strictive solids that change properties in
              the presence of the same fields; and micromechanical systems (MEMS), which are
              small electomechanical machines that fit on a microchip.

These innovative
              materials and systems have the potential to make a significant impact in
              earthquake engineering research and practice in two distinct ways.  First, new
              sensor technologies will affect the way experimental research is performed:
              small, inexpensive, and robust sensors -- that are perhaps wireless -- will
              permit accurate measurement of more material and system parameters with a
              smaller disturbance to the system being monitored.  Second, both new sensor
              technologies and new autoadaptive materials and systems will affect the
              performance and monitoring of civil engineering systems during and after
              earthquakes: new sensors will permit the health of systems to be assessed
              quickly and accurately after an earthquake.  Further, data from these sensors
              during an earthquake will allow significant insights to be gained into the
              dynamic response of these systems under strong earthquake shaking.  The results
              from the workshop will be distributed widely throughout the earthquake
              engineering community and fields related to autoadaptive media, and will be
              available on the World Wide Web.

