Title       : Biophotonics: Combinatorial Fluorescent Energy Transfer Tags and Their
               Application for Multiplex Genetic Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0086933

Award Number: 0086933
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $464763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jingyue Ju dj222@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Russo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy Waarburton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1605,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0086933
Ju
The objective of the proposed research is to design and synthesize
              a large library of combinatorial fluorescent energy transfer (CFET) tags with
              unique fluorescence emission signatures that can be analyzed using a simple
              optical system.  A fundamental limitation in fluorescent genetic analysis is
              the availability of fluorescent tags with distinctive fluorescence emissions. 
              The PIs will develop a novel fluorescent-labeling scheme that uses a limited
              number of fluorescent molecules to create a large number of CFET tags with
              unique fluorescence signatures.  The approach is based on the fluorescence
              energy transfer principle, the combinatorial concept, and that the energy
              transfer efficiency is dependent on the separation distance between the donor
              and acceptor.  Synthetic procedures will be developed to construct a library of
              at least 20 of these CFET tags, and the spectroscopic properties of the CTET
              tags will be evaluated.  The CFET tags will be generated using combinations of
              a number of different fluorescent molecules that will be linked through a rigid
              polymeric scaffold.  The scaffold will be assembled by solid phase synthesis
              and solution coupling chemistry.  The fluorescent signatures and chemical
              properties of the CFET tags will be carefully characterized to identify the
              most useful members of the collection.  The tags will have particular utility
              in the massive high-throughput approaches of the genomics revolution, including
              DNA sequencing, identification of individual variations in the genome that are
              responsible for human disease, detection of microbial pathogens, and even drug
              screening, essentially any approach that can benefit by multiplexing
              operations.  The utility of this library of CFET tags with unique fluorescence
              emission signatures will be validated by labeling a multiplex set of
              oligonucleotides for genetic mutation detection in a model system, as well as
              for genome-wide chromosome analyses.

