Title       : GOALI: Surface Heat Transfer, Surface Skin Friction, and a Reynolds Analogy for
               Flows Over Surfaces with Real Component Roughness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0086011

Award Number: 0086011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155961             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip M. Ligrani ligrani@mech.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nirm Nirmalan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: 0086011


GOALI: Surface Heat Transfer, Surface Skin
              Friction, and a Reynolds Analogy For Flows Over Surfaces With Real Component
              Roughness

PI: Phillip Ligrani

ABSTRACT
This project focuses on
              fundamental research to relate friction and thermal effects of flow path
              surfaces to "real" detailed surface roughness from actual applications.  These
              include the complex, spatially-varying roughness on internal turbine airfoil
              cooling passages, external turbine airfoil surfaces (as employed in gas turbine
              engines), and heat exchanger surfaces.  Such roughness plays major roles in
              augmenting heat loading, pressure drop, drag, and aerodynamic losses.

The
              "real" rough surfaces employed for testing are prepared using similar
              procedures and environments employed for actual operating engine components,
              and are provided by General Electric Corporate Research and Development Center,
              and General Electric Aircraft Engines.  Experimental data are obtained in an
              internal channel flow, as well as on an external airfoil with the same Reynolds
              numbers, Mach numbers, pressure gradients, free-stream turbulence levels,
              passage flow rates, boundary layer development, and physical dimensions as
              those that exist in operating gas turbine engines.  Two principal goals are: 
              (i) the development of a rough surface Reynolds Analogy for flows over the
              rough surfaces encountered in the actual applications, and (ii) the development
              of new predictive models to account for roughness in boundary layer numerical
              prediction schemes.  The results obtained as part of this study are also useful
              for the development of improved surface manufacturing techniques.




