Title       : Oklahoma Rural Systemic Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0086134

Award Number: 0086134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: MaryAnn Brittan airdmab@ionet.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Bray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart Tonemah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Indian Research a
	      2233 W. Lindsey
	      Norman, OK  730694054    /   -

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Oklahoma Rural Systemic Initiative, a collaborative project of the OKRSI
              Leadership Consortium, is a comprehensive program leading toward systemic
              reform in standards-based mathematics, science and technology education. It
              incorporates the synergistic combination of twenty-first century teaching and
              learning methodology and content with Oklahoma American Indian tribal
              perspectives. The infusion of culturally appropriate methods and materials
              brings relativity and functionality to classroom interactions in Oklahoma rural
              schools where there is a significant number or percentage of American Indian
              students and limited resources.

This project in the developmental phase is
              organized around two major structures; The OKRSI Leadership Consortium,
              consisting of statewide agencies, tribes, institutions, organizations and
              businesses and six-to-eight Rural Regional Task Forces located throughout the
              state. Local school districts and tribal communities are included and interface
              with Consortium members to allow teacher access to meaningful and effective
              professional development, which in turn leads to increases in student skills
              and achievement. The Consortium will provide leadership in leveraging human and
              fiscal resources to assist local schools to improve the delivery of
              mathematics, science and technology education.

The first year goals of the
              OKRSI are:

The solidification of the OKRSI Leadership Consortium to provide
              overall leadership and guidance.

American Indian tribes, business and
              industry and educational agencies engaged as partners in systemic
              change.

The development of a comprehensive Implementation Plan and
              submission of a grant proposal for the ensuing five year Implementation phase
              which will lead to improved academic achievement in mathematics, science and
              technology throughout rural Oklahoma.

The building of local and state fiscal
              capability to result in leveraging support and enhance comprehensive reform in
              the state and in local rural schools.


