Title       : Sisseton Wahpeton Rural Systemic Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0086181

Award Number: 0086181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1250000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Morgan smorgan@swcc.cc.sd.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elden Lawrence  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Sisseton Wahpeton Communit
	      Old Agency Box 689
	      Sisseton, SD  572620689    /   -

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Sisseton Wahpeton Rural Systemic Initiative, based at the Sisseton
              Wahpeton
Community College, is in many aspects a continuation of the Tribal
              Colleges Rural
Systemic Initiative. However, since it is a locally based
              project, instead of a six-state
effort, we will be able to concentrate on the
              educational needs of the Lake Traverse
Reservation population to a far greater
              extent. The ultimate goal of the SWRSI project is
improve the education,
              particularly in the areas of math and science, of our children
through
              systemic reform. This is a process that requires the support and dedication of
              all
the stakeholders in the community. This reform began three years ago with
              the
introduction of the TCRSI program, with the development and adoption of
              standards and
increased professional development in research-based curricula.
              The formation of a
coalition of the local school districts and the
              establishment of "focal schools" also
occurred. Activities during the TCRSI
              project are referred to as Phase I.
Phase II will be a more intensive program
              of systemic reform, with our major
objectives being the increased
              implementation of research-based curricula and the
development of culturally
              relevant alternative assessments. These assessments will be
tied to benchmarks
              established by local and state standards, and correlated to
              traditional
standardized tests. By this method our schools will be able to
              develop better teaching
methods based on our students learning styles.
The
              implementation of research-based curricula is a potential hazard if
              not
supported by up-to-date and intensive professional development for
              teachers. When
these programs are introduced without understanding their
              underlying philosophies, the
curriculum becomes part of the problem. Our
              second objective is to create a system of
professional development that is
              curriculum specific, intensive, ongoing, and relevant to
teacher needs. At the
              same it must be able to overcome the problems of a rural setting,
limited
              budgets, and high teacher turnover rates. Our strategy to overcome these issues
              is
to use distant learning technologies, web-based support, and the
              development of local
experts at SWCC and lead-teachers in the focal schools.
              Information given at
"traditional" workshops and via video conferencing
              sessions will be placed on curricula
support web pages available 24 hours a
              day to our participants. Questions related to the
use of the curricula could
              be posted with answers being provided by expert consultants or
other classroom
              teachers. To combat the high teacher turnover rate Internet courses
              for
training purposes will be developed and maintain by SWRSI and
              collaborating
institutions. These efforts will directly address the issue of
              sustainability.
The third objective of the SWRSI project is to increase the
              level of cooperation
between the individual focal schools and the tribal
              college. An Administrators
Committee and a Steering Committee (composed of
              focal schoolteachers, SWCC staff,
and community members) has been formed as
              one component of this effort. The
professional development activities of SWRSI
              will attribute to this effort, as each school
will help plan and participate
              in these joint-training sessions. 


