Title       : Transport Through Semiconductor Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0086509

Award Number: 0086509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piet Brouwer Brouwer@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0086509
Brouwer
This grant supports theoretical research on transport through
              semiconductor quantum dots in the mesoscopic regime.  The systems under
              consideration are small enough that quantum interference and the finite dwell
              time of the electrons play an important role, while they are big enough, and
              with irregular shape, so that the (classical) dynamics is chaotic and
              statistical methods, such as random matrix theory, need to be used to describe
              a sample, or an ensemble of samples.

The research consists of two parts:
              time-dependent transport and the interference of resonant and non-resonant
              paths through quantum dots.  A unifying theme of both parts is the interplay of
              chaotic dynamics, quantum interference, and electron-electron interactions. 
              The primary focus of the research is how, in quantum dots, electron-electron
              interactions manifest themselves through Coulomb blockade and dephasing.

The
              first part of the grant is centered around the adiabatic quantum electron pump
              which has recently been realized experimentally.  The idea is that if any two
              parameters of a (quantum mechanical) system are varied, a d.c. current will
              flow through it.  In the experiment, the parameters that are varied are gate
              voltages that control the shape of the quantum dot.  In this case, one can show
              that the pumped current is entirely of a quantum interference nature, hence the
              name quantum pump.  The current flow is in a random direction, set by
              microscopic details of the dot.  Basic aspects of the experiment can be
              understood from a simple scattering matrix formula.  The research to be done
              here is aimed at improvement in our understanding of the experiment (effect of
              dephasing), and to prediction of properties (relationship between voltage and
              current, which appears not to be given by the dot's conductance), through a
              more detailed analysis and extension of the scattering matrix formula, as well
              as entering new directions by inclusion of electronic interactions (Coulomb
              blockade) into formalism for time-dependent transport.

The second part of
              the research is about interference of direct transmitting and resonant paths
              through a quantum dot.  This interference gives rise to Fano resonances in the
              transmission through the dot.  Fano resonances have been observed recently and
              are described by a resonance width and by a complex Fano parameter q.  Both the
              resonance width and q vary randomly from resonance to resonance.  This research
              aims at a calculation of the distribution of q for a chaotic quantum dot. 
              Further possible activities include the study of the interplay and mutual
              connection of Coulomb blockade, direct transmitting paths, dephasing, and the
              Kondo effect, which all occur in one and the same system.
%%%
This grant
              supports theoretical research on transport through semiconductor quantum dots
              in the mesoscopic regime.  This area of research is related to the current
              interest in nanotechnology.  The systems under consideration are small enough
              that quantum interference and the finite dwell time of the electrons play an
              important role, while they are big enough, and with irregular shape, so that
              the (classical) dynamics is chaotic and statistical methods, such as random
              matrix theory, need to be used to describe a sample, or an ensemble of
              samples.

The research consists of two parts: time-dependent transport, and
              the interference of resonant and non-resonant paths through quantum dots.  A
              unifying theme of both parts is the interplay of chaotic dynamics, quantum
              interference, and electron-electron interactions.  The primary focus of the
              research is how, in quantum dots, electron-electron interactions manifest
              themselves through Coulomb blockade and dephasing.  While the research is of a
              fundamental scientifc nature, the results will also be of great interest to
              those interested in constructing nanoscale devices.
*** 



