Title       : Northwest Indian College-MST Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0086186

Award Number: 0086186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gleyn E. Bledsoe gleyn@nwic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwest Indian Coll
	      2522 Kwina Rd
	      Bellingham, WA  982269278    360/676-2772

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Northwest Indian College (NWIC) proposes a Developmental effort  to maintain
              a
comprehensive and sustainable systemic reform effort in mathematics,
              science, and
technology for its service area. In doing so, NWIC will utilize
              the lessons learned from
TCRSI Phase I activities and will continue to promote
              the NSF drivers while at the same
time seeking current strategies to assist in
              their effort to have a comprehensive program
that will catapult the
              surrounding schools and their students to meet the National
standards. Special
              emphasis will be placed on a holistic approach to community reform
using RSI
              activities as a springboard for a comprehensive reform effort.
The primarily
              goals of the Northwest Indian College RSI program is to establish a center
for
              surrounding schools that will provide comprehensive services in systemic reform
              of
mathematics, science and technology.

The NWIC proposes to develop a
              system in which the following will be promoted:
1.  Promote school- and
              district-based mathematics and science education reform.
2.  Provide
              comprehensive professional development for school-wide, rather than
    
              individual teacher, participation.
3.  Advocate for opportunities that foster
              systemic reform.
4.  Serve as a catalyst for educational, business/industry
              and parent communities to
     work together to advance science and
              mathematics education for all students.
5.  Reach large numbers of schools,
              including those with high minority/low income
     populations, through
              regional and statewide networking.
6.  Create site-based leadership
              capacity.

The overall goals are:
To prepare citizens who value critical
              thinking, mathematics, science and  life-long learning.
To increase the
              numbers of students appropriately prepare in mathematics and science
in this
              rapidly change age of technology and information.
To foster public
              understanding and support of mathematics, science and technology by
all
              stakeholders.
To help NWIC site schools to meet local, state and federal
              requirements and provide
all their students with the best possible
              education.



