Title       : Bioengineering Analysis of Three-Dimensional Electromechanical Interactions in
               the Heart
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0086482

Award Number: 0086482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. McCulloch amcculloch@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey H. Omens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0086482
McCulloch
The three-dimensional muscle structure of the heart walls is
              a fundamental determinant of cardiac mechanical and electrical functions and
              their mutual interactions. The main objective of the proposed research is to
              develop anatomically and biologically detailed computational models of cardiac
              electromechanics, and to test them using novel experimental methods. The
              computational and experimental models will be used together to investigate
              hypotheses regarding the structural and molecular determinants of cardiac
              electromechanics. The specific aims are:

1.  Cardiac muscle fibers are
              arranged into laminae with a characteristic architecture that varies regionally
              within the walls. We will test the hypothesis that this layered organization
              affects cardiac electrical and mechanical properties, contributing to optimal
              performance during health. Alterations in this structure could contribute to
              health failure. This will be explored by a combination of structural imaging
              and measurement, computational modeling, and functional imaging of mechanical
              and electrical properties using magnetic resonance imaging and high-speed
              optical imaging.

2.  Cardiac muscle fibers branch and splay in the heart
              wall. This pattern can be disarrayed in some inherited heart diseases. We will
              investigate the hypothesis that the statistical pattern of fiber branching
              affects the mechanical and electrical properties of the heart walls. These
              studies will use theoretical modeling, automated microstructural tissue
              analysis, computational modeling and experimental studies in genetically
              engineered mouse strains.

3.  Cardiac electrical impulses trigger mechanical
              contraction, but we and others have also shown that mechanical loading also
              affects electrical properties and the risk of rhythm disorders. We will
              investigate the hypothesis that the specific patterns of wall mechanics can
              affect the electrophysiology of cardiac muscle through stretch-activated ion
              channels and other cellular mechanisms. These studies will use a biologically
              detailed, dynamic, three-dimensional computational models, which will be
              validated by experimental measurements in isolated hearts. These studies will
              also investigate the effects of regional mechanical properties on the risk of
              arrhythmia.

4.  To help enhance the national science and engineering
              infrastructure, we will deploy web-based versions of the computational models
              of the heart, continue to involve undergraduates in research and expand our
              minority outreach efforts; and hold an industry-supported workshop.

The new
              experimental and computational models to be developed in this research will
              have applications in understanding basic cardiac physiology and biophysics, in
              drug discovery and biomedical engineering design, and in simulation
              environments for education, training and collaboration. 


