Title       : High Risk, Exploratory Research: Paleoanthropology in the Socialist Republic of
               Vietnam
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0086208

Award Number: 0086208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert H. Covert Herbert.Covert@Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Funding from the National Science Foundation will support the development
              of a new, cooperative research program in paleoanthropology between scholars at
              Kent State University, the University of Colorado at Boulder, and the
              Geological Museum & Department of Geology and Minerals of Vietnam (DGMV).  
              Little paleontological research has been carried out in Vietnam; hence, the
              natural history of Southeast Asian primates is essentially unknown despite the
              fact that modern members of this group exhibit the greatest diversity of modern
              primates for any geographic area.  In this exploratory project the researchers
              will survey areas that have been mapped as sedimentary deposits dating to the
              Cenozoic (the last 65 million years) for fossil primates.  This is a high-risk
              endeavor for at least two reasons.  First, while the vast majority of primate
              fossils come from Cenozoic sedimentary deposits, many sedimentary deposits do
              not yield vertebrate fossils.  Second, much of the geological mapping in
              Vietnam is preliminary in nature.   This high-risk research is, however,
              because it has recently been argued that the earliest known anthropoids
              (monkeys, apes, and people) lived in Asia, not Africa; and that the initial
              adaptive radiation of apes occurred in Asia, not Africa.  New fossil primates
              from Vietnam would bear on these ongoing discussions.  The co-principal
              investigators of this project have recently developed a strong research
              relationship with scientists working for the Geologic Museum of Hanoi and have
              initiated a survey for fossil mammals in Vietnam.  During 2001 they hope to
              significantly expand this collaboration by extending this study of the geology
              of Vietnam and by surveying additional areas for fossils.  Because fossil
              primates predating about 100,000 years are unknown from Vietnam any primate
              fossils yielded by this research have the potential to expand significantly
              upon the understanding of primate paleobiogeography, Asian natural history, and
              ultimately, human evolution.


