Title       : Bacterial, Viral and Parasitic Infections in Antarctic Seabirds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a0086212

Award Number: 0086212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25313              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary D. Miller gdmiller@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Scholes Hall, Room 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Antarctic continent has been relatively isolated from human impact due to
              its remote location and extreme environment. The first human contact with the
              continent was made by explorers and sealers of the nineteenth century's who
              were followed by explorers and scientists of the twentieth century. In the past
              thirty years, there has been an increase in human presence in Antarctica
              through tourism. A concern has been the potential introduction of wildlife
              diseases in Antarctica through the increase in human presence. Birds in the
              wild are susceptible to an array of infectious and parasitic diseases, but
              clinical signs of disease are relatively obvious and disease is generally
              diagnosed post mortem. The diagnosis of disease in Antarctic birds in the wild
              is hampered by the lack of information on both the diseases themselves and on
              what is normal and what is pathological. There are few cases in Antarctica
              where die-offs have been observed and could be attributed to disease. Few
              clinical investigations have sampled healthy birds.  Research to date has
              confirmed the presence of infectious agents in Antarctic penguins, but
              pathology has not been confirmed, nor has the source of the agents. Besides the
              potential of introduction via humans, the South Polar skua is a strong
              candidate as a source of introduction of disease in the Antarctic environment.
              Skuas are scavengers and predators, which frequent the vicinity of stations and
              ships and prey on penguins and other birds at colony sites. More significantly,
              skuas migrate outside Antarctica during the winter. This Small Grant for
              Exploratory Research will examine previously collected blood samples of both
              penguins and skuas to determine the presence of bacteria and viral diseases,
              parasites, and antibodies to infectious agents. In conjunction with Australia
              scientists, a reference collection of sera as well as viruses, bacteria, and
              parasites will be established. This will provide a valuable baseline for future
              studies of wildlife diseases in Antarctica. 
