Title       : Stochastic OPF and Transaction Monitoring in Deregulated Power Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  2002  
File        : a0086706

Award Number: 0086706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin A. Clements clements@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul W. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The deregulated electric power industry requires new optimal power flow (OPF)
              and state estimation tools to maintain high levels of security while operating
              near full capacity in competitive markets.  
Stochastic OPF problems
              incorporate operating contingencies and random effects such as uncertainty in
              demand or energy prices.  No operator in today's markets can afford the cost of
              operating so that its system can withstand fully every contingency, regardless
              of the probability of its occurrence. 
Because so many contingencies are
              included, these problems are massive, to large for direct methods. We propose
              the use of  Monte Carlo-based importance sampling coupled with Benders
              decomposition, techniques that produce subproblems of tractable size.  
The
              proposed work will first develop Monte Carlo-based stochastic OPF algorithms
              for a DC network subject to random failures of lines and generators.  The
              second stage will add uncertainty to loads, requiring separate importance
              sampling for the two sources of uncertainty.  Finally, the stochastic model
              will be extended to include day-ahead purchase of spinning reserve in the face
              of uncertain loads and energy prices.  The algorithmic methods for these three
              classes of OPF will then be extended to a full AC network.  
A number of
              public discussions have identified a growing problem arising from undisclosed
              bilateral energy transactions that distort a network's planned operating point
              as they pass through it.  The task of identifying such "rough" transactions can
              be formulated as a problem in hypothesis testing in power system state
              estimation.  The potentially daunting number of undisclosed buyer-seller
              combinations to be tested can be accommodated by careful problem formulation
              and by efficient computational techniques such as low rank updates.  The
              central conceptual step is proper use of all a priori information.
The
              proposers will draw on their experience in state estimation-observ-ability,
              efficient computation, bad data detection and identification-and in
              time-coupled dynamic  dispatch, unit commitment, and price-responsive load
              modeling to develop efficient algorithms for both classes of problems by
              exploiting common aspects of their problem structure.  This work will lead to
              new estimation and hypothesis-testing paradigms, robust approached to
              stochastic OPF, and efficient, practical computation algorithms.   


