Title       : Numerical Studies of Phase Transitions in Disorderd Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0086287

Award Number: 0086287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan Peter Young petery@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0086287
Young
This grant supports theoretical research on phase transitions in
              disordered systems.  The work is primarily numerical.  The research will focus
              on two areas.  The first is to investigate the nature of the spin glass state,
              which occurs in systems with frustration and disorder.  Although the
              terminology refers to a class of magnetic systems, the concepts developed in
              spin glasses have a much wider applicability and have found use in other areas
              of science such as protein folding and optimization problems.  Only limited
              results have been obtained analytically, so numerical simulations have played
              an important role.  Past work has established fairly conclusively that a finite
              temperature transition does occur.  The nature of the spin glass state below
              the transition temperature is, however, fairly controversial.

Recently the
              PI's group has embarked on a series of studies to elucidate the nature of the
              spin glass state by investigating how the ground state changes when various
              types of perturbations are applied.  Because of frustration, determination of
              the ground state is non-trivial and required a fairly sophisticated genetic
              algorithm.  These calculations suggest a picture of the spin glass which is a
              modified version of one of the proposed theories, the droplet picture, but also
              contains an important ingredient of the alternative theory, replica symmetry
              breaking.   During the course of this grant, the PI will investigate this
              scenario in more detail, and, most importantly, check that it is also
              consistent with finite temperature Monte Carlo simulations on rather small
              sizes but taken down to temperatures much lower than before using the exchange
              Monte Carlo method, which considerably reduces the slowing down that occurs at
              low temperature in conventional Monte Carlo.

Since numerical results on spin
              glasses can only be done on rather small systems at low temperatures, because
              of long relaxation times due to the many-valley nature of the phase space
              (which is only partially reduced by the exchange Monte Carlo method), a major
              concern in the interpretation of numerical data is the size of the corrections
              to scaling.  The PI therefore also intends to look systematically at how the
              size of these corrections varies for different models, to see if there is an
              optimal model for which the corrections are smallest.

Finally, the second
              area that will be studied concerns quantum phase transitions with disorder. 
              These are poorly understood compared with classical phase transitions at finite
              temperature.  This is because many of the techniques used successfully in
              classical transitions don't work in the quantum case, perhaps because
              non-perturbative (Griffiths-McCoy) effects are important.  Hence again,
              numerical work has been very important.  Several studies will be carried
              out.
%%%
This grant supports theoretical research on phase transitions in
              disordered systems.  The work is primarily numerical.  The research will focus
              on two areas.  The first is to investigate the nature of the spin glass state,
              which occurs in systems with frustration and disorder.  Although the
              terminology refers to a class of magnetic systems, the concepts developed in
              spin glasses have a much wider applicability and have found use in other areas
              of science such as protein folding and optimization problems.  Only limited
              results have been obtained analytically, so numerical simulations have played
              an important role.

The second area that will be studied concerns quantum
              phase transitions with disorder.  These are poorly understood compared with
              classical phase transitions at finite temperature.  This is because many of the
              techniques used successfully in classical transitions don't work in the quantum
              case, perhaps because non-perturbative (Griffiths-McCoy) effects are important.
               Hence again, numerical work has been very important.  Several studies will be
              carried out.
***


