Title       : Fast Hybrid Test Platform for Seismic Performance Evaluation of Structural
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0086592

Award Number: 0086592
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1983553            (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Benson Shing shing@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Enrico Spacone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
              Program is a project funded under the NSF Major Research Equipment Program. 
              This cooperative agreement, under the NEES Program, establishes a NEES fast
              hybrid test platform for seismic response simulation of structural components,
              subassemblages, and systems at the University of Colorado at Boulder, Colorado.
               The University of Colorado at Boulder will specify, develop, purchase/upgrade,
              construct, install, commission, and operate a fast hybrid test system
              consisting of high speed actuators, digital controller, data acquisition
              system, computers, and simulation software for full size and large-scale models
              of walls, columns, frames and subassemblies under experimental hybrid testing
              at loading rates between 10% and 100% of that experienced during an earthquake.
               This capability is one to two orders of magnitude higher than currently
              available in pseudodynamic tests.  This equipment will be operational by 2004
              or earlier and will be managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment site,
              with teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to provide new earthquake
              engineering research testing capabilities for large structural systems through
              2014.  This NEES equipment site will be connected to the NEES collaboratory
              through the CU Engineering Center, which already has Gigabit Ethernet
              connection.  Shared-use access and training will be coordinated through the
              NEES Consortium award.  This award is an outcome of the peer review of
              proposals submitted to program solicitation NSF 00-6, NEES: "Earthquake
              Engineering Research Equipment."  The following equipment is provided under
              this award:  (1) One high-speed actuator, 220 kip load capacity, +5 in stroke,
              250 gpm servo valve, maximum velocity of 9 in/sec; (2) Upgrade two existing 110
              kip, +5 in. stoke actuators with 250 gpm servo valves to attain a maximum
              velocity of 18 in/sec; (3) High-performance digital servo-controller with three
              control channels and three-variable control capability; (4) High-speed data
              acquisition system with 32 data channels; (5) Three digital displacement
              transducers; (6) Ten analog displacement transducers; (7) Three accelerometers
              with frequency range up to 500 Hz; (8) Three personal computers for numerical
              simulation, data processing using Matlab and C++ complier, and data
              display/teleobservation connection; (9) Expansion of existing data acquisition
              system to accommodate teleobservation, teleoperation, teletransmission, and
              telestorage; and (10) Equipment for teleobservation and teleoperation
              capabilities so that experiments on the equipment will be observable and
              controllable via high performance network connections. The core of the facility
              is the digital controller, the computer where the dynamics of the structure
              being evaluate is modeled and numerical computation is performed to solve the
              equations of motion, and the software (to be developed as part of this project)
              which controls and links the physical and mathematical subassemblages. 
              Sophisticated actuator control algorithms will be developed as a part of this
              project and they are the keys to project success.    The facility would be the
              only one of its kind in the United States (multiple actuators) with full
              substructuring capability.  It would serve as the test bed for future large
              scale, multi-degree-of-freedom fast hybrid testing systems. The University has
              committed $190,685 for the control room construction and refurbishing work,
              equipment purchase and partial support for a laboratory technician from 2001
              through 2004. The University will integrate this fast hybrid testing system
              into its undergraduate and graduate curricula, and it will promote the use of
              the results by other educational institutions mainly through the use of the
              World Wide Web.  Further, the experimental observations obtained from the test
              will be incorporated in an ongoing NSF sponsored K-12 educational program.  The
              University will also provide training opportunities for outside researchers
              through seminars and workshops.
