Title       : NTE: Removal of Toxic Metal Ions from Contaminated Water by Dendrimer Enhanced
               Ultrafiltration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0086727

Award Number: 0086727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mamadou S. Diallo mdiallo@howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lajos Balogh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1605,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Proposal No.:			CTS-0086727
Proposal Type:		New Technologies for
              the Environment Initiative (00-49)
Principal Investigators:	Mamdou  S.
              Diallo
Institution:			Howard University 

NTE: Removal of Toxic Metal Ions
              from Contaminated Water by 
Dendrimer-Enhanced Ultrafiltration

The
              discharge of toxic metal ions into publicly owned water-treatment works
              (POTWs), surface water bodies, aquifers and coastal water systems has caused a
              major water contamination problem throughout the world.  Polymer-enhanced
              ultrafiltration (PEUF) is emerging as a promising process for treatment of
              water contaminated by toxic metal ions.  In PEUF, a water-soluble polymer with
              strong binding affinity for toxic metal ions is added to contaminated water. 
              The resulting solution is passed through an ultrafiltration (UF) membrane with
              pore sizes smaller than those of the metal-ion-laden polymer.
Highly purified
              permeates have been obtained using PEUF.  This project exploits recent advances
              in nanoscopic chemistry such as the invention of dendrimers to develop more
              efficient and cost effective functional materials for PEUF.  Dendrimers are
              highly branched polymers with controlled composition and architecture
              consisting of three components: a core functionality, interior branch cells,
              and terminal branch cells. Critical properties of dendrimers such as size,
              shape, core chemistry, surface chemistry and
polydispersity can be controlled
              by a judicious choice of synthetic building
blocks and reaction conditions. 
              For example, the terminal groups of a
dendrimer can be designed to be
              compatible or incompatible with a specific
surface, while its core may act as
              receptor for  metal ions. The overall
objective of this project is to evaluate
              the feasibility of Dendrimer
Enhanced Ultrafiltration (DEUF) as an efficient,
              environmentally acceptable,
and cost effective process for treating water
              contaminated by toxic metal
ions.  Commercial dendrimers are being modified
              chemically to determine the effectiveness of various forms in separating
              copper, zinc, and cadmium ions.  The tendency of the dendrimers to foul UF
              membranes is also being tested.

The Metal Products and Machinery (MP&M)
              industry is the first target for the
application of DEUF.  Approximately
              40,000 of the 70,000 companies of
the MP & M industry generate wastewater
              contaminated by toxic metal ions.
Under current regulations, the MP& M
              industry is required to treat its contaminated wastewater prior to discharge
              into POTWs.  EPA is in the process of issuing new and more stringent effluent
              concentration limitations for the MP&M industry. The additional costs of
              compliance to these new regulations using the best practicable control
              technology currently available are estimated to range from 1.95 to 3.59
              billion
dollars per year.  A preliminary evaluation by EPA of the PEUF process
              shows
it to be cost effective compared to chemical precipitation, the
              wastewater
treatment baseline technology in the MP& P industry.  Because the
              metal-ion
binding capacity of dendrimers is significantly larger than that of
              linear
polymers currently used in PEUF, the use of DEUF should result in more
              efficient water purification and significant savings for the MP& M 
              industry.






