Title       : GK-12: Adventure Engineering: An Inquiry Learning, Design Driven Approach to
               Middle Grade Science and Mathematics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2002   
File        : a0086457

Award Number: 0086457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1102538            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Knox rknox@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Mooney  (Principal Investigator former)
              Edmund A. Marek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne M. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to integrate exciting adventure-based scenarios,
              solutions to which require inquiry learning and an engineering design approach,
              into the middle grade (5-9) science and mathematics classrooms. Middle grade
              students win be posed with adventurous scenarios, e.g., Engineering the Congo,
              Mission to Mars, filled with carefully crafted obstacles, e.g., water
              purification, power generation, route optimization. The level appropriate
              science and/or mathematics principles are woven into the obstacles. Student
              groups then develop solutions to the posed obstacles through inquiry learning
              and the engineering design approach, running the gamut from experimentation to
              conceptualization to prototype construction and testing. This curriculum that
              weaves m the required science and/or math content is designed to replace the
              existing middle grade content.
A team (AE Team) will develop the Adventure
              Engineering curriculum of engineering graduate and undergraduate Fellows,
              middle grade science and mathematics teachers from urban, suburban and rural
              schools, and faculty from Science Education, Mathematics Education, and
              Engineering at the University of Oklahoma. The engineering fellows will be
              extensively prepared in the pertinent standards, existing curriculum, and
              inquiry learning method through observation and participation in the middle
              grade classrooms, participation in College of Education methods courses, and
              workshops with middle grade teachers. During the three-year project, the AE
              Team will develop inquiry and design based science and math curriculum, with
              diligent assessment, under the adventure-based engineering premise. To
              accomodate the middle grade teachers, the AE Team will meet outside the
              classroom monthly on Saturday mornings during the academic year and for daylong
              workshops in the summer. Between AE Team meetings, the Fellows will work to
              develop and implement curriculum with the designated teachers in the middle
              grade classrooms. Each year, the engineering Fellows will increase outreach
              activity by seeking different teachers and assisting them with Adventure
              engineering curriculum implementation. The curriculum will be developed and
              prepared for web-dissemination to be self-sustaining beyond the three-year
              project period.
The Adventure Engineering program is designed to motivate
              those students in the critical middle grades that otherwise would not pursue
              technical careers, particularly women and minorities. To this end, the
              Adventure Engineering curriculum will be developed for and implemented in
              approximately 72 classrooms, half of which will be predominantly minority
              classrooms in Oklahoma City. The AE team Fellows will be recruited from and
              with the dedicated assistance of the outstanding Multicultural Engineering
              Program at the University of Oklahoma.


