Title       : GK-12 Formal Proposal: Science and Technology Enhance Authentic Learning in The
               High Schools - Project STEALTH
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0086415

Award Number: 0086415
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1490010            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Nanny nanny@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Teri R. Rhoads  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary John O'Hair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project STEALTH involves thirteen graduate and twelve advanced undergraduate
              Fellows, twelve secondary science and mathematics teachers (from two high
              schools and two middle schools located in Oklahoma City and Del City), and
              seven OU faculty (from the School of Civil Engineering and Environmental
              Science, School of Industrial Engineering, Department of Educational Leadership
              and Policy Studies, and the Oklahoma Networks for Excellence in Education), who
              will work in teams developing, designing, implementing, and assessing authentic
              learning, inquiry-based activities for secondary science and mathematics
              students. These activities will be incorporated into lessons, demonstrations,
              laboratory exercises, individual and group projects, and field experiences in
              order to: 1) emphasize authentic and community-based experiences; 2)encourage
              creative problem-solving skills; 3) develop interest in life-long learning; and
              4) prepare secondary students for advanced education. Activity themes will
              focus on environmental science and engineering, new materials and their use,
              and civil infrastructures. Activities will be designed to fit the teachers and
              students' needs based on curriculum requirements, course content, students'
              abilities and interests, and available resources. Fellows will be prepared to
              create and implement these activities through a new course presenting: 1)
              educational theory, concepts, and assessment congruent with authentic learning;
              2) the design, implementation, and assessment of hands-on, inquiry-based
              activities in secondary science and mathematics curricula; and 3)appropriate
              teaching practices and methods for secondary students, as well as local, state,
              and national curricula standards. The program's effectiveness on the Fellows'
              teaching skills, as well as its effect on secondary science and mathematics
              education will be quantitatively assessed and used to continually improve the
              program.


