Title       : A NEES Geotechnical Centrifuge Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0086566

Award Number: 0086566
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4614294            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce L. Kutter blkutter@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S.J.Ben Yoo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel W. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ross W. Boulanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Velinsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-00865566
Kutter

The Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
              Program is a project funded under the NSF Major Research Equipment Program. 
              This cooperative agreement, under the NEES Program, establishes a NEES
              centrifuge earthquake engineering research equipment site at the University of
              California (UC), Davis. UC Davis will design, purchase, construct, install,
              commission, and operate new equipment for, and upgrades to, its existing
              Geotechnical Centrifuge. The upgraded Centrifuge will be operational by 2004 or
              earlier and will be managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment site, with
              teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to provide new earthquake
              engineering research testing capabilities through 2014.  This NEES equipment
              site will be connected to the NEES collaboratory through a high performance
              network.  Shared-use access and training will be coordinated through the NEES
              Consortium.  This award is the outcome of peer review of this proposal
              submitted to program solicitation NSF 00-6, NEES: Earthquake Engineering
              Research Equipment.  This Centrifuge is located in the Center for Geotechnical
              Modeling, two miles west of the University of California, Davis campus, and has
              been used by UC Davis faculty and students and other researchers since 1996. 
              UC Davis will provide infrastructure improvements for housing and operating the
              Centrifuge and for storing new equipment.   This award provides the following
              equipment: (a) modifications to the Centrifuge to enable operation up to 80 g,
              (b) upgrades to the existing horizontal shaker, (c) one large hinged-plate
              container, (d) one biaxial horizontal-vertical shaker, (e) one  four
              degree-of-freedom robot, robot tools, and associated software, capable of
              installing and/or operating test devices such as piles, penetrometers, deep
              soil vibrators, and video inspection devices without stopping the Centrifuge,
              (f) networked data acquisition systems with Internet
              teleobservation/teleoperation capability provided through the campus' Gigabit
              Ethernet Backbone, (g) data visualization capabilities with a high resolution
              projection system, (h) ten strands of 20 dual-axis digital MEMS accelerometers
              developed under a subaward to Integrated Mico Instruments, and (i) tomographic
              imaging and geophysical testing tools/methodologies, developed under a subward
              to the Georgia Institute of Technology. The capabilities provided by the
              upgraded Centrifuge will enable researchers to investigate important problems
              in earthquake engineering such as:  soil-pile-structure interaction in soft or
              liquefiable soils;  the effects of vertical shaking on bridge structures,
              industrial and lifeline facilities, slopes, and embankment dams; and ground
              improvement methods to mitigate liquefaction hazards. UC Davis will integrate
              experimentation with the upgraded Centrifuge into its research program and
              undergraduate and graduate curricula and provide training opportunities for
              outside researchers.


