Title       : GK-12 EdGrid Graduate Teaching Fellows Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0086455

Award Number: 0086455
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1538268            (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Jakobsson jake@ncsa.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal extends the catalyzing impact of EdGrid
              (http://www.eot.orgledgrid), a consortiumconunitted to developing, testing, and
              disseminating systemic approaches to integrate the use ofcomputer-based
              modeling and scientific visualization in science and mathematics education.
              Therole of the GK- 12 fellows is to bring to each team content expertise and
              experience withapplications of computational science, modeling and
              visualization. Fellows will benefit byimproving their own computational suls,
              learning to relate complex science and mathematicsconcepts to others, by
              becoming comfortable with teaching, and by understanding how they
              canparticipate in the improvement of science and mathematics education.
              Teachers and educationfaculty benefit from access to content expertise,
              assistance with the use of computationalmodeling and visualization tools, and
              by learning current scientific methods.

The main objectives include:

o 
              Training on issues of K-12 science and mathematics education and computer-based
              modelingand visualization.

o  Enhanced conununication among the content and
              education faculty within the university, andbetween the university and K- 1 2
              communities.

o  Science and mtheniaties curriculum utilizing computational
              science, modeling andvisualization tools, technologies, and methodologies.

o
               Classroom experiences for K- 12 students using computational science, modeling
              andvisualization to do science and mathematics.

o  Dissemination of
              experiences and materials.

o  Inculcating a comrffitment to broad outreach
              of leading-edge scientific ideas on the part offuture scientists who will be
              the graduate student trainees in the project.

o  Applying to the GK-12
              enterprise abilities that NCSA/EOT-PACI have developed for long-distance
              collaboration communication, and conununity-building.

Noteworthy features of
              the project include the collaboration of very different and
              geographicallyseparated university communities as well as the integration of
              research universityscienceleducation enterprises. This will be facilitated by
              NCSA/EOT-PACI experience inorganizing and computing across geographically
              distributed human and material resources.

