Title       : ITR: Experimental Validation of Large-Scale Networked Software Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0086096

Award Number: 0086096
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1800000            (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Sanders whs@crhc.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wen-mei Hwu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven S. Lumetta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ravishankar Iyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1658,1661,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Large-scale networked software systems are hard to design, and even
              more
difficult to validate. Validation of such systems is
              increasingly
important, since they are more and more being called on to
              perform critical
functions. This validation difficulty stems from the inherent
              complexity of
these systems, and often is due to the fact that they are often
              designed to
adapt to variable workloads and operating conditions at the
              process, node,
and network levels. Incorrect operation during periods of
              dynamic
adaptation can lead to unpredictable and potentially
              hazardous
consequences. In order to ensure that such systems operate correctly
              in
critical environments, one must perform validations to confirm that
              they
will function reliably in the presence of faults/failures, have
              predictable
performance, and will continue to operate when intrusions occur.
              Validation
of multiple behavior dimensions (e.g.,
              reliability/availability,
performance, and survivability) is also critical.
              This research will
develop the theory, methodology, and tools necessary to
              experimentally
validate the reliability/availability, performance, and
              survivability of
large-scale networked software systems.  The intention is to
              develop a
comprehensive framework for experimentally validating large-scale
              networked
software systems. Taken as a whole, this work will provide a sound
              and
fundamental approach to validation of networked software and
              applications.


