Title       : INBOUNDS: The Integrated Network-Based Ohio University Network Detective Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0086642

Award Number: 0086642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290751             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shawn D. Ostermann osterman@cs.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brett C. Tjaden  (Principal Investigator former)
              Lonnie R. Welch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This document describes a proposed software system, called INBOUNDS
              (Integrated
Network-Based Ohio University Network Detective Service), that
              will address the
difficult research problem of security in the dynamic
              real-time Internet environment
populated by both legitimate users and hostile
              intruders.
    Internet security is becoming more critical by the day.
              Successful attacks on banks,
schools, government agencies, and corporations
              that do business online are becoming
more and more common, and the frequency
              of these attacks and the amount of damage
done is rising rapidly. Commercially
              available firewalls and intrusion detection systems
are currently the only
              weapons with which to defend against the threat, but they are
obviously not
              capable of keeping up with the ever-changing attack strategies of hackers.
   
               Thus, we propose INBOUNDS a real-time network based intrusion detection
              and
response system under development at Ohio University's Laboratory for
              Real-Time,
Secure Systems and Applications. INBOUNDS detects and responds to
              suspicious
behavior by using TCPTrace (a network traffic analysis tool) and
              DeSiDeRaTa (dynamic,
real-time resource management middleware). INBOUNDS is
              intended to function in a
heterogeneous environment with fault tolerance, very
              low overhead, and a high degree of
scalability. A prototype of INBOUNDS is
              currently being used for around-the-clock
intrusion detection and response at
              Ohio University and we propose to add functionality
that will enable INBOUNDS
              to deal with the following important types of attacks:
    Large-scale,
              distributed denial-of-service attacks
    Abnormal network protocol behavior
              including SYN and RESET attacks
    Suspicious keywords in interactive
              sessions/email
    Suspicious patterns of data, such as the fan-out patterns
              commonly seen with
    email viruses
    Communication over unusual network
              ports, which are common when attackers
    target seldom used and insecure
              servers
    Connections from unknown/unusual hosts
    Abnormal data patterns
              for a particular time of day
    Unusual data patterns on known ports, such as
              would be seen when at attacker
    installs programs using the fingerd port as
              in the Morris Worm
