Title       : An International Collaboration on Electrical Discharge Reactors for the
               Degradation of Organic Dyes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a0086351

Award Number: 0086351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Locke locke@eng.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
Program Ref : 0000,5930,9197,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              INT 0086351
Locke

This international cooperative research project involves
              three research groups, one in the Unites States, one in the Czech Republic and
              one in Croatia.  Bruce Locke of Florida State University, Tallahassee, serves
              as the principal investigator along with partners Pavel Sunka from the Czech
              Institute of Plasma Physics, Prague, and Natalija Koprivanac of the University
              of Zagreb, Croatia.  Their overall objective is the development and analysis of
              a type of advanced oxidation technology for the degradation of complex
              industrial and commercial organic dyes in aqueous solutions. Specifically their
              work features development and evaluation of liquid phase electrical discharge
              reactors for the chemical degradation of azo dyes, reactive dyes, and
              3-phynylmethand type dyes.

The international project builds upon the
              strengths of each lab including Locke's expertise in analysis of chemical
              reactors including electrical discharge reactors, Koprivanac's expertise in
              chemical reactions involving synthesis and degradation of organic dyes, and
              Sunka's strengths in plasma physics and analysis of electrical discharge
              reactors for both gas and liquid applications.  Findings are expected to lead
              to an improved understanding and eventual development of: 1) new electrode
              materials for liquid phase electrical discharge processes using plasma-spraying
              technology in Prague,
2) new reactor configurations combining gas and liquid
              phase discharges in Tallahasee, and, in Zagreb, 3) chemical reaction pathways
              for dye degradation using ozone and or hydrogen peroxide in combination with
              various zeolites. If successful, combined results should yield more efficient
              and effective processes for the degradation and removal of complex organic dyes
              from commercial, industrial and manufacturing wastewater.

This project in
              engineering processes fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
              knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to
              combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
              mutual interest and competence.       
