Title       : PGE/SEP: An Experiment in Engaging High School and Undergraduate Women in
               Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2000   
File        : a0086424

Award Number: 0086424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori L. Pollock pollock@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary S. Carberry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen F. McCoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
In this project, we plan to test and evaluate a three-pronged approach to
              attracting females into computer science and for keeping them in computer
              science once they have entered college.  The two largest components of our
              program are aimed at giving high school girls the tools necessary to have
              confidence about their technical abilities and be comfortable in computer
              science, as well as providing them with an independent project experience with
              female university faculty mentors in computer science.  The third prong of our
              approach is aimed at retaining college women in computer science through their
              bachelor's degree and into graduate school.

The summer component of this
              program is designed for 20 high school students to participate in an 8-week,
              half-day summer camp.  The camp will focus on both static and interactive web
              programming, and animation and gui programming with Java.  The Girls' POWER
              (Programming Of the WEb Rocks!) summer program will include lectures, lab
              sessions, and most significantly individual and group projects.

In order to
              provide personal contacts for high school girls on their own territory, the
              high school, we plan to set up a Visit a High School Program, in which females
              in computer science from both academia and industry participate as
              distinguished role models and visitors to local high schools.  The visiting
              role models would be accompanied by a graduate or undergraduate female computer
              science or computer engineering student to provide a role model at two
              different levels.

The activities for undergraduate women focus on lessening
              women's of isolation as a computer science major, raising their self-esteem,
              increasing their awareness of career opportunities, and promoting research and
              graduate study.  Activities include a mentoring program, informal lunch
              meetings, organized field trips, and independent research study
              opportunities.

The proposed project has a number of aspects that are
              innovative.  We have created a strong team of three senior female computer
              science professors who are noted for both their research and teaching
              excellence.  The program leverages off of the technical strengths, excitement,
              and successes of the web for achieving the goals of the program.  The program
              targets females in the critical high school and early undergraduate years, and
              focuses on the hypothesized barriers to attracting and retaining women at these
              stages.

The anticipated regional outcomes of this project include an
              increase in the number of local high school women taking the Advanced Placement
              exam in computer science, as increase in the number of high school women at the
              participating schools majoring in computer science in college, and an
              established communication between numerous female computer scientists at all
              levels in this local geographic region.  Beyond the Delaware Valley, the
              results should help to advance the understanding of the kinds of activities
              that actually aid in attracting and retaining women.

