Title       : ITR: Framenet++: An On-Line Lexical Semantic Resource and its Application to
               Speech and Language Understanding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0086132

Award Number: 0086132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2098356            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Fillmore fillmore@icsi.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean M. Gawron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel S. Jurafsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Srinivas Narayanan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Internationl CompSci Inst
	      1947 Center Street
	      Berkeley, CA  947041105    510/666-2900

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,1661,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award.   Robust
              domain-independent language understanding is essential for multilingual
              information extraction, summarization, question answering, and automatic
              translation.   With pervasive computing environments soon to come, language
              understanding will become even more indispensable for interacting with
              artifacts of widely different functionalities.   The field of natural language
              understanding has made significant progress in the last fifteen years.  A large
              part of this gain is due to the sophisticated combination of statistical
              algorithms with template-based algorithms tailored to specific domains like
              air-traffic information, travel scheduling, and business news.  But any real
              solution to the problem of domain-independent understanding will require moving
              beyond template-based monolingual systems to more flexible, general purpose HCI
              systems via three key innovations:    (1) a domain-independent semantic
              language as the back end for these understanding systems, replacing the current
              domain-restricted templates and slots;    (2) rich semantic lexical databases
              which are broad enough to cover the necessary words for language engineering
              tasks, and deep enough in usable semantic information to support true
              domain-independent understanding;    and (3) sophisticated techniques for
              performing this mapping.

This project will develop these three components:  
               a very large lexical database FrameNet++, a semantic language designed for
              domain-independent understanding tasks, and the tools for applying it to and
              evaluating it on key NLU applications.   The semantic language and lexical
              database are based on formalizing the semantic frames and the semantic and
              syntactic combinatory properties - the valences - of a significant portion of
              the English lexicon.    FrameNet++ will offer significantly richer semantic
              information than is available in current databases like COMLEX and WordNet, by
              characterizing the conceptual frames within which words are defined and
              identifying the semantic roles which the arguments of these words can take.  
              These roles and frames are key to building domain-independent language
              understanding applications.    The project will focus from the start on
              specific NLU applications:    word sense disambiguation, information
              extraction, multilingual information extraction, and an eventual extension to
              text data mining.    For each application, the PI and his team will apply the
              FrameNet++ system to improve the domain independence of the semantic
              components, using statistical algorithms for semantic annotation that we have
              already begun to implement.    These applications will in turn provide a rich
              and realistic evaluation framework to guide FrameNet++ development, and will
              encourage potential users to apply it to a wide variety of tasks.

The
              FrameNet++ database will be capable of serving many purposes.    Provided with
              statistical information about frequencies of words, word/sense mappings, and
              combinatorial patterns linked to word senses, it will be usable in various
              automatic language understanding processes, including word sense disambiguation
              and information extraction.    Since the formal semantic annotations are keyed
              to conceptual structures which are independent of any individual language, they
              are available for the creation of parallel lexicon databases of other
              languages.    The semantic structures in the databases will facilitate matches
              from one language to another, in machine translation and machine-assisted
              translation, while the syntactic structures allow the production of appropriate
              grammatical sentences in the target language.

