Title       : Dissertation Research: Resource Control and Social Hierarchies in the Land of
               the Olmec: An Archaeological Survey in the Lower Basin of the Coatzacoalcos
               River, Veracruz, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a0086505

Award Number: 0086505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11844              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Gerardo Jimenez Delgado will
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. A central question in archaeology
              concerns the processes which led to the transformation of small scale
              egalitarian societies into large, complex socially stratified entities. This
              pattern of change occurred prehistorically, and seemingly independently, in
              many parts of both Old and New Worlds and this fact suggests an underlying
              dynamic rather than historical accident as cause. Many possible factors such as
              managerial control over scarce resources - agricultural land, irrigation water,
              clay or other mineral deposits - may, it has been suggested, play important
              roles. Some anthropologists have postulated that control over labor rather than
              natural resources per se facilitated the emergence of social complexity.
              Working in a ca. 500 sq. km. region on Mexico's Gulf Coast Mr. Delgado will
              examine this question. The Olmec was the first of Middle American's early
              civilizations and monumental architecture, including multi-ton stone heads
              fashioned from basalt testify to the Olmec's ability to mobilize a substantial
              labor force. Variation in residence and in the materials they contain also
              point to a hierarchically organized society. Mr. Delgado will focus on the
              Early Formative stage in Olmec development. Working in an area with variable
              agricultural land of different degrees of productivity and point sources of
              potting clay and high quality basalt, he will determine the relationship
              between the distribution of population and natural resources. To accomplish
              this he will use GIS analysis of areal photographs as well as ground survey to
              map the patterning of soils and reconstruct the paleo landscape. He and his
              colleagues will then conduct a carefully designed surface survey with limited
              shovel testing to locate archaeological sites and to date them. He has
              developed a series of scenarios which relate developing complexity to differing
              causes and which predict how population would map onto resources in each
              case.

This research is important for several reasons. It will address a
              basic question of high anthropological significance. It will provide data of
              interest to many archaeologists and assist in training a promising young
              scientist.

