Title       : New Technologies for the Environment: Technologies for Quantifying and Linking
               Environmental and Economic Improvements in Small- and Medium-Size Enterprises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0086762

Award Number: 0086762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99853              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bert Bras bert.bras@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chen Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leon F. McGinnis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1605,1669,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for research on reducing the environmental impact of
              small-to-medium sized enterprises (SMEs) in manufacturing, specifically, by
              focusing on the strategic and operational decisions that impact flows of energy
              and mass through the enterprise.  The objective is to develop decision support
              technologies that will allow SMEs to simultaneously consider costs, energy, and
              mass impacts of environmentally important strategic and operational decisions. 
              To achieve this objective, first the particular needs, barriers and
              opportunities for SMEs with respect to self-motivated environmental impact
              reduction efforts will be identified.  Secondly, one or two SME manufacturing
              plants suitable for a pilot study will be identified.  Next, an integrated
              activity-based cost, energy, and mass model will be developed for the pilot
              SME. The purpose will be to demonstrate that environmental concerns can be
              incorporated into both strategic and operational decision making. The
              infrastructure needed to obtain data from the plant to develop a top-level
              economic and environmental performance monitoring tool will be identified. 
              

If successful, this proposed work would provide SMEs with a new
              cost-effective technology to identify and tackle their most significant
              opportunities for improving economic and environmental performance of
              manufacturing.  Benefit of these technologies would be long lasting because it
              could result in sustained self-motivated environmental performance improvements
              by SMEs in their manufacturing operations.  The very same technologies would
              quantify the results of improvements, thus providing justification for future
              rounds of investment technologies to increase economic and environmental
              efficiency.

