Title       : ITR: Computational Geometry for Structural Biology and Bioinformatics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0086013

Award Number: 0086013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7222182            (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Edelsbrunner edels@cs.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack S. Snoeyink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Homme W. Hellinga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pankaj K. Agarwal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonidas J. Guibas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1661,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Life at its most detailed level depends on the geometric shape of molecules.
              Nevertheless, geometric methods are relatively uncommon in computational
              biology, primarily because of difficult and unsolved issues in applying
              geometric computing to biology.   This project will address these causes by 
              investigating geometric representations and developing novel geometric methods.
              It will incorporate these into software that helps structural biologists with
              their work and integrates with their current tools.  The key research issues
              include: 1)representation and classification of geometric shape;  2)synthesis
              of geometric, physical, and statistical information; 3)computation and
              representation of motion; 4)organization of shapes for rapid searches; and 5)
              hierarchies for everything.

This research is expected to shed light on some
              of the most important unsolved biological puzzles: prediction of protein
              structure, simulation of protein folding, and analysis of ligand to protein
              docking.  These processes link form to function.  Understanding them will pave
              the way to a post-genomic era in biological research, in which the wealth of
              DNA sequence information is complemented by corresponding knowledge of
              geometric shape.  Together, sequence and shape will provide a description of
              the biological function so critical for all life.

 

