Title       : Advanced Technology for Radar Sounding of Polar Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  2001     
File        : a0086316

Award Number: 0086316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $563429             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Morse morse@ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald D. Blankenship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs, provides funds
              from the Polar Instrumentation and Technology Development Program to develop an
              advanced ice-penetrating airborne radar system for studying polar ice sheets.
              Since its inception in the late 1960's, radar sounding has distinguished itself
              as perhaps the single most important technique for glaciological work and an
              important aspect of sub-ice geological research. In the 1970's The Technical
              University of Denmark (TUD) designed and constructed an ice-penetrating radar
              based on, then, state-of-the-art technology. This now venerable system is
              responsible for the vast majority of all ice sounding data yet collected over
              the ice caps of Antarctica and Greenland. This same radar was upgraded for
              digital recording by The University of Texas and used for extensive
              ice-thickness-resolution surveys in both West and East Antarctica conducted
              during the 1990's. Currently, three categories for advances in radar ice
              sounding capability have been identified. These advances are required to
              achieve scientific progress on several problems at the forefront of
              glaciological and glacio-geophysical research. These categories are: 1)
              improved ice column penetration for detection of the subglacial interface
              through thick and/or warm ice and through highly heterogeneous ice; 2) improved
              internal layer spatial resolution and improved deep layer detection; 3) the
              ability to characterize the subglacial interface and, specifically, to identify
              the presence of water.

Recent interest in the Martian paeleoenvironment and
              the recognition of possible ice covered oceans on the Jovian satellites has
              stimulated research activity in sub-ice detection and characterization problems
              from both within and outside the terrestrial glaciological community. This
              activity has culminated in a new design for an ice penetrating radar that is a
              test-bed for sounding of planetary ice bodies. A prototype was developed by the
              Jet Propulsion Laboratory (and constructed with the assistance of The
              University of Kansas) that draws on the best of modern radar technology. Field
              tests of this JPL/KU system in both Greenland and Antarctica indicate that this
              new radar has the potential for addressing fundamental questions at the
              forefront of glacio-geophysical research.

From the perspective of the three
              categories of needed advances outlined above, these field tests have also
              revealed some limitations with the current prototype. This project will work to
              overcome these shortcomings by merging components of the JPL/KU radar with the
              UT/TUD radar. The objectives for this new "Multi-Institutional Radar Sounder"
              (MIRS) are to improve layer resolution and total system sensitivity through
              pulse compression (relative to the current UT/TUD radar), and to enable
              material/roughness characterization of the detected interfaces by preserving
              the complete shape (both magnitude and phase) of the echo waveform along with
              automatically calibrating the overall system sensitivity. An additional benefit
              of this system will be the improved ability to "see through" highly scattering
              ice such as the crevassed regions near ice stream margins or in valley
              glaciers.

In order to verify system design and fully establish the
              capabilities the MIRS, this development work will include field tests that
              target a wide range of ice sheet environments, including both hypothesized and
              established subglacial water bodies underlying the thickest portions of the
              East Antarctic Ice Sheet. This will be accomplished with a series of airborne
              radar surveys to be conducted during the 2001/02 Antarctic field season.


 
              

