Title       : PGE/SEP: Out of the Lab: A Camp for Ninth Grade Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2000  
File        : a0086366

Award Number: 0086366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47426              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Marcello jmarcello@sj-alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sheldon Jackson College
	      801 Lincoln Street
	      Sitka, AK  998350479    907/747-5222

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In conjunction with a public radio program, Sheldon Jackson College and Pacific
              High School will conduct a one-week camp on science and society issues for
              ninth-grade girls.  Our marketing plan will be to encourage traditionally
              underserved students, such as Alaskan Natives, low income and rural (bush)
              students.  The camp will be preceded by a three-day workshop for teachers to
              become familiar with update science concepts.  The camp will be held on the
              Sheldon Jackson College campus located in downtown Sitka, on the Pacific Ocean
              at the edge of the Tongass National Forest in the Heart of Alaska's inside
              passage.  The cam will utilize Expeditionary Learning School techniques: 
              guided questions, and posing challenges to have students explore scientific
              arenas.  The goal of the camp will be to expose young women to science in
              relation to social and ethical issues.  The camp will cover the scientific
              method, scientific assumptions and explore how science impacts our culture, how
              the media portrays scientists, and science communication.  The experience
              should result in positive student attitudes towards exploring careers in
              science.  Further, time will be spent with each individual developing a career
              pathway that will map out a plan for courses during their high school
              career.


