Title       : SGER: Development of in Situ Techniques for Quantifying Rates of Feeding, House
               Production and House Flux by Appendicularians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a0086229

Award Number: 0086229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marsh J. Youngbluth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harbor Branch Ocean Inst
	      5600 Old Dixie Highway
	      Fort Pierce, FL  349467303    407/465-2400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The contribution of midwater appendicularians to particle dynamics remains
              understudied in marine food webs.  This project will develop in situ
              submersible-based techniques that will lead to more detailed, long-term
              investigations of the ecological role of species with relatively large houses
              (1-30 cm diameter).  These species are poorly known but ubiquitous in water
              column environments on a global scale, are often numerous, and are tractable
              targets for in situ documentation of rates of feeding, house production, and
              house flux.  The limited but compelling amount of field information about these
              omnivorous, non-selective filter feeders suggests that they may have a central
              role in the flux of material throughout the water column, especially in
              particle-rich layers.  First, appendicularians are capable of rapid generation
              times.  Second, most species are capable of high grazing rates on a wide
              spectrum of particles, including microbial phytoplankton, bacteria, and
              detritus.  The rate of export or recycling of biogenic carbon from
              particle-laden appendicularian houses depends upon several factors.  For
              example, the investigator believes that particle loading on houses in the
              epipelagic and epibenthic zones will vary in relation to surface production and
              resuspension, respectively.  Rates (of particle selection, feeding, house-fecal
              pellet production, and house-fecal pellet sinking) will also vary with species,
              particle selection, and house age.  Therefore, developing reliable field
              methods will be essential to better understand how behavioral and environmental
              parameters interact to influence the fate of particulate matter. 
