Title       : GK-12: Project FULCRUM - Building Partnerships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0086358

Award Number: 0086358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1477817            (Estimated)
Investigator: Diandra L. Leslie-Pelecky dleslie@unlnotes.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gayle A. Buck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger D. Kirby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne R. Kirby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick H. Dussault  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT FULCRUM: BUILDING STUDENT-SCIENTIST- TEACHER PARTNERSHIPS
- Give me a
              long enough lever and a place to stand and I can move the Earth -
Project
              FULCRUM is a teacher-scientist-teacher educator collaboration that will place
              graduate and undergraduate science students from the University of Nebraska in
              grades 4 - 8 in the Lincoln Public Schools to form partnerships with teachers.
              The goals of this collaboration are:
1) Enhance 4'h _ 8,h grade students'
              opportunities to team science by increasing access to inquiry-driven
              experiences in content areas that satisfy national and state science
              standards;
2) Assist teachers in feeling more comfortable and knowledgeable
              about teaching science;
3) Provide students with diverse role models by
              involving women and other underrepresented groups at all levels;
4) Improve
              student attitudes regarding their involvement in and future study of science;
              5) Help GK-12 fellows improve pedagogical, communication and teamwork skills,
              thus
enhancing future employment opportunities;
6) Assess the short- and
              long-term impacts of the program on the elementary and middle schools, the
              teachers at those schools and the GK- 12 fellows;
7) Strengthen the UNTL - LPS
              partnership by establishing an infrastructure that facilitates interactions
              between teachers, teacher educators and scientists; and,
8) Piomote long-term
              cooperation between scientists and teacher educators at UNL to stimulate
              additional joint activities impacting. K- 12 education.
Project'FULCRUM is
              based on school-centered teams that include a graduate and an undergraduate
              GK-12 fellow, a lead teacher, other classroom teachers, faculty scientists and
              pre-service teachers. GK-12 fellows will form partnerships with teachers at
              their school to increase the inquiry component of existing activities and to
              develop new activities that introduce the students to science content, and to
              the relationship of science to people and society.
Fellows will attend a
              summer institute to introduce them to inquiry learning. Seminars throughout the
              school year will help them understand their role in the classroom. The lead
              teacher will mentor the fellow and assist the Pls in gathering and evaluating.
              data from their schools. Pre-service teachers will share a common methods
              course and will discuss experiences from the program as part of their course.
              Internal and external assessments will monitor whether the program is meeting
              the needs of the students.
0086358

