Title       : Initiation of (-)-Strand Synthesis in Turnip Crinkle Virus Associated RNAs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0086952

Award Number: 0086952
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430155             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne E. Simon anne_simon@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0086952  Anne Simon
Although RNA viruses have been the subjects of intensive
              investigations for the past 100 years, replication, a fundamental process in
              the life cycle of a virus, remains poorly understood.  The viral-encoded enzyme
              involved in replication, the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), together with
              possible proteins from the host, must recognize specific viral RNAs, initiate
              complementary strand synthesis and then use these complementary strands as
              templates for synthesis of the viral genome.  Promoters for RdRp are poorly
              understood, and much of the research to date involves viruses terminating with
              either tRNA-like structures (e.g., Brome mosaic virus) or poly(A) tails (e.g.,
              Poliovirus).  Much less is known about viruses whose genomic RNA(s) terminate
              with a free hydroxyl group such as turnip crinkle virus (TCV).  In addition, it
              is only recently becoming clear that internal sequences, and not just end
              sequences, are important for initiation of transcription by RdRp.  Possible
              roles for such sequences are (i) RdRp-binding sequences, or (ii) sequences that
              engage in RNA-RNA interactions with end sequences to bind the RdRp to the viral
              genome.  TCV is used as a model to study sequences and structures involved in
              replication since it is among the smallest and simplest of the RNA viruses. 
              More importantly, TCV is associated with very small subviral RNAs that can be
              used in replication studies.  Protoplast and in vitro systems have been
              developed to study replication of TCV genomic and subviral RNAs and several
              regions involved in replication of the subviral RNA satC have been identified. 
              
The TCV RdRp undergoes a process called abortive initiation when using TCV as
              template, which produces short RNA sequences able to function as primers for
              repair of deletions of satC ends.  Preliminary results suggest that promoters
              at the ends of TCV and satC strands may not be functioning as units independent
              of upstream sequence as previously thought, but rather may be involved in
              specific interactions with interior sequences.  To address this hypothesis, the
              sequence/structural requirements for abortive initiation from the TCV hairpin
              promoter will be determined by analyzing the importance of the 3'
              single-stranded tail and an upstream sequence element in abortive initiation by
              the TCV RdRp. This objective should permit the delineation of an element
              required for abortive initiation on the TCV genome.  Mutations that are able to
              restore replication of TCV with the promoter from satC and that are outside the
              promoter sequence will be mapped by replacing segments of the mutant TCV into
              TCV with the promoter of satC and assaying for infectivity. This objective
              should provide another means for elucidating internal cis-acting sequences that
              interact with the 3' terminal promoter of TCV.   In addition, the importance of
              an interior sequence in satC required for transcription in the absence of the
              3' end bases will be investigated. Successful completion of these experiments
              should provide significant advances in our understanding of the function of
              RdRp's and their ability to recognize a wide variety of linear and structural
              elements as promoters for complementary strand synthesis. 
