Title       : ITR: Computational Infrastructure for Microfluidic Systems with Applications to
               Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0086061

Award Number: 0086061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2900000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda R. Petzold petzold@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tao Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Igor Mezic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Noel C. MacDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew V. Tirrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1661,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The applications of microfluidic devices (which involve liquids moving in spaces
              measured in micrometers, i.e. millionths of a meter) are growing explosively.
              As a specific example, consider the development of microsystems for blood
              testing and screening. For consumers, one could envision devices available in
              drugstores that could perform genetic screening for conditions of concern to
              individuals. At a larger scale, use of such devices in blood banks could
              significantly reduce the time and blood lost in screening the 14 million pints
              of blood donated per year. Sample preparation is a critical bottleneck in the
              development of integrated miniature analytical systems, and it remains largely
              unaddressed. It is currently done outside the microsystem by mixing, shaking,
              and pipetting, because there are no effective integrated design method.
              Improved computational methods promise to allow integration and interconnection
              of microfluidics. This will have an effect analogous to automated methods for
              VLSI design on microelectronics; it will revolutionize the field.

This
              project will develop a computational infrastructure for simulation and design
              of microfluidic systems involving non-Newtonian, micrometer/nanometer-scale
              flows dominated by surface-related phenomena. Computational tools and
              analytical tools will be developed and used to compare with theoretical and
              experimental results. The project emphasizes methods to deliver complex
              molecules to flow surfaces, to create surface reaction sites and to provide the
              components for molecular-scale mixing and dispensing. It will design,
              fabricate, and characterize both stationary and oscillating MEMS fluidic
              channels and surfaces to evaluate molecular-scale mixing, flow, delivery, and
              dispensing of complex biological fluids. The focus will be on surface dominated
              flow and reaction phenomena that can be scaled for delivery of single molecules
              to programmed reaction sites. Such surface-related phenomena should find broad
              application in making MEMS-based, "chip-scale" analytical instruments and
              "biochips". The computational tools required to analyze and design such devices
              are currently nonexistent. This project brings together a team of computer
              scientists, numerical analysts, fluid dynamicists, experimentalists, and
              microscale process theoreticians who will collaborate closely on creating those
              tools and using them.



