Title       : A System for Multi-Axial Subassemblage Testing (MAST)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0086602

Award Number: 0086602
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joy Pauschke                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6472049            (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine W. French cfrench@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol K. Shield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas W. Ernie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome F. Hajjar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arturo E. Schultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1644      NETWK FOR ERTHQUKE ENG SIMULAT
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The George E. Brown, Jr. Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES)
              Program is a project funded under the NSF Major Research Equipment Program. 
              This cooperative agreement, under the NEES Program, establishes a NEES
              large-scale, laboratory earthquake engineering research experimentation site at
              the University of  Minnesota-Twin Cities campus.  The University will design,
              purchase, construct, install, commission, and operate a Multi-Axial
              Subassemblage Testing (MAST) system for structural earthquake engineering
              experimentation.  This equipment will be operational by 2004 or earlier and
              will be managed as a national shared-use NEES equipment site, with
              teleobservation and teleoperation capabilities, to provide new earthquake
              engineering research testing capabilities through 2014.  This NEES equipment
              site will be connected to the NEES collaboratory through the University's
              Abilene connection, with Gigabit Ethernet capabilities.  Shared-use access and
              training will be coordinated through the NEES Consortium.  This award is an
              outcome of the peer review of proposals submitted to program solicitation NSF
              00-6, "NEES: Earthquake Engineering Research Equipment." The Multi-Axial
              Subassemblage Testing (MAST) system provides an integrated approach to the
              simulation of structural response of buildings and bridges in moderate and
              large-scale earthquakes, linking large-scale testing of structures with
              three-dimensional nonlinear analyses of structural components and systems. The
              MAST system enables multi-axial cyclic and pseudo-dynamic tests of large-scale
              structural subassemblages, such as portions of beam-column frame systems,
              walls, bridges, and piers.  The MAST system consists of high performance
              actuators, cross heads (large steel weldments for the top and bottom reaction
              surfaces, a digital controller with six degrees-of-freedom (DOF) software
              (control system), a hydraulic distribution system, and an L-shaped reaction
              wall system to provide lateral load resistance for the horizontal actuators. 
              The MAST system uses the six DOF controller to position the top cross head
              using eight actuators (four vertical and two horizontal pairs of orthogonal
              actuators) to apply realistic states of deformations and loading in a
              straightforward and reproducible manner.  The six DOF control software employs
              advanced control technology to locate the position of the cross head through
              real-time simultaneous control of the eight cross head actuators.  This system
              not only enables control of the position of a point in space, but also of a
              plane in space.  This feature makes it possible to apply biaxial control of
              structures such as multi-bay subassemblages or walls.  It also enables the
              application of pure planar translations, as well as the possibility of applying
              gradients to simulate overturning (e.g., axial load gradient in the columns of
              a multi-bay frame or wall rocking).  With this system, a full six DOF loading
              condition can be imposed on the test structure, thus providing a new
              large-scale testing capability that will enhance the earthquake engineering
              community's understanding of complex failure states.   The MAST system will be
              located in the Structural Engineering Laboratory in the Department of Civil
              Engineering on the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities campus.  The University
              has committed to $875,000 in cost sharing for laboratory infrastructure
              improvements to accommodate the MAST system.  The University of Minnesota will
              integrate the MAST system into its research program and undergraduate and
              graduate curricula, implement a MAST collaboratory for researchers,
              practitioners, and industry professionals to facilitate experimental,
              computational, and technology transfer aspects of the MAST system, and provide
              training opportunities for outside researchers.


