Title       : Biophotonics: Biophotonics Based on Liquid Crystals: New Principles for
               Profiling Regulatory Signaling Proteins and Their Post-Translational
               Modifications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0086902

Award Number: 0086902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas L. Abbott abbott@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Bertics  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Israel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1606,9199,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Whereas decoding the entire genomes of procaryotic and eucaryotic organisms was
              a major
biological challenge of the nineties, this new decade seeks to capture
              an understanding of the
protein interactions of a cell. This understanding has
              the potential to yield enormous societal
benefit via predictions of total
              cellular responses to new pharmaceutical compounds, infectious
agents,
              environmental toxins, or disruptions in particular regulatory pathways. The
              research
described in this proposal aims to address this grand challenge by
              establishing a fundamentally
new and highly sensitive optical measurement
              technique that permits rapid, simultaneous
detection and quantification of
              multiple protein molecules involved in regulating intracellular
signaling
              pathways.

The research described in this proposal fuses principles of optics
              in liquid crystalline
media with the design of nanostructured surfaces to
              create a fundamentally new optical tool that
has the potential to be broadly
              applicable to studies aimed at unraveling the complex behavior of
cellular
              systems at the protein level. The first goal is to establish the use of
              biophotonic methods
based on liquid crystals for analysis of key regulatory
              signaling pathways in cells. Such a
technology could impact drug discovery,
              pharmacodynamic monitoring, regulation of gene
expression, protein-protein
              interactions, and our understanding of carcinogenesis. The second
broad goal
              is to demonstrate that liquid crystals can form the basis of a general and
              powerful
methodology that permits detection of post-translational
              modifications to proteins. Because the
identification of specific chemical
              modifications of a protein can reveal its cellular location,
biological
              lifespan and activation status, classification of proteins by their
              post-translational
modification would be enormously useful in studies
              elucidating the complex behavior of cells.

We propose to explore the use of
              liquid crystals to monitor cellular expression and
activation of regulatory
              signaling proteins such as Ras, and to detect the interaction of Ras
              with
target proteins in the multiple signaling pathways that mediate its
              biological activity. Although
our initial focus will be on detecting the
              binding of Ras to anti-Ras IgG and, when activated, its
binding to the down
              stream effector molecular RAF1, this system is prototypical and
              will,
therefore, be generalizable to a broad class of regulatory signaling
              proteins. We propose to
demonstrate the generality of the methodology by using
              liquid crystals to screen simultaneously
for post-translational modifications
              of multiple proteins involved in a common regulatory
pathway.

First, we
              will design surfaces that permit coupling of biomolecular recognition
events
              between total Ras and anti-Ras IgG, and between activated Ras and RAF1, to
              the
orientations of liquid crystals. Second, we will determine the sensitivity
              and capability to
quantitate photonic methods based on liquid crystals using
              as examples detection of total Ras
and activated Ras. Third, we will integrate
              photonic principles based on liquid crystals with
microfluidics so as to
              minimize sample size and enable detection of minute amounts of
captured
              proteins (~104 molecules). We will provide simultaneous measurement of total
              Ras and
activated Ras, and integrate the delivery of the sample and the liquid
              crystal. Fourth, we will
demonstrate the generality of the above described
              methodology based on liquid crystals by
rapidly screening for the
              post-translational modifications of multiple proteins involved in a
common
              regulatory pathway (MAPK, JNK, ERK 1/2).

Although the principles we propose
              to develop are broadly applicable to fundamental
studies in cell and molecular
              biology, they also have the potential for a tremendous impact on
biomedical
              investigators. One such example is in the detection of the activation states
              of
intracellular regulatory proteins. It is the activation state of these
              proteins that determines which
intracellular signaling cascades are initiated,
              and these in turn determine the fundamental
behaviors of cells. As such, the
              rapid determination of the activation states of these regulatory
proteins will
              represent a boon to the study of diverse medical conditions that result
              from
inappropriate signaling events such as those linked to neoplastic
              transformation and immune
mediated disorders.

