Title       : Environmentally Benign Reuse of Waste Tires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2001   
File        : a0086927

Award Number: 0086927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge G. Zornberg zornberg@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1605,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is the generation of data and analysis leading to
              proper analysis, material characterization, and field implementation of highway
              embankments reinforced using shreds from recycled waste tires.  The project
              includes four distinct phases: (1) analytical framework, (ii) material
              characterization, (iii) field feasibility demonstration, and (iv) educational
              modules.  The analytical component pursues the development of a generic desighn
              methodology for stability evaluation of embankments reinforced with tire
              shreds.  Tire shreds will be treated as discrete reinforcing elements in the
              proposed analytical framework.  The material characterization component
              involves a comprehensive shear strength testing program of tire shreds-soil
              specimens.  This experimental program will evaluate the response of tire
              shredsoil composites to varying dosages of tire shreds, shred geometries, and
              soil characteristics.  the field feasibility demonstration involves
              construction of a full-scale prototype embankment reinforced with shredded
              tires in order to address field constructibility and performance aspects of the
              proposed technology.  Contruction of the permanent embankment will take place
              in the premises of a collaborating company that will provide the physical
              space, materials, and construction equipment for the field component of this
              research.  Finally, the educational component involves the compilation of
              educational modules that will integrate the proposed research into
              geoenvironmental engineering instruction and into ongoing outreach minority
              programs.  The proposed effort seeks implementation of comprehensive material
              characterization, analysis, and field demonstration components in order to
              establish the basis for a "green reinforced soil design" in which the
              reinforcement inclusions are not made from nonrenewable polymeric materials
              (i.e. geosynthesis) but from recycled waste products.
