Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Substrate Size, Orientaton and
               Compliance Upon Prosimian Arboreal Quadrupedalism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2000   
File        : a0086835

Award Number: 0086835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11928              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan G. Larson slarson@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Primates, the order of mammals to which humans belong, are characterized by
              arboreal locomotion.  This is also a key feature that differentiates primates
              from most other groups of animals.   As such, understanding the development of
              this locomotor pattern is important in understanding our own roots. This
              project examines primate locomotion on arboreal supports. Life in the trees
              presents many challenges for balance and movement. Arboreal supports differ in
              diameter (size), in angular orientation, and in the degree to which they move
              under the weight of an animal (compliance). While a number of studies have
              identified behavioral and morphological specializations correlated with the use
              of an arboreal habitat, detailed locomotor data are necessary to better
              understand the postural strategies primates use to maintain balance in an
              arboreal setting. Since precise locomotor data are difficult to collect in the
              wild, laboratory studies on simulated branches allow us to examine these
              issues. This study examines locomotor adjustments that members of three
              families of prosimian primates make in response to differences in arboreal
              support type. Subjects have been chosen from six species to compare locomotor
              responses in animals of  different body sizes and proportions, to address
              adaptations to arboreality that have been suggested to characterize the
              earliest primates.

