Title       : PGE/SEP: Latinas En Ciencia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0086419

Award Number: 0086419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn D. Johnson marilyn.johnson@omsi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan I. Holloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alison Heimowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Mus of Sci & Ind
	      1945 SE Water Ave.
	      Portland, OR  972143354    /   -

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Oregon Museum of Science and Industry (OMSI) project experiences and the
              numbers of Latinas choosing to pursue careers in science and technology.

The
              three primary project goals of Latinas en Ciencia are:
	
1. To engage Latina
              girls in science and technology at early age before they've decided against
              science and technology career pathways.
2. To support Latina girls' engagement
              with science and technology from preschool through high school.
3. To change
              the internal culture at OMSI in order to make the Museum feel like home for the
              Latinas.

Several strategies will be utilized to achieve these project goals.
               OMSI will create an outreach program in three communities with a large Latino
              population around the Portland Metropolitan area.  Aimed at recruiting and
              supporting Latina girls in third through fifth grade, this program will help
              build ability and create opportunities for girls in science and technology,
              while reinforcing the girls' abilities, fostering independence, and creating an
              "I can succeed" attitude in the girls.  Activities in each community will
              include school assemblies, a weekly science club, family science nights,
              overnight programs at the Museum, and summer camp experiences.  OSMI will
              create a culture within the Museum that is conducive to attracting Latina girls
              and provide effective programs at the Museum, and summer camp experiences. 
              OMSI will create a culture within the Museum that is conducive to attracting
              Latina girls and provide effective programs and opportunities for them in
              science and technology by instituting monthly Latino Family Science Days,
              utilizing bilingual staff and volunteers for interpretation, within the Latino
              Community and within the Museum will be linked to facilitate connections at all
              age levels, offering mentoring opportunities and building leadership abilities
              and self-confidence in the Latina girls.  Community partnership established
              during the Planning Grant will also be further developed and nurtured.

These
              various strategies will be evaluated to assess participation levels in
              different programs and for different age group and to assess the engagement of
              the Latina girls in science and technology activities.  Academic and
              skills-based gains will also be evaluated for particular groups to provide
              useful insight into the effectiveness of the strategies employed.  The hope is
              to determine which strategies are most effective so as to further understanding
              of how to engage Latina girls in science and technology through nonformal
              science experiences.  By learning how to more effectively introduce this
              undeserved population to science and technology, nonformal science institutions
              can help Latina girls discover possible career paths in science and technology
              that may have otherwise been inconceivable.

