Title       : PGE/SEP: E-WOMS: Expanding Women's Opportunities through Mathematical Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2000   
File        : a0086310

Award Number: 0086310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy K. Levin alevin@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diana F. Steele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Northern Illinois University (NIU) will engage in a small, experimental project
              to improve the participation and retention of women in mathematics.  E-WOMS:
              Expanding Women's Opportunities through Mathematical Science, offers a
              twopronged approach to solving the problem of low continuation rates for women
              in college mathematics.

The first component of the project includes a novel
              collaboration among three units in NIU's College of Liberal Arts and
              Sciences-the Department of Mathematical Sciences, the Department of
              Communication, and the Women's Studies Program.  The objective of this
              component is to change negative campus perceptions regarding women's roles,
              abilities, and achievement in mathematics.  Graduate interns in Communication
              will work with the other two units in designing a public information campaign
              to educate the community during the funding period.  This activity will give
              the interns opportunities to translate their research and theoretical knowledge
              into practice, and then to reflect back on their experiences in final
              papers.

The second component consists of teaching interventions focusing on
              60 women taking Calculus I during their first semesters at Northern (30
              students each in fall 2001 and 2002).  The interventions will create a
              community of students engaged in collaborative problem solving and the other
              activities (both in class and in a separate support group) enhanced by an
              associated section of UNIV 101. An orientation class.  By enrolling in these
              courses together, attending presentations by professional women who use
              mathematics in their careers, and being offered ample opportunities for
              mentoring by members of the Department of Mathematical Sciences as the Women's
              Studies Program, the students involved will receive support and knowledge
              necessary to continue to take the higher mathematics courses required for many
              majors.  Throughout, particular attention will be paid to the fact that many
              NIU students come from rural communities in which there are few (if any) female
              models of achievement in careers involving mathematics and higher education.

