Title       : RUI: Highly Correlated Systems of Reduced Dimensionality: Broken Symmetry Phases
               in Quantum Hall Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2000   
File        : a0086191

Award Number: 0086191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward H. Rezayi ehr@pegasus.calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Los Angeles
	      5151 State University Dr
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-0111

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0086191
Rezayi
This is a RUI (Research at Undergraduate Institution) award for
              theoretical reseach on highly correlated electrons in reduced dimensionality. 
              Electrons confined to two-dimensional Landau levels exhibit a host of
              intriguing phenomena.  The most notable of these is the fractional quantum Hall
              effect.  An emerging area in quantum Hall systems is the physics of high Landau
              levels.   Experiments show highly anisotropic and non-linear electronic
              transport coefficients, as well as a reentrant quantum Hall phase showing a
              conduction threshold.  These unusual transport properties have been associated
              with translational symmetry-breaking phases of the two-dimensional electron gas
              as predicted by Koulakov, Fogler and Shklovskii and also by Moessner and
              Chalker.  The anisotropic transport results from a striped phase and the
              reentrant behavior could be a signature of  a pinned crystalline phase.  These
              are different from Wigner solids in having more than one electron per unit
              cell.  The research projects to be done here are extensive studies of these
              phases by numerical exact-diagonalization methods.  This approach seems
              particularly promising as the broken-symmetry phases have already been detected
              using such techniques by the principal investigator, Duncan Haldane and Kun
              Yang.  Another area of research is to study various excitations (particularly
              involving reversed spins) of the quantum Hall state observed at half-filling of
              the first excited Landau level.  Recent numerical calculations by the principal
              investigator and Duncan Haldane favor a BCS-like spin-polarized ground state of
              p-wave pairing of composite fermions - a composite object made up of an
              electron and an attached magnetic flux carrying two units of flux quanta.  Upon
              tilting the magnetic field towards the electron-layer, a transition to a
              striped phase with associated anisotropic transport has been seen
              experimentally.  The nature of this transition, as well as the quantitative
              dependence of physical properties (such as the energy gap) on the tilt angle,
              will also be investigated. In addition, the relevance of recently proposed
              novel quantum Hall phases involving groupings (generalized pairings) of more
              than two electrons to states of the first excited Landau level will be
              investigated.  Many of these projects involve three important phases of
              electronic matter: the Fermi liquid, BCS-type pairing, and charge-density wave
              states.  The work is therefore likely to enhance and deepen our understanding
              of these important phases of matter and uncover important inter-relations among
              them.
%%%
 This is a RUI (Research at Undergraduate Institution) award for
              theoretical reseach on highly correlated electrons in reduced dimensionality. 
              Electrons confined to two-dimensional Landau levels exhibit a host of
              intriguing phenomena.  The most notable of these is the fractional quantum Hall
              effect.  A number of different projects will be undertaken in this field,
              primarily using numerical methods.  Undergraduate students will participate in
              some phases of the research.
***

