Title       : NSDL: Atmospheric Visualization Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0086225

Award Number: 0086225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $741660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. Klaus klaus@anl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Mace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith Andrew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Argonne National Lab
	      9700 South Cass Avenue
	      Argonne, IL  60439    630/252-6797

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports an NSDL collection based on near-real time visualization of
              atmospheric data from the Atmospheric Radiation Measurement Program (ARM)
              Southern Great Plains (SGP) site. In order to ensure the continued existence of
              this collection, a model user and provider community of students and teachers
              will be developed. This visualization collection will have a great impact on
              the educational community, since the SGP site is the largest group of remote
              sensing atmospheric instruments in the world. 

The development of this
              collection entails collecting visualization code, implementing visualization
              code, and a scientific and educational review of these visualizations. The
              collection process has been started with code contributed from NOAA, UCAR, and
              many Universities. Implementation of this code in an automated format that can
              be used by the digital library and is self-sustaining is a major component of
              the effort involved. The ARM scientific community already has a scientific
              review process, which will be used to ensure the visualizations implemented are
              of scientific quality. The educational review process will contain four
              sections. Materials will be reviewed for use by middle school and high school
              students and teachers, as well as by undergraduate and graduate students. These
              reviews will address the benefits and problems associated with using the
              visualization for educational use, and will be used to ensure the educational
              value of the collection.

The direct involvement of teachers and students in
              the implementation work, testing of a community provider model, and
              class-testing of the collection are steps in this project to create a model
              user and provider community. Undergraduate and graduate students will assist in
              the implementation of visualization code. Given this introduction, these
              students will be ready to create or make additions to current visualization
              code, which will go through the educational and scientific review. Successful
              completion of these reviews will end in implementation of the code as part of
              this collection. This would start the capability of EIU and University of Utah
              to be both user- and provider-communities. Further, an EIU undergraduate class
              will use this collection with visualization projects. Class-testing in this
              manner will act as a feedback mechanism to improve the usability of the
              collection. The class projects will be another example of how students can
              become providers. The professor of the class will determine which projects are
              viable to request a scientific review. Such visualizations would then become
              available for use as summer projects for the in-service high school teachers in
              EIU's MSNS program to review for use in their classrooms. This would create a
              long-term avenue for scientific and educational review. The massive amounts of
              data and access to atmospheric visualization codes may even lead to the
              creation of an "open source" community around building code for this
              collection. One thing is certain, visualization of atmospheric data will spark
              the intellectual curiosity of students at all education levels.

