Title       : Workshop II: Biotechnology and the Integration of Behavioral Science; August
               15-17, 2000, Arlington, Virginia.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a0086955

Award Number: 0086955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine R. B. Boake cboake@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1160,9125,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The field of animal behavior has been divided in recent decades. On one hand,
              those who study laboratory animals like mice and fruit flies have developed
              sophisticated genetic tools to study problems in learning and drug addiction.
              On the other hand, studies of natural populations of animals have emphasized
              behavioral ecology, with very little ability to come to grips with the
              physiological and genetic factors that influence behavior. The proposed
              workshop is designed to re-integrate the various fields of animal behavior by
              developing ways to apply the methods learned in the laboratory to species that
              have been studied largely in the wild. In particular, we wish to develop ways
              to exploit the recent explosions of new techniques and knowledge about
              molecular genetics, which are largely a result of the Human Genome Project.
              These techniques are becoming so straightforward that it may well be possible
              to apply them to animals that were too difficult to study genetically in the
              past. Further, we wish to provide behavioral ecologists with the opportunity to
              apply their expertise and insights to studies of laboratory species, which
              could allow laboratory research to address behavioral problems from new
              perspectives. These goals can be met if molecular biologists are trained in the
              basics of animal behavior and if behavioral biologists are trained in molecular
              techniques; such training does not currently exist. The planned workshop has
              three goals. First we will discuss the techniques from biotechnology that could
              be applied to animal behavior. Second we will consider the kinds of behavioral
              problems that are amenable to molecular studies. Finally, we will develop the
              framework for a training program that will allow scientists in each discipline
              to learn enough about the other discipline to enable them to develop productive
              research programs that integrate behavior with biotechnology.


