Title       : ITR: The GriPhyN Project: Towards Petascale Virtual-Data Grids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0086044

Award Number: 0086044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11874886           (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Avery avery@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1661,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to provide the Information Technology (IT) advances
              required for petabyte-scale data intensive science in the 21st century. Driving
              the research are unprecedented requirements for geographically dispersed
              extraction of complex scientific information from very large collections of
              measured data. To meet these requirements, the GriPhyN (Grid Physics Network)
              team of seven IT research groups and four frontier physics experiments will
              pursue IT advances centered on the creation of Petascale Virtual Data Grids
              (PVDG). Only PVDG technology can meet the data-intensive computational needs of
              a diverse community of thousands of scientists spread across the
              globe.

GriPhyN's physicists (the CMS and ATLAS experiments at the Large
              Hadron Collider, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory
              (LIGO), and the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS)) are about to enter a new era
              of exploration of the fundamental forces of nature and the structure of the
              universe. The data analysis for these experiments presents enormous IT
              challenges. Thousands of scientists, connected worldwide by various networks,
              need to perform computationally demanding analyses of data sets growing from
              100 terabytes to 100 petabytes. The scale of this task far outpaces our current
              ability to manage and process data in a distributed environment, demanding
              fundamental IT advances.

To meet these challenges, GriPhyN will pursue an
              aggressive program of IT research to realize the concept of Virtual Data. This
              encompasses the definition and delivery of a (potentially unlimited) virtual
              space of data products derived from experimental data. In this virtual data
              space, requests can be satisfied by direct access and/or by computation,
              depending on the requirements of local and global resource management and
              security policies. GriPhyN's IT researchers will target advances in the areas
              of:
 Virtual data technologies, including information models and new methods
              of managing software components for virtual data manipulation,
 Request
              planning and scheduling, including mechanisms for requesting and enforcing
              policy constraints in a networked environment, and
 Task execution, including
              agent computing and other paradigms for meeting user requirements for
              performance, reliability, and cost.
In order to apply these advances to
              experimental data analysis problems, GriPhyN will package them in a
              multi-faceted, domain-independent Virtual Data Toolkit, and use this toolkit to
              prototype the PVDG technology for the CMS, ATLAS, LIGO, and SDSS data analysis
              tasks. In the process, it will create PVDG systems for community use. This will
              educate a new generation of interdisciplinary scientists with expertise in the
              critical area of data intensive computing. The benefits of doing so will not be
              unique to physics, but will also apply to problems in biology (e.g. the human
              genome project), the environment (e.g. the Earth Observation System), and many
              other areas.

