Title       : Development of Remote Sensor Microsystems for Environmental Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a0086953

Award Number: 0086953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Auner gauner@ece.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gina S. Shreve  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Loren J. Schwiebert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      656 W. Kirby
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1605,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the most important fields of application for sensor systems is
              sensing
environmental pollutants- particularly the detection of chemical and
              bacterial
contamination of drinking and recreation waters. Sensing systems can
              provide continuous
monitoring of chemical and bioanalytes. In phase I of this
              research we will develop a
new type of chemical and biosensor system which
              provides a class of economical and
portable devices that can detect desired
              analytes sensitively and rapidly. The intrinsic
selectivity of this
              microsensor chip arises from the specific nature of bio-recognition
reactions,
              e.g., antibody-antigen reations. The sensitivity depends upon the
              coupling
between the recognition reaction and the transducer and upon the
              inherent sensitivity of
the transducer. We will develop ultra high sensitivity
              wide bandgap semiconductor based
shear acoustic wave structures as the common
              sensor platform for the integration with the
sensing medium. The device will
              be developed using new Excimer laser micromachining
technology and
              state-of-the-art immobilization chemistry. The proposed research will be
a
              systematic multi-disciplinary research and development project involving
              novel
materials development, new processing and integration technology and a
              synergy with
our educational program. The goal of the research is to develop
              an E. Coli and a
pesticide detecting prototype sensor system that can be
              adapted to a large array of
microsensors, for the detection of a multitude of
              contaminate sources, during phase II of
the project.
