Title       : ITR: Visualization of Multi-valued Scientific Data: Applying Ideas from Art and
               Perceptual Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0086065

Award Number: 0086065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2296599            (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Laidlaw dhl@cs.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Tarr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Karniadakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1652,1661,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Visualization of Multi-valued Scientific Data: Applying Ideas from Art and
              Perceptual Psychology

This is a multi-disciplinary research project to
              discover new visualization tools for interacting with and understanding
              multi-valued volumes of scientific data and the physical phenomena they
              measure. The tools will be developed and evaluated in close collaboration with
              scientists in three disciplines: neurobiologists studying neural development
              and disease via biological imaging, computational flow researchers studying
              blood flow through arteries, and geographers using remote sensing for
              environmental monitoring and resource management. We will factor out common
              patterns from the problems in these multiple disciplines to develop interaction
              metaphors and visualization techniques that are generalizable and widely
              applicable.

This project develops new visualization evaluation
              methodologies, an area that has only begun to be addressed. And it compares the
              effectiveness of visualization applications in several interactive and static
              computing and display environments including a 4-wall Cave, a 40'x40' virtual
              environment with a head mounted display, stereo head-tracked workbenches,
              desktop workstations, paper, and 3D rapid-prototyping output. Immersive
              environments will be studied
because the value of these non-traditional
              working environments has not been established and because they present an
              opportunity to explore fundamentally different interaction metaphors.
              Comparisons will be performed for both interactive and static cases with
              appropriate technology determined for each application.

This project brings
              together experience from art and perceptual psychology for inspiration. Through
              several centuries, artists have evolved a tradition of techniques to create
              visual representations for particular communication goals. Art history provides
              a language for understanding that knowledge. We will draw inspiration from
              painting, sculpture, drawing, and graphic design and apply these techniques to
              the scientific problems.

Beyond inspiration, perceptual psychology also
              brings a second set of knowledge to bear on scientific visualization problems.
              Evaluating the effectiveness of visualization methods is difficult because, not
              only are the goals difficult to define and codify, tests that evaluate them
              meaningfully are difficult to design and execute. These evaluations are akin to
              evaluating how the human perceptual system works. Perceptual psychologists have
              been developing experiments for understanding perception for decades, and they
              will help develop methodology and expertise for evaluating visualization
              methods in close collaboration with  biologists, fluids researchers,
              geographers, artists, and computer scientists.

While many of the individual
              components of this project are important alone, the collaborative aspects are
              the most notable. Mining ideas from art and perception will suggest unusually
              innovative visualization ideas. The application of new visualization techniques
              and collaboration with researchers in other fields will provide us with a
              unique opportunity to validate the techniques and ensure that they are
              responsive to the needs of the scientific problems. Because the techniques will
              be developed with application to multiple disciplines, they are likely to find
              further application within these and other disciplines. The assembled team
              brings strengths in all of the disciplines and has already demonstrated a track
              record of collaborative work.

The broader impact of the proposed research
              lies not only in the information technology arena, where new methods will help
              scientists in many disciplines to more effectively interact with and understand
              their data and gain insight about the physical phenomena they represent, but
              also in the specific scientific domains we will study. The study of blood flow
              could lead to improved understanding of and treatment for cardiovascular
              pathologies. An understanding of early neural development could enable new
              therapies for birth defects, genetic disorders, and other diseases. Remote
              sensing advances could provide more effective resource monitoring and permit
              widespread improvements in global quality of life.

