Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Topology and Geometry of 3- Dimensional Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1995      
File        : a9225055

Award Number: 9225055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Hass hass@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Abigail A. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project is in the area of knot theory and the topology               
              of3-dimensional manifolds.  The investigators will study                       
              3-manifolds, using two points of view to analyze surfaces in a                 
              3-manifold.  The first method uses combinatorial techniques                    
              combined with the concept of 'thin position' of a knot.  This                  
              will be used to consider some old problems in knot theory, such                
              as the cabling conjecture, as well as the classification problem               
              for Heegaard splittings of Seifert fibered spaces.  Thin position              
              surfaces serve as a combinatorial version of the minimax surfaces              
              used by Pitts-Rubinstein in their investigations of Heegaard                   
              splittings, and they will be used to attack problems similar to                
              the recognition problem for the 3-sphere, recently solved by                   
              Rubinstein.  The second method uses techniques of smooth minimal               
              surface theory and hyperbolic geometry to investigate the                      
              topology of 3-manifolds.  One goal is to show that any 3-manifold              
              admits only a finite number of Heegaard splittings of each genus,              
              a result recently established for Haken manifolds by Johannson.                
              Another goal is to show thatnon-Haken 3-manifolds are determined               
              by their fundamental groups.  Finally, the investigators will                  
              explore the topological consequences that follow from imposing                 
              curvature conditions on a manifold and its boundary.                           
                   The geometry of three dimensions is the geometry of the                   
              world we live in, so one might expect that the mathematical study              
              of this area would have particularly broad applications.  This is              
              indeed the case, and the area leads to applications in physics,                
              in the study of the differential equations governing physical                  
              phenomena, to group theory, and to many other branches of                      
              mathematics.  Mathematicians study, in all dimensions, the                     
              geometric objects called "manifolds," which have properties                    
              similar to those of the space we live in.  Manifolds in dimension              
              three exhibit unique features which make their study a                         
              flourishing area of current research.  The objective of this                   
              project is to study certain categories of these 3-manifolds, in                
              pursuit of the overall goal of understanding these geometric                   
              objects.  Using techniques developed from studying knotted curves              
              and the complexity of their raveling, and from the theory of soap              
              films and minimal surfaces, the investigators aim to contribute                
              to the classification problem for3-manifolds and to understand                 
              specific classes of 3-manifolds in great detail.
