Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Judicial Agenda in Comparative Perspective,
               1960-1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9225087

Award Number: 9225087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel B. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The role of courts and judicial processes in policy-making is an                
                                                                                            
              important question not only in this nation but in many others                  
              throughout the world.  We have extensive scientific knowledge of               
                                                                                             
              judicial processes in the U.S., but relatively little empirical                
              work has been done in other countries.  The scientific questions               
                                                                                             
              are especially important in light of the many newly democratized               
                                                                                             
              nations currently engaged in constitution-making and the increasing            
                                                                                             
              prominence of courts in policy-making processes throughout the                 
              world.  These questions include: the extent of activist                        
              constitutionalism in democracies, the role orientations of judges,             
                                                                                             
              the role of interest groups and the legal profession in the                    
              creation of a judicial agenda, the extent and structure of interest            
                                                                                             
              group conflict, which interests are served and which are not served            
                                                                                             
              in the judicial arena, and the judicial control of constitutional              
                                                                                             
              and other rights claims.  The extent of change in the political                
              role of courts can be assessed by analyzing the extent of change               
                                                                                             
              in the judicial agenda over time because politically activist                  
              courts in effect invite certain kinds of issues to resolve.  It is             
                                                                                             
              important to ask, therefore, what is the mix of traditional and new            
                                                                                             
              issues, which issues are claiming an increasing place on the                   
              agenda, and what interest groups are pressing them.                            
                                                                                             
              This doctoral dissertation will examine changes from 1960 to 1990              
                                                                                             
              in the nature of issues considered by courts of last resort in                 
              Canada, England, India and the United States.  In addition, the                
              study will assess the relationship between agenda change and other             
                                                                                             
              theoretically important developments in the political system of the            
                                                                                             
              four countries.  Three issues will be examined in greater detail:              
                                                                                             
              environmental policy, in particular water pollution policy; women's            
                                                                                             
              rights, especially in employment; and press censorship.  Data on               
                                                                                             
              case issues and decisions will be collected and coded from the                 
              official court reports of each country.  Judicial biographies and              
                                                                                             
              memoirs, as well as scholarly analyses of judicial careers, will               
                                                                                             
              be examined for information on judicial role orientations.  Semi-              
                                                                                             
              structured interviews will be conducted with representatives of the            
                                                                                             
              interest groups involved in raising each of the three issue areas.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              This research will make an important contribution to our                       
              theoretical understanding of judicial processes across political               
                                                                                             
              systems, in addition to adding significantly to our store of                   
              scientific data on courts.  It will provide the basis for a broader            
                                                                                             
              understanding of the relationship between judicial processes and               
                                                                                             
              policy-making in any political system.
