Title       : Quantitative Role of Glycine Betaine and DMSP in the Cellular Nitrogen and
               Sulfur Budgets of Marine Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1995  
File        : a9225051

Award Number: 9225051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald P. Kiene Rkiene@disl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,1650,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Marine phytoplankton produce a variety of organic osmolytes                    
              including the nitrogenous compound glycine betaine (GBT) and                   
              its sulfur analog, dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP).  We                      
              believe that GBT and DMSP make large and hitherto                              
              unrecognized contributions to the cellular nitrogen and                        
              sulfur pools in many species of marine phytoplankton and to                    
              particulate organic nitrogen (PON) and particulate organic                     
              sulfur (POS) pools in surface seawater.  Very little is                        
              known about the production, distribution and cycling of                        
              these labile biogenic compounds. Information from the                          
              literature and from our own preliminary studies suggests                       
              that many species of phytoplankton produce both GBT and DMSP                   
              simultaneously and that nitrogen availability may affect the                   
              relative proportions of GBT and DMSP.  We therefore will                       
              conduct laboratory and field studies to test the following                     
              hypotheses:  1) GBT makes up a significant (5-20%) fraction                    
              of cellular nitrogen in certain species of marine                              
              phytoplankton.  Likewise, DMSP is a major constituent of                       
              cellular sulfur; 2) As with DMSP, there is a relationship                      
              between taxonomy and GBT production; 3) The levels of GBT                      
              and GMSP in phytoplankton are a function of nitrogen                           
              availability, with use of DMSP favored under N-limitation:                     
              4) phytoplankton take up GBT and DMSP from their                               
              surroundings and release them under certain conditions; 5)                     
              In the field production of GBT over DMSP, or selection of                      
              species which produce GBT, will be favored in high nitrogen                    
              environments.  Our study will provide new and important data                   
              on the quantitative role of methylated nitrogen and sulfur                     
              osmolytes to the cellular nitrogen and sulfur budgets of                       
              phytoplankton and to PON and POS in the sea.  This                             
              information will lead to a better understanding of the                         
              biological cycling of nitrogen and sulfur in the ocean. ***
