Title       : From Dispute to Dispute: An Analysis of the Dynamics of Internation Conflict
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1993  
File        : a9225148

Award Number: 9225148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dina A. Zinnes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Muncaster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              International crises and major ongoing internation disputes are a              
              central topic of concern for everyone.  This project provides                  
              scientific theoretical underpinnings to our understanding of the               
              recurrence of major international disputes.  The goal is to study              
              mathematical representations of dispute sequences or histories by              
              drawing together the work of the principal researchers in                      
              international relations and embedding them in a framework that                 
              emphasizes common ties, interests, interconnections, and                       
              relationships among nations..  By analytic and computer                        
              explorations, attempts will be made to predict, for a sequence of              
              disputes, who will be a party to each dispute, what will happen in             
              each dispute, and how the outcome and details of each dispute will             
              affect the relationships among the nations involved.  These                    
              predictions will then be used to examine a number of major                     
              questions current in the international relations literature and                
              develop empirical tests using several of the datasets that have                
              been compiled by the National Science Foundation's project on Data             
              Development for International Research.                                        
                                                                                             
              This project goes beyond previous studies of internation conflict              
              because it examines dispute sequences, allows different nations to             
              move in and out of disputes from one time period to the next, and              
              brings to the forefront the important influence of relationships               
              among nations.
