Title       : Undergraduate Research in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1995    
File        : a9225034

Award Number: 9225034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Davis davis@pepperdine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee B. Kats  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Tallman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. M. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pepperdine University
	      24255 Pacific Coast Hwy
	      Malibu, CA  902634819    310/506-4000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Natural Science Division at                   
              Pepperdine to continue a successful REU Site.  The funds                       
              will enhance an already active program of undergraduate                        
              research in biology.  Students will be taught the common                       
              elements of the research process and increase their                            
              appreciation for the diversity of biological subdisciplines.                   
              In addition, the program provides mechanisms for recruiting                    
              students from traditionally underrepresented groups in                         
              science and from schools where students may not have                           
              opportunities to experience biological research.  Each                         
              summer the program will begin with a six-day research                          
              orientation workshop at the Murchison Science Center during                    
              which students will be introduced to the uses and                              
              limitations of specific research tools and techniques and                      
              immersed in the research process (literature review,                           
              hypothesis formulation, and hypothesis testing).  After the                    
              orientation workshop, students will pursue individual                          
              research projects under the direction of faculty in either                     
              cellular biochemistry, behavioral ecology, plant                               
              physiological ecology or ecophysiology of marine intertidal                    
              animals.  All research projects will be designed to provide                    
              students with insight into how scientists formulate research                   
              questions, design experiments, collect and analyze data, and                   
              communicate their results to the scientific community.  Over                   
              the course of the summer, visiting scientists will hold                        
              special research seminars in each research area, giving                        
              students an opportunity to discuss their own data with other                   
              scientists.  Each research group will hold weekly literature                   
              seminars to discuss current journal articles pertaining to                     
              their research interests.  The program will conclude each                      
              summer with a student research symposium in early August.                      
              Follow-through will include student participation at local                     
              and regional undergraduate research conferences.  In cases                     
              of special merit, students will be encouraged to present                       
              their results at national meetings and to prepare their                        
              results for publication in a scientific journal.
