Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Complex Analysis and Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1995  
File        : a9225043

Award Number: 9225043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos Berenstein carlos@isr.umd.edu  (DATA NOT AVAILABLE current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research on a wide range              
              of problems in complex analysis and integral geometry.  It                     
              divides into three main areas, the first being concerned with                  
              residues, the division problem and applications.  By this one                  
              understands the problem of finding solutions to the Bezout                     
              problem of finding multipliers which produce a constant sum of                 
              entire functions without common roots.  This is an algebra                     
              problem in the sense that one wants to generate a certain ideal                
              from a collection of functions.  It may turn out that the ideal                
              is the entire space.  This type of deconvolution is only of                    
              interest when one can control the degree of the multipliers.                   
              Answers to such questions leads to effective methods in                        
              arithmetic intersection theory.  The second line of investigation              
              concerns integral geometry on the Heisenberg group.  If the                    
              integral of a function taken over translates of the same curve by              
              an underlying group always results in a constant value, can one                
              make any assertion about the function?  In one complex dimension               
              the answer is taught in undergraduate classes.  In higher                      
              dimensions the problem of deciding which are the admissible                    
              curves remains to be determined.  Finally, related work will be                
              done on the inverse conductivity problem which in applications                 
              refers to the problem of determining interior characteristics of               
              a body from boundary measurements of conductivity.                             
                   The research in this project represent a combination of deep              
              theoretical ideas with close ties with applications to problems                
              in electric impedance tomography, analysis of defects in                       
              materials, robotics and control theory.
