Title       : Planning Meetings for the Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for
               Silicon Wafer Engineering and Defect Science (Si WEDS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1997     
File        : a9712502

Award Number: 9712502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Rozgonyi rozgonyi@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Proposal: Planning Grant for an Industry/University Cooperative
              Research Center for Si Wafer Defect Engineering at North Carolina State
              University   Principal Investigator: George A. Rozgonyi, NCSU  Program Officer:
              Cheryl Cathey  Date: 10 March 1997    Silicon wafers are the foundation for
              building integrated circuits.  In order to be competitive in the integrated
              circuit industry, silicon chip manufacturers must continually strive to
              decrease the feature size of the components of the integrated circuits.  A
              smaller feature size enables the chip manufacturers to both make smaller chips,
              fulfilling the market demand for ever smaller electronics, and to increase the
              yield of chips per silicon wafer, decreasing the cost per chip.  In order to
              ensure high quality chips in high yields, the base material, the silicon wafer,
              must be as free from bulk and surface defects and imperfections as possible.   
              This proposed Center would work with the silicon wafer manufacturers to:  *
              provide a mechanism for the research issues of the wafer manufacturing
              community to be identified and addressed by the academic community,  * educate
              graduate and post-graduate students to become effective members of the wafer
              manufacturing research community, and  * provide a administrative
              infrastructure to enable funding of a large scale wafer defect research center.
                  The Center's research would be organized into three thrusts:  bulk defects
              and imperfections, surface defects and imperfections, and cross-cutting areas
              such as metrology and simulation.  The bulk defects and imperfections thrust
              would involve research on control of the nucleation, growth, motion and
              annihilation of silicon crystals.  The surface defect thrust would investigate
              methods to control and engineer the wafer surface properties.  The cross
              cutting areas thrust would focus on metrology development and fundamental
              knowledge underlying metrology tools.      The Center would have Dr. George
              Rozgonyi of North Carolina State University and Ro bert Helms of Stanford
              University as co-Directors, and would involve researchers from the University
              of Arizona, Arizona State University, the University of South Florida, MIT, and
              Berkeley.  There are currently six wafer manufacturing companies that are
              willing to pay $50,000 per year to be part of the Center.  With the research
              expertise resident at the seven universities, this Center would aid the wafer
              suppliers in improving their silicon wafer quality, thus enabling them to
              better meet the market requirements of their customers, the silicon chip
              makers.  The chip makers would then be able to product smaller, cheaper
              devices, making them more competitive in the electronics marketplace.
