Title       : PEET: Monography, Phylogentics, and Developing Expertise in New World
               Pleurostict Scarab Beetles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a9712447

Award Number: 9712447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $740000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett C. Ratcliffe bratcliffe1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Jameson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9712447  RATCLIFFE   The beetle family Scarabaeidae has approximately 27,800
              species.  The pleurostict scarabs form a clade within the family and include
              the subfamilies Melolonthinae, Rutelinae, Dynastinae, Cetoniinae, Euchirinae,
              and Phaenomeridinae.  The clade constitutes about 75% of the family (or 69% of
              the Scarabaeoidea).  The pleurostict scarabs remain poorly known taxonomically,
              and only about 50% of the genera in the New World can be identified to genus
              with reliability.  Moreover, the current classification of the pleurostict
              scarabs is based on taxonomic constructs from the last century that do not
              reflect  relationships of taxa.     This project, by Brett Ratcliffe and
              coworkers, will result in phylogenetic analyses of all tribes of the
              pleurostict clade in order to provide a stable classification of the
              pleurostict scarabs.  This phylogeny-based classification will provide the
              scientific context for understanding origins of groups, character trait
              evolution, and implications for species concepts and modes of speciation.  The
              new classification will form the foundation for a taxonomic key to the 320
              genera of New World pleurosticts that will be produced in both print and
              electronic format.  In addition, four poorly known, monophyletic groups of New
              World pleurostict scarabs will be monographed: Gymnetini (Cetoniinae),
              Pelidnota and related genera, Trizogeniates, and Platycoelia (all Rutelinae). 
              This research will create electronic databases of specimen-level information,
              character data, geographic and temporal distributions, catalogs, and images. 
              Monographs of the four groups, in addition to the key, will be produced in
              electronic and print formats.  The research will contribute to the development
              of computer infrastructure for organizing and accessing knowledge about scarab
              beetles, and it will establish the foundation for future work in scarab
              systematics.  To accomplish all of these goals, the PI and post-doctoral
              associate will train two Ph.D.-level students who will becom e proficient in
              modern monographic, taxonomic, and phylogenetic methods and electronic
              dissemination of information.
