Title       : Wireless and Mobile Communications Workshop (WIRELESS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1997     
File        : a9712470

Award Number: 9712470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61229              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Schorr schorr@isi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Bannister  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Packet switching, as exemplified by the Internet and Broadband Integrated
              Services Digital Networks, has grown to tremendous proportions in the short
              space of 30 years of research and development.  However, many of the concepts
              in networking and communications were developed in the context of metallic or
              optical-fiber links to which network nodes are permanently attached. Several of
              the basic tenets of networking are being challenged by the introduction of
              wireless links that rely on atmospheric propagation of radio-frequency signals
              and mobile nodes that are connected to wireless (or even wired) links for only
              a short period of time.  This workshop will identify the major research issues
              in wireless and mobile communications.      The workshop, to be held March
              24-16, 1997, will identify major research issues in wireless and mobile
              communications. By assembling leading researchers in the field the workshop
              will provide a forum for intense discussion and debate about the essential
              problems to be solved and about how best to approach these problems.    The
              workshop will feature active participation by researcher with well established
              contributions in the field.  Two basic tracks of researchers are being
              assembled: 1) communications, link, and hardware technology experts; and 2)
              networking, middleware, and advanced applications experts. The workshop will
              consist of joint and two-track sessions, allowing the exchange of ideas among
              different specialists and focusing discussion among related specialists.     A
              final report of the workshop will be a group-authored report entitled,
              "Research Priorities in Wireless and Mobile Communications".
