Title       : Impact of the Keweenaw Current on Cross-Margin Transport in Lake Superior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a9712871

Award Number: 9712871
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1162759            (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik T. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Ricketts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elise A. Ralph  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,4444,9178,9189,EGCH,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9712871  Brown    Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement of
              Opportunity (NSF 97-38) for   Coastal Studies in the Great Lakes.  This is a
              collaborative research project involving eleven    investigators from five
              academic research institutions.  The research is being conducted under the  
              auspices of the NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program and the NOAA Coastal
              Ocean   Program.  This collaborative, interdisciplinary 5-year research program
              will entail an integrated   program of field and laboratory studies and
              mathematical modeling to quantify the role of coastal   currents and thermal
              fronts in mediating cross-margin transport in Lake Superior.      The western
              shore of Lake Superior's Keweenaw Peninsula exhibits a dramatic coastal jet
              known   as the Keweenaw Current.  A strong, shore-parallel density front, the
              thermal bar, also is   characteristic of this region and persists long into the
              summer. The goal of the proposed work is to   determine the physical, chemical,
              and biological effects that arise from the intense physical forcing   on this
              system, and specifically, to elucidate how these effects interact temporally
              and spatially to   define distinct nearshore and offshore environments in Lake
              Superior.  This project represents the   first effort to model coupled
              physical, chemical, and biological processes in the coastal zone of   Lake
              Superior where both vertical and horizontal thermal structure and transport
              processes are   important.    The research team is divided into three
              subgroups: Physical Processes, Chemical Gradients, and   Biological
              Communities.  The Physical Processes group will examine the relative importance
              of all   forcing factors (e.g., wind-driven variability, baroclinic
              instability) that govern cross margin   transport using in situ observations,
              numerical modeling, and satellite observations.  The Chemical   Gradients group
              will characterize nearshore-offshore differences in distributions of chemical  
              species, evaluate chemical tracers of wa ter and sediment movement, and
              investigate differences   (inshore vs. offshore) in chemical cycles induced by
              the current.  The Biological Communities   group will determine how gradients
              in primary production, trophic structure, and rates of material  
              transformation develop. All three groups will interact closely throughout the
              project to obtain and   share complementary data sets and to derive a coupled
              physical/chemical/biological model of the   system.  The detailed,
              process-level understanding achieved by this project will advance our  
              quantitative understanding of the processes that regulate the transport,
              transformation and fate of   biologically, chemically and geologically
              important matter in coastal regions and provide a firm   basis for future
              management decisions on how best to preserve the pristine nature of Lake  
              Superior.        Under this award, moorings will be deployed through three full
              years so that conditions in all   seasons, including under the ice, can be
              monitored.  Ground-based measurements will be enhanced   by concurrent
              satellite determination of surface temperature and archived images will be
              employed   to obtain a record of interannual variability in thermal structure.
              Work will also lead to   development of chemical tracers of water and sediment
              movement by fingerprinting particles   originating within the study zone in
              order to track and quantify present-day and historic patterns of   particle
              transport from nearshore to offshore. Measurement of radionuclides on particles
              within the   nearshore zone and in cores from the offshore zone will play a
              critical role in identification of   sediment transport and deposition
              pathways.
