Title       : The Plasma Physics of Metal-Nitride Deposition of IntegratedCircuit Barrier
               Layers using Ionized Physical Vapor Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9712988

Award Number: 9712988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Hopwood hopwood@ece.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1062,1775,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9712988 Hopwood  This project seeks to develop a fundamental understanding of
              high-density plasmas composed of metal vapor and nitrogen, and investigates a
              plasma deposition system through modeling, plasma diagnostics, and thin film
              characterization. The modeling effort aims to provide both physical
              understanding and analytical tools for improving the deposition of TiN and TaN
              barrier layers utilized in ULSI circuits. Physical diagnostics of the density
              of plasma species will parallel the modeling phase. Gas phase titration, energy
              and mass spectroscopy, Langmuir probes and optical emission spectroscopy of the
              metal-N2 plasma are planned. Analysis of deposited film quality will provide
              correlation between plasma and film properties. %%% The project is
              multidisciplinary combining fundamental plasma science research with surface
              materials science synthesis and processing studies to address forefront issues
              in a topical area of strong technological relevance and high potential payoff. 
              The research will contribute basic plasma and materials science knowledge at a
              fundamental level to several aspects of advanced electronic/photonic devices
              and integrated circuitry. An important feature of the program is the
              integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area. The impact of the research
              on the technological infrastructure is high since the project focuses at the
              crossroads of three critical areas in plasma science and engineering:
              high-density plasma sources, sputtering processes within a metal-nitride plasma
              chemistry environment, and deposition of thin film barrier layers for advanced
              microelectronics technology. To enhance an interest in fundamental research and
              plasma science, an undergraduate co-op student will work in concert with the PI
              and two graduate students. ***
