Title       : PEET: Classical and Molecular-Based Monographic Revision of the Cephalobina:
               Integrating Databases and Training in Microbivore, Plant and Animal Nematology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9712355

Award Number: 9712355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $740000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Nadler sanadler@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Baldwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9712355  NADLER    Nematodes, the most abundant multicellular organisms on
              earth, are important components of global biodiversity, play key roles in
              aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, and impact agriculture, veterinary science,
              and medicine.  Certain species are important Omodel systemsO for the study of
              animal genetics and development.  Correct identifications of named species,
              correct descriptions of species not yet named, and accurate assessments of the
              historical (phylogenetic) relationships among species, are critically important
              for the future development of nematode research. However, nematode species
              diversity is poorly known, and presently there are few taxonomists trained to
              work with these animals.      In this work, Steven Nadler and James Baldwin
              will conduct a comprehensive monographic study of cephalobine nematodes
              (suborder Cephalobina), a group of nematodes found everywhere in the soil,
              training a new generation of nematode taxonomists in the process.  Although
              most Cephalobina feed on bacteria, there is evidence that they are related to
              certain economically important plant and animal parasitic nematodes.  This
              study will find out whether such relationships can be substantiated. 
              Cephalobina also play an important role in regulating available nutrients in
              healthy ecosystems, and their distribution may prove useful as indicators of
              environmental disturbances by humans.  This study will provide some of the
              accurate species identifications needed to evaluate these ecosystem effects
              more efficiently.  These organisms may also be of utility as simple models to
              understand basic biological processes such as development and aging.  The work
              should provide new experts in nematode taxonomy, new tools applicable to the
              study of all nematode groups, and information on cephalobine nematodes that is
              widely and conveniently accessible through Internet access to identification
              aids and databases.
