Title       : GOALI: Pulsed Terahertz Spectroscopy of Colossal Magnetoresistance Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9712776

Award Number: 9712776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39000              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Dennis Drew hdrew@physics.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin J. Heilweil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9712776  Drew
                 This  experimental GOALI research project, supported in  part  by  the  
              Office  of  Multidisciplinary  Affairs  (OMA)  of  the  MPS  Directorate,  is 
              on  the infrared and microwave  magneto-optical  properties  of  Colossal
              Magnetoresistance (CMR) materials,  with  emphasis  on  manganese perovskites, 
              in the form of  thin  films  grown  on far-infrared transparent substrates. The
              films will  be  characterized  using  dc  transport and  magnetic 
              susceptibility  measurements,  and  will then be studied using THz 
              spectroscopy.  The  results  will  be  used  to help illuminate  the 
              mechanisms  involved  in  CMR  in  the  manganese  perovskites  and   address 
              questions  about  the application of the materials  as  microwave  circuit 
              elements,  bolometric detectors, and  magnetic  sensors.  This  research 
              project is interdisciplinary in nature  and  will  involve collaboration
              between a leading academic laboratory and a  government laboratory.  %%%  This 
              experimental GOALI research project, supported in  part  by  the   Office  of 
              Multidisciplinary  Affairs  (OMA)  of  the  MPS  Directorate  makes use of
              sophisticated optical  measurements  to  clarify   the  interaction  of 
              magnetic  fields  with  "Colossal  Magnetoresistance  Materials" (CMR) of the 
              manganese  perovskite  family.  These CMR materials have extremely large
              sensitivity  in  their  electrical resistance to ambient magnetic field,  and 
              are  therefore  of  great interest for their potential application  in 
              magnetic  field  sensing elements as are used  in  magnetic  disk  drives,  as 
              well as for their scientific interest. Results  from  this research may include
              unusual new effects or structures which  may  find  application in technology.
              This  research  project  is  interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  will  involve 
               collaboration  between   a   leading  academic  laboratory  and   a  
              government  laboratory.  ***
