Title       : Collaborative Research: The Nature and Predictability of the Madden and Julian
               Oscillation in the Coupled Ocean- Atmosphere System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9712483

Award Number: 9712483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141698             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duane E. Waliser duane.waliser@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9712483  Waliser     This grant represents one of the two awards that
              provide support for a collaborative project between Dr. Duane Waliser at SUNY -
              Stony Brook and Dr. Charles Jones of UC - Santa Barbara (under ATM-9712855). 
              The principal investigators seek to improve our understanding of, and
              ultimately our capability to forecast, a tropical intraseasonal phenomenon
              known as the Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO).       The Madden-Julian
              Oscillation is one of the most important modes of tropical intraseasonal
              variability that may have important influences on medium- to extended-range
              weather forecasting in the extratropics, the Asian-Australian monsoon activity,
              and even the variability of the equatorial Pacific Ocean thermocline structure
              via its close association with westerly wind bursts.  A growing body of
              evidence, including recent modeling results obtained by the principal
              investigators, suggests that air-sea interaction processes, particularly the
              influence of sea-surface temperature (SST) variations on surface fluxes, may be
              important in the maintenance of the MJO.   The principal investigators will
              continue their investigation by (1) further exploring the role of SST and
              surface processes in determining the strength of and maintaining the MJO using
              coupled ocean-atmosphere models and (2) assessing the impact of the
              representation/forecast of the  MJO on the overall extended range forecast
              skill in an operational medium-range weather forecast model.  The research will
              involve the use of  diagnostic and statistical analyses as well as numerical
              simulations.  The PIs will employ several different models in their study.    
              This research has important implications for improving dynamical extended range
              forecasting at both intraseasonal and seasonal time scales.  Therefore, both
              the Climate Dynamics and Large-scale Meteorology Programs will share in the
              support of this collaborative project.
