Title       : Displacement and Downsizing Effects on Older Workers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9712076

Award Number: 9712076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30584              (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Bridges wbridges@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of the effects of corporate downsizing on older workers.  This
              research uses matched data from Current Population Surveys and from the Bureau
              of Labor Statistics Mass Layoff Series to explore the relationships among
              internal labor markets, mass layoffs, workers' ages, and the probabilities of
              job displacement.  Specific hypotheses that explain these relationships are
              generated from two different institutional theories from sociology -- "symbolic
              efficiency" and "internal dualism"-- and from one microeconomic theory --
              Lazear's mandatory retirement theory.  These hypotheses will be evaluated at
              the individual level of analysis allowing statistically generalizable
              statements about age group specific displacement probabilities under different
              contextual circumstances.     Worker displacements, especially those which
              result from corporate downsizing, have become a lightening rod for criticism
              and concern about U. S. economic performance. Although unemployment is
              relatively low by contemporary standards, the number and type of recent
              displacements are troubling insofar as they have been interpreted as signaling
              a change in the basic fabric of our country's employment relations. In
              particular, many observers have taken dismissals of long-term workers as
              convincing evidence that durable and stable relationships between employers and
              workers have disappeared in an era of contingent work.  Empirical questions
              like those examined in this study need to be addressed before this conclusion
              can be taken seriously.      In addition to this project's contribution to
              verifying different social science propositions about employment relationships,
              it will also provide important background information for policy analysts in
              this area of social life. For example, it will be possible to examine age-group
              specific displacement probabilities with and without controls for both other
              individual characteristics (e.g. education) and for industry level
              characteristics (e.g. pension coverage in the industry) .
