Title       : Time and Frequency Domain Studies of Ultrafast Dynamics in Liquids and Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9712725

Award Number: 9712725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence D. Ziegler lziegler@chem.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project of the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program in the  
              Chemistry Division with support for instrumentation from the Office of  
              Multidisciplinary Activities, Prof. L. Ziegler of Boston University will  
              perform time-domain and spontaneous emission frequency-domain studies on  
              ultrafast dynamics of solutions and neat liquids.  The spontaneous   resonance
              emission of short-lived photodissociative molecules in   high-pressure gases
              (approaching liquid densities), liquids, and   supercritical phases will be
              analyzed as a probe of time scales of   solvation, optical dephasing and
              bath-induced nonadiabatic effects.    Classical Molecular Dynamics simulation
              and instantaneous normal mode   techniques will be used to analyze the
              experimental observations.  Two   extensions of femtosecond polarization
              spectroscopy, dispersed optical   heterodyne detected (OHD) birefringence and
              dichroism of transparent   liquids, will be developed.  The role of two-photon
              absorption resonances   in femtosecond pump-probe spectroscopy will be
              explored.     Chemical reactions usually require the elevation of molecules to
              excited   states of energy.  Since the chemistry of molecules under conditions
              of   high pressure, in solution, or embedded in a solid matrix or in a cluster 
               is affected by their  environment, it is important to know and understand  
              these changes in order improve the technology based on chemical    reactions. 
              The research undertaken in this project will  provide a data   base and
              theoretical model for the reaction  kinetics and dynamics of   well
              characterized molecules which are embedded in a condensed phase   medium.  It
              also helps in the understanding of the outcome of many types   of
              light-initiated chemical events.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
