Title       : Dissertation Research: The Relation of Pastoral Production and Exchange to
               Patterns of Regional Settlement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9712999

Award Number: 9712999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Zettler rzettler@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard Zettler, MS Jill Weber will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her project is to understand how early
              civilizations in the Near East  managed, with relatively simple subsistence
              technologies, to feed large numbers of individuals many of whom were removed
              from direct daily contact with the land. In contrast with its southern
              counterpart, Northern Mesopotamia, which forms the focus for this study, has
              low rainfall which makes it marginally productive for rain fed agriculture and
              societies were forced to develop strategies to deal with a highly unpredictable
              environment and frequent droughts. Many anthropologists have postulated that
              large and dense population aggregations could be achieved only through a
              centrally controlled economy which de-emphasized production for local
              consumption and instead focused on specialized intensive and spatially
              desecrate production of agricultural produce and livestock in environmentally
              suitable localities. For such a system to work, an effective redistribution
              system based on independent markets or other alternatives is required to
              minimize risk and move animal and plant products as necessary to create the
              necessary resiliency.  Through the analysis of fauna remains excavated from
              three Bronze Age sites MS Weber will reconstruct the pastoral production
              system. The species of animals raised, the age at which they are slaughtered
              and the relative numbers of males and females removed from the population are
              dependent on a number of factors. Archaeologists have shown that culling
              patterns of animals raised for sale and non-local consumption differ in
              significant ways from that of animals locally consumed. The three sites which
              MS Weber will examine were occupied for substantial periods of time and
              excavation has shown that all were subject to cycles of growth and decline,
              accompanied by increased and decreased political centralization. Through a
              comparison of political and subsistence (as measured through animal bone)
              change it will be possible to understand how early civilizations managed the
              resources necessary for their survival.  This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed
              light on how an early civilization thrived in an environmentally marginal
              situation and help to further the professional development of a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
