Title       : Integration of Information from Internet Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1999 
File        : a9712239

Award Number: 9712239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yannis Papakonstantinou yannis@cs.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Integration of multiple Internet sources poses many novel challenges such as
              handling semistructured data, creating views without complete knowledge of the
              source structure, adapting to the limited query interfaces (capabilities) of
              the sources, and answering queries referring to virtual objects which are the
              result of complex information fusion operations. Recent works have provided
              flexible, though very often inefficient, ways to rapidly develop mediators that
              achieve the above goals. This research develops data structures, algorithms and
              systems which can enhance the performance, often by orders of magnitude, and
              improve the user interface without compromising the development flexibility.
              Data guides are proposed for describing the concepts (or combinations of
              concepts) that significantly appear in each source and in the integrated view
              created by the mediator. Data guide computation algorithms use (1) the mediator
              specification, (2) the parser of the source data, and (3) actual data of query
              results. Mediators and user interfaces are extended to make use of the data
              guides upon query processing and query formulation. This research also develops
              algorithms that (1) further extend the mediator's ability to adapt to the
              limited capabilities of the sources, (2) use knowledge (e.g., dependencies) of
              the source data to enhance the performance of object fusion queries, and (3)
              optimize the delivery of partial answers. This research will demonstrate how
              flexible integration systems (such as systems for constructing virtual malls by
              integrating multiple Web shopping sites or systems for fusing all available
              financial information relating to a company) can be rapidly developed while
              still achieving the performance of hard-to-built custom made integration
              systems.
