Title       : Application of a Tracer Technique to Study Sulfur Dioxide Oxidation in Cloud
               Drops as a Function of Drop Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1997  
File        : a9712436

Award Number: 9712436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178681             (Estimated)
Investigator: Liaquat Husain   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent A. Dutkiewicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9712436  Husain     The majority of the global sulfur dioxide oxidation is
              believed to occur in clouds. The primary mechanisms are oxidation by ozone,
              hydrogen peroxide, and molecular oxygen in the presence of trace metals, such
              as iron and manganese. Recent measurements and cloud chemistry models indicate
              that cloud drop composition varies with drop size. This chemical heterogeneity
              among cloud drop populations has the potential to significantly influence the
              rate of aqueous phase sulfur oxidation, resulting in faster sulfate production
              in large drops. The average oxidation rate in a chemically heterogeneous cloud
              drop population could significantly exceed the rate expected from the average
              drop composition.   This project, to be conducted jointly by groups at Colorado
              State University and at the State University of New York at Albany/ New York
              State Department of Health, will test the hypothesis that sulfate production
              does not vary with drop size when hydrogen peroxide is the dominant oxidant,
              but can vary significantly with drop size when oxidation by ozone or trace
              metal catalyzed oxidation are dominant. The study will apply a tracer technique
              which was recently developed by L. Husain to measure sulfate production in
              cloud drops. The ratios of sulfate to a conservative aerosol tracer (Se, As, or
              Sb) will be measured both in pre-cloud aerosol and cloud water, indicating the
              proportion of the sulfate that was produced in the cloud. Large and small cloud
              drops will be collected using a size-fractionating cloud collector.
              Measurements of droplet composition and gas phase concentrations of sulfur
              dioxide, ozone, and hydrogen peroxide will also be made to permit prediction of
              sulfur oxidation rates as a function of drop size for comparison with rates
              determined by the tracer technique. Two environments (Whiteface Mountain, New
              York, and Bakersfield, California) have been selected for study to ensure that
              conditions will be encountered where hydrogen peroxide both is and is not the
              dominant oxidan t.
