Title       : Dissertation Research: Natal Dispersal and Reproductive in the Monogamous Dusky
               Titi Monkey, Callicebus Moloch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1997    
File        : a9712519

Award Number: 9712519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Rodman psrodman@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Mason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In most vertebrates, either sons or daughters typically disperse farther from
              the birthplace than offspring of the other sex before breeding. Theory suggests
              that which sex disperses depends on the mating system and the degree to which
              males and females invest care in offspring.  In polygynous mammals males
              usually provide little care, and males disperse farther than females.  In
              contrast, in monogamous birds males often provide substantial care, and females
              disperse farther than males.  There is little understanding of dispersal in the
              few monogamous mammals in which males care significantly for offspring. 
              Through genetic analyses and behavioral observations, this study will
              investigate patterns of natal dispersal in the dusky titi monkey, a monogamous
              South American primate characterized by paternal care. The study will also
              investigate adult reproductive behavior. Despite pairing monogamously, female
              titi monkeys mate with males other than their mates.  Using genetic techniques
              and behavioral observations, this study will establish whether these extra pair
              matings produce offspring and will investigate the factors that guide female
              reproductive decisions and whether they affect paternal behavior and social
              dynamics between paired adults.  The results will broaden understanding of
              factors that affect the stability of the family group in monogamous primates.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
