Title       : Dissertation Research: The Functional Anatomy of Late Pleistocene and Resent
               Human Carpometacarpal and Metacarpophalangeal Articulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9712593

Award Number: 9712593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5396               (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik Trinkaus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the relationships between the shapes and orientations of
              hand joints and the levels and directions of forces normally transmitted
              through the hands of archaic and recent humans. The skeletal samples to be
              studied consist of Neandertals, Near Eastern early modern humans, Upper
              Paleolithic humans (90,000 to 20,000 years B.P.) and recent Holocene humans. 
              Both Neandertals and early modern humans used similar Middle Paleolithic stone
              tools, whereas later Upper Paleolithic  humans are associated with stone tool
              industries having higher frequencies of smaller, standardized tool types which
              required an increased range of both power and precision grips to manufacture
              and employ.   The three-dimensional shape and orientation of the wrist and
              finger articulations are measured using stereo-photogrammetry.  Correlation
              analysis is used to determine the relative contribution of habitual force
              levels and hand muscle mechanical advantages, to between-sample differences in
              joint shapes. The existence of between-sample differences in hand joint anatomy
              indicative of altered frequencies of manipulative behaviors that cannot be
              explained by force transmission levels would confirm that significant
              behavioral differences in tool manipulation existed between Late Pleistocene
              human groups. Ultimately, between-group differences in tool usage could have
              contributed to the eventual adaptive success of early anatomically modern
              humans.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
