Title       : Exploring Image Data-Bases Using Novel Similarity Metrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1999    
File        : a9712833

Award Number: 9712833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir J. Lumelsky                    
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlo Tomasi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonidas J. Guibas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Continued reductions in the prices of mass storage and widespread  access to
              computer networks, especially the Internet, have given  a large number of users
              access to vast amounts of information.  Much of this information is pictorial,
              often ordinary images  stored in digital form. Yet the tools available for
              organizing,  browsing, and interrogating such image data have not kept pace 
              with the volume of information made available.  This research  develops a novel
              way of summarizing and indexing images and other  pictorial data based on their
              appearance, and more specifically  on their color, shape, and texture content.
              These descriptors,  called image signatures, are uniform, compact, flexible,
              robust,  and intuitive. The notion of the Earth-Mover's Distance between 
              signatures is introduced and used to give a metric structure to  the image
              space. This metric structure, together with additional  geometric information,
              is then exploited to provide efficient  nearest-neighbor search algorithms, as
              well as to compute  distance-preserving embeddings of the image space, or
              portions  thereof, into a low-dimensional Euclidean space. Such embeddings, 
              obtained using multi-dimensional scaling, allow the user to  visualize
              intuitively both local image neighborhoods of interest,  or the entire image
              space at once. The user is able to navigate  around the image space
              intuitively, with a sense of continuity  and comprehensiveness, unlike current
              systems which typically  present fragments of the data-base in a disconnected
              fashion.  These tools then enable a novel metaphor for exploring image data- 
              bases, making it more akin to the familiar browsing of a library  or a
              bookstore.
