Title       : SGER: A DSP Based Active Power Filter to Cancel Harmonic Currents in Low Voltage
               Electric Power Distribution Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1997     
File        : a9712596

Award Number: 9712596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47494              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wajiha Shireen wshireen@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,9102,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                             ECS-9712596  Shireen    Typical
              low voltage electric power distribution systems are increasingly being
              contaminated with excessive amounts of harmonic currents due to the growing use
              of nonlinear loads.  The resulting electrical "pollution", often propagates for
              miles along the distribution feeders.  More publicized problem cases have been
              caused by large single source offenders such as arc furnaces and megawatt-sized
              adjustable speed drive systems.  These situations have been handled by electric
              utilities on a case by case basis.  However, cumulative problems because of the
              aggregation of thousands of small residential, commercial and industrial
              nonlinear loads are much more difficult to deal with.  Thus, there exists the
              need for new and innovative circuits that can be placed at end user facilities
              and on distribution feeders to reduce harmonic distortions.  This research
              project proposes a Digital Signal Processor(DSP) based active power filter to
              cancel harmonic currents in low voltage electric power distribution systems. 
              In recent years, DSPs have become an attractive means for the implementation of
              measurement and control algorithms, mainly because of their computing speed and
              low cost compared to conventional microprocessors used in control applications.
               The objectives of the proposed research are:    To develop a DSP based control
              algorithm for a single phase active power filter to cancel harmonic currents in
              low voltage electric power distribution systems.    To experimentally evaluate
              the algorithm on a laboratory prototype.    To verify that the DSP-based active
              power filter is capable of providing localized low cost solution to the
              harmonic problem in power distribution systems.  In view of the proliferation
              of power electronics equipment connected to the utility system, various
              national and international agencies have been considering limits on harmonic
              current injection to maintain a good power quality.  The revised IEEE-519-1992
              sta ndard, specifies requirements for the users as well as for the utility
              companies.  Therefore, the proposed research will make significant
              contributions that serve the interests of the utility companies as well as the
              consumers.  DSP-based single phase active power filters as proposed in this
              project can have significant contribution in isolating and neutralizing
              harmonics generated by a group of single phase nonlinear loads (such as
              computers and other electronic office equipment) and thereby protecting the
              upstream distribution system.  This would provide a localized low cost
              solution, that will also be light in weight and occupy minimum space.  The use
              of a DSP based controller will improve the system performance significantly
              compared to existing methods.  Digital control by a DSP will provide fast
              transient response, high performance and increased reliability, in addition to
              the inherent advantages like computational power and immunity to noise and
              drift.  Also, being programmable the DSP-based controller can easily be
              upgraded or modified to meet specific system requirements.
