Title       : Photochemical and Photophysical Processes Involving Fullerenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9712735

Award Number: 9712735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David I. Schuster david.schuster@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The functonalization of C60 and C70 by means of a (2+2) photocyclization   of
              cyclic enones onto the fullerene skeleton will be examined.   The   generality
              and chemoselectivity of the methodology will be developed   through a selective
              use of different enones, and comparisons of the   product distributions
              obtained with C60 and C70 fullerenes.   Mechanistic   details will be
              elucidated with particular attention paid to   understanding why the high
              energy enone triplets prefer to undergo the   chemical reaction with the
              fullerene skeleton, rather than energy   transfer to a lower energy fullerene
              triplet state.   Metalloporphyrins   tethered to the fullerenes will be
              achieved by means of this   photosynthetic methodology, and the photoinduced
              electron transfer   between the tethered fragments examined.   Graduate and
              undergraduate   students will be involved in all aspects of the research
              including its   presentation at scientific meetings.     With this award, the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program   supports the research and
              educational activities of Professors Schuster   and Wilson of the Department of
              Chemistry at New York University.    Professors Schuster and Wilson will focus
              their research efforts on   generalizing a photochemical methodology for
              functionalizing C60 and C70   fullerenes.   Photophysical experiments will be
              undertaken to elucidate   the mechanism of addition and the  factors affecting
              the rate of chemical   reaction with the fullerene skeleton relative to the
              rate of energy   transfer.   Professors Schuster and Wilson involve both
              graduate and   undergraduate in all aspects of the work making the research and
              its   presentation educational vehicles.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
