Title       : Modeling Great Lakes Coastal Transport and Flux
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9712883

Award Number: 9712883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243211             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry J. Niebauer niebauer@sunset.meteor.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9712883  Niebauer    Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement
              of   Opportunity (NSF 97-38) for Coastal Studies in the Great Lakes.   The
              research is being conducted under the auspices of the NSF   Coastal Ocean
              Processes (CoOP) program and the NOAA Coastal Ocean   Program.  This
              collaborative, interdisciplinary research program   will entail an integrated
              program of field and laboratory studies   and mathematical modeling to quantify
              the role of coastal   currents and thermal fronts in mediating cross-margin
              transport   in Lake Superior and Lake Michigan.    The objective of this
              project is to numerically model and   understand the basic oceanographic
              processes that affect and   drive cross-margin and vertical transport in the
              Great Lakes.   This modeling study will consider physical, biological, and  
              chemical interactions with emphasis on episodic and seasonal   weather (wind
              and heat) forcing of vertical and horizontal lake   circulation, and effects on
              events such as primary production.   The ultimate goal is to gain understanding
              to the point of being   able to predict transport of momentum and mass,
              including natural   and anthropogenic material. The transport of natural and  
              anthropogenic material includes primary production in nutrient- 
              phytoplankton-zooplankton loops with emphasis on aggregation of   particles
              (both natural and anthropogenic) and associated   vertical flux and fate.   
              This modeling research will be applied to two contrasting Great   Lakes coastal
              margins for comparison and contrast: Lake Superior   as an example of an
              oligotrophic Lake that is seasonally impacted   by ice cover, and Lake Michigan
              as an example of a coastal region   that is more impacted by anthropogenic
              input. While this research   is aimed at the Great Lakes coastal zone, it is
              directly   applicable to the coastal ocean.  The work requires a  
              multidisciplinary, collaborative research approach and   cooperative
              interaction to fit the various biological, physical,   chemical and met
              eorological model components together and to   gather, apply and interpret data
              for initial and boundary   conditions as well as to verify the resulting model
              results. This   will be accomplished through interaction with investigators and
                laboratories around the Great Lakes. The research will lead to a   better
              quantitative understanding of the processes that dominate   the transport,
              transformations, and fates of biologically,   chemically, and geologically
              important matter across the margins   of the Great Lakes.
