Title       : Broadening Access: Research for Diverse Network Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9712414

Award Number: 9712414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199911             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlotte Linde   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mizuko Ito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vicki O'Day  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Annette Adler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth D. Mynatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst for Rsch on Learning
	      66 Willow Place
	      Menlo Park, CA  94025    650/687-7900

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1092,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The drive toward public and universal access to the National Information
              Infrastructure (NII) has been a significant focus of national attention,
              bringing together policy-makers and activists working in fields such as
              education, community service, and disability rights. As computer networking
              becomes increasingly important, it is crucial to examine whether and how
              diverse social groups use this new technology. Computer networking technologies
              should be useful for a broad spectrum of society, rather than creating yet
              another social division on economic, educational, and generational lines. This
              project addresses this concern through research on SeniorNet, a community of
              computer-using seniors, proposing an in-depth case study of how a
              technologically disenfranchised group has been able to make computers and
              computer networking meaningful in daily life. The premise of this research is
              that access needs to be understood not only in relation to technical and
              economic factors, but also in relation to the social and historical context of
              computer use. The project focuses, in particular, on a sense of online
              community as a key factor in motivating and supporting access to new
              information technology. The analytic framework for this study is based on
              broadening the definition of access to include:1) initial entry, 2) ongoing
              participation in computer-networked activity, and 3) change and development of
              the community over time. Rather than focusing on just economic or technical
              preconditions for use of networking technologies, this study looks also at how
              people learn how to use it, why they find it compelling, and how it is
              integrated into their daily lives. This project is a collaboration between
              computer and social scientists at the Institute for Research on Learning (IRL)
              and the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), involving ethnographic research
              and participation in a process of technological innovation with SeniorNet.
              SeniorNet is a nonprofit organization, founded in 1986, with approximately
              20,000 current members, of whom approximately 4,000 communicate over America
              Online (AOL), and with a new but growing population on the World Wide Web
              (WWW). SeniorNet activities include online bulletin boards and chat rooms,
              face-to-face gatherings at both a national and local level, as well as classes
              in computer use at over 80 learning centers across the county. SeniorNet
              provides a rare case of a successful online community of a group that is
              generally considered technologically disenfranchised. Further, its relatively
              long history provides a rich case for looking at how a group is established and
              develops over time, in relation to changing technical standards. The research
              will involve ethnographic study of the existing practices of community
              organization, with particular attention to ways of gaining (or failure to gain)
              access to the community, and various forms of membership and participation. The
              project will address issues of access and technological innovation for
              technologically disenfranchised groups by providing a case study of a
              successful network community of seniors, informed by an interdisciplinary
              research perspective. The project will produce an ethnography of SeniorNet,
              focused around issues of access, membership, participation, and community
              development, and consideration of its relationship to policy debate around
              access to NII.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
