Title       : Resultants and Implicitization by Moving Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9712345

Award Number: 9712345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152314             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald N. Goldman rng@cs.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The method of moving surfaces is a fundamentally new and  significantly better
              method for implicitizing rational surfaces.  This method has recently been
              applied to address the problem of  multivariate polynomial resultants.  Initial
              successes include  finding  determinental formulae for some sparse resultants. 
              The method of moving surfaces produces expressions that are more  compact than
              previous ones, and unlike previous determinental  formulae do not contain
              extraneous factors.    Multivariate resultants provide a powerful computational
              tool for  solving problems involving polynomial equations in several 
              variables.  While Groebner bases can also be used to solve  systems of
              polynomial equations (as well as answer additional  questions about polynomial
              systems), multivariate resultants are  generally more efficient at eliminating
              variables than Groebner  bases.  Preliminary examples suggest that the method
              of moving  surfaces might be even more efficient than current multivariate 
              resultant techniques.    The method of moving surfaces can be used to attack a
              wide  variety of problems in elimination theory including:  1.  constructing
              multivariate resultants without extraneous  factors  2.  building sparse
              resultants  3.  implicitizing rational curves and surfaces  4.  developing
              inversion formulas for rational curves and  surfaces  5.  intersecting rational
              curves and surfaces  6.  intersecting algebraic curves and surfaces.    The
              method of moving curves has already lead to a new  classification scheme for
              rational curves; a similar scheme for  rational surfaces will be investigated. 
              While rigorous  theoretical foundation for the method of moving curves based on
               ideal theory has been developed, the method of moving surfaces is  currently
              substantiated only by several Mathematica examples  and a few preliminary
              theorems.  Thus the theoretical foundation  is far from complete.  For example,
              the method provides an  algorithm for determining the rows of a matrix whose
              determinant  is a sparse  resultant if it does not vanish.  So far, the method 
              has never failed to produce a non-vanishing determinant, but no  proof exists
              that the method will never fail.  A constructive  proof will be sought.    The
              method has thus far been applied to eliminating one variable  from two
              polynomials, or two variables from three polynomials.  The general problem  of
              eliminating n-1 variables from n  polynomial equations will be studied.
