Title       : Conference on Restoring Wolves to the Adirondacks: Civic Democracy & Obligations
               to Future Generations, October 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1999  
File        : a9712377

Award Number: 9712377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Strachan Donnelley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan Norton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia A. Sharpe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leigh Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Hastings Center
	      360 Broadway
	      Hastings-on-Hudson, NY  107062909    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This two and a half day conference will provide the occasion for a comprehensive
              analysis and rich public discussion of the relationships between civic
              democracy, obligations to future generations, and the particular topic of the
              restoration of wolves to the Adirondacks. The conference will introduce these
              issues to a large, diverse audience including biologists, ecologists,
              philosophers, lawyers, activists, politicians, public policy analysts, and
              members of the media. Particular attention will be paid to the restoration of
              one species, the wolf, through three major realms of inquiry. First,
              philosophers and other humanists will address the moral question by considering
              what obligations current citizens have to future generations and how those
              obligations should be identified and fulfilled. Furthermore, they will address
              what values should guide public policy concerning the particular matter of the
              project to restore wolves to the Adirondacks. Second, the conference will
              involve political theorists, public policy specialists, and politicians, who
              will consider the adequacy of our current political institutions and laws to
              protect the interests of future generations. Particular attention will be given
              to exploring what kind of legislation can best embody contemporary wisdom
              concerning the conservation and restoration of various species. Third,
              biologists, ecologists, and paleontologists will discuss the biological issues.
              Given the radical difference between the time-scales of ecological and
              evolutionary change and human cultural change, they will consider what,
              exactly, is most important to save from a biological point of view.
              Furthermore, they will also address the long-term biological implications of
              the wolf restoration project. An important aspect of this event will be its
              inclusion of speakers capable of addressing three distinct themes within the
              single conference format. Participants from a range of disciplines will be
              carefully selected to explore the major themes. These scholars will make public
              presentations during the conference, and several of them will provide
              additional lectures at various universities and public gatherings elsewhere in
              the state of New York. The conference site is the American Museum of Natural
              History in New York City. The anticipated date is October 21-23, 1998. Papers
              from the conference will be collected in a scholarly book intended for academic
              faculty and students in a range of disciplines as well as general citizens,
              legislators and policy analysts with an interest in the issues of
              intergenerational obligations and species restoration. The presentations will
              be video-taped, so that they can be utilized in distance education and public
              education courses. Finally, the material from the conference will be utilized
              in a university course offered over the Internet. The conference should foster
              valuable public debate concerning its principal themes and contribute to public
              understanding concerning intergenerational obligations, wolf restoration
              projects, and the importance of citizen participation in public policy debates
              with long-term implications.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
