Title       : Image Database: Handling Multiple Objects and Spatial Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1999  
File        : a9712715

Award Number: 9712715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanan Samet hjs@umiacs.UMD.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to investigate issues involved in the
              implementation of image databases containing symbols. The issues involve the
              specification of queries with a preference given to a graphical specification
              as well as the development of algorithms to process the queries. A query is
              specified with exemplars of the symbols that are to be found in the database.
              The symbols in the database are not necessarily classified in advance thereby
              permitting variation in the quality of the match. Queries to the database
              involve matching contextual, and spatial constrains. The order in which he
              different constraints are checked for satisfaction is not fixed, the query
              optimizer chooses the optimal order. The query images can contain one or more
              instances of each symbol. The user can specify if all of the symbols must
              satisfy the spatial constraints or if a maximal subset is also permitted. In
              the latter case, there is a need for a specification technique for the required
              subset as well as for the response. The spatial constraints include topological
              relations such as overlap, encloses, and intersects as well as distance and
              direction. The symbols are not restricted to point objects thereby also
              including objects with extent such as lines and areas. The query processing and
              specification method is integrated with an existing spatial and non-spatial
              database to enable queries about non-spatial attributes of objects
              corresponding to the symbols. The results of this research will improve the
              ability of symbolic image databases and geographic information systems (GIS) to
              efficiently handle large spatial problems, e.g., adding fiber cables in city
              planning.
