Title       : PPD: The Understanding Science Through Captioning Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9712964

Award Number: 9712964
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207121             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy Rubin arubin@cast.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CAST, Inc.
	      39 Cross Street
	      Peabody, MA  01960    /   -

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9712964       The language of science is difficult to learn for many 
              children - but much more difficult for children who cannot hear.   This project
              is designed to bring new technology into the  classroom that can help deaf
              children to succeed in science by  making both the language and the methods of
              science more  accessible and engaging to them.  Project objectives are:    o To
              develop and implement strategies using video captioning  technology to enhance
              student achievement in science at three  schools for the deaf in New England.  
               o To replicate the initial implementation in a school educating  both deaf and
              hearing students.  o To disseminate the findings of the research as well as the
               enhanced curriculum and strategies for its effective  implementation.        
              The project will integrate three building blocks: A  successful science
              curriculum that is already sold nationally, a  pedagogical collaboration with
              teachers of deaf students that has  already extended over three years, and a
              new enabling technology  that has been developed and evaluated specifically for
              children  who are deaf.  The project will bring these three components 
              together creating a science curriculum that offers new  opportunities to
              actively engage deaf children in doing and  understanding science by reducing
              the pervasive barriers of time,  motivation, and instructional methods that
              presently impede their  progress.  The curriculum will be elaborated and
              evaluated in  classroom tests, modified as necessary, and then replicated and 
              disseminated.         The research design includes approximately 50
              upper-school  students in four schools for the deaf.  Acknowledging the 
              impossibility of adequate matching of control and experimental  subjects, a
              full reversal (ABABAB) design will allow evaluation  of whether the
              intervention condition is associated with enhanced  learning.  Both
              quantitative and qualitative methods will be used  to maximize the
              generalizability of the results and to capture  valuable informati on
              obtainable only from individuals.  The four  different pedagogical approaches
              of the participating schools in  the study ensures broad applicability to
              educational settings for  children who are deaf.         The science curricula
              and methods developed in this study  will have an immediate impact in the four
              schools within the  study and on all schools that already use this science 
              curriculum.  Beyond these schools and this specific curriculum,  however, the
              tools and methods developed in this project should  have wide general
              applicability.
