Title       : Trends in Intergroup Contact and Racial Attitudes Among U.S. Youths, 1975-1994
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1998  
File        : a9712026

Award Number: 9712026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75935              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Tuch steve@gwis2.circ.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Sigelman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of trends in racial attitudes among American youth.  Despite
              decades of progress in black-white relations, including a narrowing of the
              racial gap in socioeconomic status and a steady decline in white Americans'
              overt expressions of racial animosity, widespread racial inequalities and
              prejudices persist, and there is some evidence that racial hostility among
              adolescents is on the rise.  This research examines the current status and
              recent history of intergroup relations among American youth, with a particular
              focus on the factors that promote positive interracial attitudes and
              experiences. Drawing on data from a two-decade-long series of nationally
              representative annual surveys of high school seniors ("Monitoring the Future: A
              Continuing Study of the Lifestyles and Values of Youth"), this project will
              examine trends in the racial attitudes and interracial experiences of young
              black and white Americans from the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s and test a
              multivariate explanatory model that links the racial attitudes of youths to
              their opportunities for interracial contact in a variety of formal and informal
              settings. The model distinguishes among three key dimensions of interracial
              contact: opportunities for contact, frequency of contact, and closeness of
              contact; and among four outcomes: adolescents' perceptions of the relations
              between blacks and whites, their degree of concern about racial issues, their
              evaluation of their own personal experiences with members of other races, and
              their endorsement of interracial ties.            By examining the nature,
              extent, and consequences of interracial contact among young people, this
              research will provide new insight into the future of American race relations.
              It will provide needed information about issues of concern to school
              administrators, community leaders, and others concerned with implementing
              effective interventions to improve the racial attitudes of adolescents and the
              racial climate in this country.
