Title       : Questions Stemming From Core Model Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1997  
File        : a9712580

Award Number: 9712580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest Schimmerling   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The area of research is set theory, especially large cardinals  and core
              models.  Many mathematical principles that have been  shown to be independent
              of ZFC (Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with  the Axiom of Choice).  The most
              famous example is the Continuum  Hypothesis, CH.  Goedel showed that ZFC + CH
              holds in his  Constructible Universe, L.  Cohen invented the method of forcing 
              and used it to show the consistency of ZFC with the failure of  CH.    It is
              natural to consider extensions of ZFC by large cardinal  axioms in order to
              resolve otherwise independent questions in  mathematics.  Moreover, the
              collection of large cardinal axioms  forms a hierarchy in terms of relative
              consistency.  Measuring  the consistency strength of a given principle involves
              showing  that the principle is equiconsistent with a particular large  cardinal
              axiom.    Often, Cohen's forcing method is used in obtaining upper bounds  on
              consistency strength. In the other direction, core models are  analogs of
              Goedel's L for theories of the form ZFC + ``large  cardinal axiom''.  Beginning
              with the pioneering work of Jensen,  core models have been applied to obtain
              lower bounds on  consistency strength.  Important recent advances, in both the 
              forcing and core model technologies have led to some  equiconsistencies at the
              level of Woodin cardinals.    Schimmerling will continue his work on pure core
              model theory,  while at the same time attempting to apply core models to 
              questions in descriptive set theory, cardinal arithmetic, and  infinitary
              combinatorics, and, also, to solve some closely  related combinatorial problems
              using forcing.
