Title       : Workshops on Professional Master's Degree Programs in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2000  
File        : a9712840

Award Number: 9712840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146232             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel M. Rankin smr@math.ams.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Mathematical Soc
	      201 Charles Street
	      Providence, RI  029402294    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Three organizations, the American Mathematical Society (AMS), the
              Mathematicians and Education Reform (MER) Forum, and the Society for Industrial
              and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), propose to organize national workshops to
              provide a venue for departments to become well-informed about recommendations
              for graduate studies and existing professional master's degree programs, and
              gain practical knowledge for planning and implementing their own professional
              master's degree program.  Approximately 60 representatives from 35 to 40
              departments of mathematical sciences will participate in the workshops.    The
              mathematics community is being challenged to examine and revise graduate
              education to meet the needs of a variety of constituencies for individuals with
              strong foundations in the mathematics relating to their profession, and to
              provide viable employment paths for graduates with advanced degrees in
              mathematics.  Promoting the development of professional master's degree
              programs is an important way to begin to address these concerns.  Through a
              multifaceted program centered on two workshops, the project will enable
              mathematics departments to make informed responses to the challenges to
              graduate studies by focusing on helping mathematics departments in planning and
              implementing professional master's degree programs, and by developing resources
              to help departments in these efforts.  Creating a forum in which departments
              can evaluate the role of professional master's degree programs with respect to
              the general issues in graduate education enables departments to strengthen
              their graduate programs.  The workshops offer a constructive approach to
              explore a broader role for the mathematics community to support mathematics,
              and to form ties between mathematics and disciplines and professions in which
              mathematics is a crucial component.    The workshop discussions on developing
              professional master's degree programs will be given broad exposure in the
              mathematics community.  Information gathered for the workshop s, and the
              resources developed for the participating departments will be made available to
              the mathematics community.    The organizing committee for the workshops
              includes representatives of the three cooperating organizations.
