Title       : RUI: Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Cluster-Surface and Ion-Surface
               Interactions with High Performance Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a9712538

Award Number: 9712538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark H. Shapiro   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9229,9251,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9712538  Shapiro  This is an award for Research at Undergraduate Institutions 
              (RUI).  The principal investigator will be utilizing high  performance
              computers to conduct molecular dynamics  simulations of cluster-surface and
              ion-surface interactions.  Specific topics will include: the evolution of
              incident ion  trajectories in solid targets following the impact of very 
              energetic clusters; the consequences of intermediate to high  energy cluster
              bombardment (damage, electronic excitation,  sputtering); cluster emission from
              targets following ion and  cluster bombardment, with emphasis on the
              relationship  between the statistics of sputtering events and cluster 
              emission; the utility of cluster beams to desorb material  for mass spectograph
              studies; the charge state properties of  energetic cluster components
              traversing thin targets; the  use of both low and high energy cluster beams for
               micromachining.  Research will be carried out in  collaboration with the Basic
              and Applied Physics Group at  Caltech and with the Le Beyec Group at Orsay. 
              The goals of  the research are to extend the fundamental understanding of 
              cluster-surface interactions; to guide future experimental  research; and, to
              involve promising undergraduate students  in research.  %%%  This grant will
              support research at a predominantly  undergraduate institution.  The research
              involves computer  simulations of clusters of atoms and charged ions striking 
              surfaces of materials.  These type of interactions are  important for materials
              processing, materials wear and for  understanding fundamental aspects of
              surfaces.  The research  will involve undergraduate students and involves 
              collaborations with groups at Caltech and Orsay in France.  ***
