Title       : PEET: Monographic Studies in the Cladoniaceae (Lichen-Forming Ascomycetes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9712484

Award Number: 9712484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $745000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula T. DePriest Depriest@onyx.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel Hammer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rytas Vilgalys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9712484  DePriest    Lichens, the fungi that form symbiotic associations with
              photosynthetic algae or cyanobacteria, are geographically widespread in
              occurrence, ecologically important, but understudied taxonomically and
              phylogenetically despite their representing one-fifth or more of known fungal
              species diversity. This is true in microcosm for the species-rich and highly
              conspicuous lichens such as Cladina and Cladonia, which carpet wide expanses of
              northern forests and arctic tundra as well as isolated patches on exposed rocky
              coasts and tropical sand beaches. These lichens are critical components of
              their ecosystems, especially in northern latitudes where they provide food for
              reindeer and caribou. Various groups within the lichen family Cladoniaceae have
              been the subject of national or regional taxonomic treatments, but the family
              remains unsynthesized on a worldwide basis. The absence of a robust taxonomic
              framework limits the further use of Cladonia as a model system for the study of
              chemical evolution (in "lichen substances"), morphogenesis, and artificial
              lichenization. These taxonomic and phylogenetic matters are being addressed by
              a team of lichenologists headed by Dr. Paula DePriest at the Smithsonian
              Institution, site of one of the world's major collections of lichens, with her
              colleague Prof. Samuel Hammer of Boston University, along with colleagues at
              Duke University and elsewhere in the U.S. and in Finland, home to a strong
              tradition of lichen research.   The team will focus on the c. 11 genera and
              estimated 500 species in the family Cladoniaceae, using existing collections in
              natural history museums and augmenting these with new field collections. A
              major emphasis in the research is the acquisition of new sets of characters for
              taxonomic discrimination and phylogenetic comparison, including molecular DNA
              sequence data and morphological features of hyphal growth of the fungus, the
              so-called podetia. The integration of these various kinds of evidence to
              improve classification and  phylogenetic inference constitutes a pioneering
              model for the modernization of lichen systematics. Products of the team's
              activities will include traditional publications as well as Web-based outputs.
