Title       : Dissertation Research: Pattern of Sexual Dimorphism in Limb Joint Surfaces of
               Catarrhine Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9712585

Award Number: 9712585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11206              (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Jungers wjungers@epo.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the most fundamental issues in the analysis of primate fossil samples is
              the determination of how many species they contain.  Samples that contain
              differently-sized individuals of similar (but not identical) shape often incite
              debate among paleoanthropologists as to whether the sample is made up of two
              related species (one large, one small), or two sexes of a single species (large
              males, small females.)  Theoretically, when two sexes differ significantly in
              size (as in baboons and gorillas), their limb joints may also differ slightly
              in shape.  This is due to the fact that larger males will encounter relatively
              greater joint stress levels than females, thereby inducing differences in the
              surface area of the joints.  Using video imaging and recent advances in
              computer analysis, this study will examine sex-related shape differences in the
              limb joint surfaces of a number of recent Old World primates, including monkeys
              and apes.  This research will reveal exactly how the bones of males and females
              differ, as well as determine whether or not patterns of sex-related shape
              differences are similar across species, or depend upon factors such as how the
              animals move around.  This examination of sex-based differences within modern
              primate taxa will provide a crucial background with which to evaluate current
              fossil assemblages.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
