Title       : Planning Grant: Texas Pre-history: How Do We Know?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9712014

Award Number: 9712014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barry A. Van Deman                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Diffily jdiffily@metronet.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fort Worth Museum of Scien
	      1501 Montgomery Street
	      Fort Worth, TX  761073017    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9712014  Diffily    The Ft. Worth Museum of Science and History will plan
              activities  related to their proposed exhibit "Texas Pre-History: How Do We 
              Know?"  This will be a 10,000 sq. ft. permanent exhibit along with  a traveling
              exhibit and education program menu and will feature a  constructivist approach
              to inquiry-based learning focusing on  archaeological and paleontological
              fieldwork being carried out in  Texas today.  Research sites prominently
              featured in the exhibit  will be several early Cretaceous dinosaur sites
              excavated by  paleontologists Louis Jacobs, and Dale Winkler, Southern
              Methodist  University, and archaeological sites from early Clovis and Dalton 
              Periods being excavated under the direction of archeologist Reid  Ferring,
              University of North Texas.  The exhibits and complementary  activities will
              explore the questions a) what is being learned  about the prehistory of Texas
              b) how do scientists interpret their  findings and c) what don't we know?   
              With this planning grant, they will conduct extensive front end  studies to
              identify key questions that visitors will have when they  come to the exhibit. 
              Meetings with advisors to develop a  conceptual plan for the exhibit and
              educational materials.  During  these sessions such questions as the following
              will be explored.   A) "How can the Museum pre-design multiple mysteries and
              outcomes  to satisfy the interest of diverse visitors...", b) can the museum 
              combine paleontology and archaeology without perpetuating the naive  notion
              that dinosaurs and people lived at the same time, c) what  materials and
              policies will be developed to handle the creationism  vs evolution that might
              arise, and d) how will the challenges of  circulating the traveling exhibit be
              addressed?  Museum staff will  travel to other museums to examine model
              exhibits, and project  staff will work with teachers to develop project-related
              formal  education programs.
