Title       : Automated Perturbation Theory for Hamiltonian Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9712410

Award Number: 9712410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine A. Yelick yelick@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many non-linear problems in dynamics fall under the general  theory of
              perturbations. Important examples include the attitude  and orbital stability
              of satellites, the identification of  molecules by spectroscopy, and the
              stability of beams in  accelerators. These multidimensional systems are not
              integrable,  but perturbation methods can be applied to transform them to 
              approximations with fewer degrees of freedom.  Most of the time,  such
              approximations are performed by elementary procedures with  no mathematical
              sophistication, with the result that the  calculations become enormous. The
              goal of this project is to  build a toolbox for solving dynamical systems,
              specifically  targeted to perturbation methods for Hamiltonian systems.  The 
              toolbox will be flexible enough to treat efficiently different  classes of
              systems will allow researchers to explore new  problems, experiment with new
              transformations, and verify  published results.    As a demonstration of
              usefulness, flexibility and efficiency,  an analytical theory  will be
              developed for lunar satellites at  low altitude. Planners for lunar survey
              missions, such as the  Clementine mission in 1994, seek orbits appropriate for 
              reconnaissance.  They need to predict the long-term behavior of a  satellite in
              order to select an orbit with low eccentricity (for  constant sensor altitude)
              and fixed pericenter (to economize fuel  in maneuvers). At present, orbit
              selection is largely a matter of  guesswork. Using crude approximations,
              planners choose possible  orbits which are then checked by numerical
              integration. Without a  global view of the long-term dynamics, mission planners
              can only  hope they sampled wisely. Generating ``maps'' of long-term phase 
              space from an analytical model will remove the guesswork. Such  maps have
              already proved useful in mission planning for earth  satellites.
