Title       : Broadcast and Epidemic Communication for Managing ReplicatedData
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9712108

Award Number: 9712108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150632             (Estimated)
Investigator: Divyakant Agrawal agrawal@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amr El Abbadi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many commercial database products and application tools are  beginning to
              support data replication to provide ready  access to data in distributed,
              mobile, and disconnected  environments. Most of these systems have chosen to
              use  asynchronous replication schemes in which updates to  replicas are not
              synchronized. Although these schemes  perform reasonably well for single object
              updates (i.e.,  environments such as file-systems), they are not suitable  when
              a single update involves multiple objects (i.e.,  transactional environments).
              This project investigates the  benefits of using synchronous and asynchronous
              broadcast  mechanisms for managing replicated databases. Broadcast  primitives,
              viz., reliable broadcast, causal broadcast, and  atomic broadcast, will be used
              to design new protocols for  synchronous replication.  In synchronous
              replication,  transactions accessing replicated data are synchronized with 
              other transactions in the system.  In asynchronous  replication, transactions
              execute locally and other means  are used to disseminate their effects globally
              as well as to  detect and correct inconsistencies.  The epidemic model of 
              communication will be used as the transport mechanism here.  Pessimistic as
              well as optimistic replication protocols will  be developed to maintain
              replicas asynchronously. Finally, a  simulation framework will be developed to
              evaluate the  protocols for synchronous and asynchronous replication.
