Title       : GOALI: The Structure Sensitivity of Photochemical Reactions on Titanium Dioxide
               Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1997     
File        : a9712606

Award Number: 9712606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66192              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory S. Rohrer gr20@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Morris-Hotsenpiller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9712606  Rohrer    Systems based on solar activated titania photocatalysts have
              the  potential to effectively and economically remove or degrade toxic 
              impurities in air and water.  Recent research conducted by the  principal
              investigator of this proposal has recently demonstrated  that some surfaces of
              titania, TiO2, are better at catalyzing the  relevant reactions than others. 
              If the anisotropy of this  catalytic property were understood more completely,
              it might be  possible to improve the reactivity of titania photocatalysts 
              through structural or microstructural modifications.  Therefore,  the objective
              of this project is to define this  orientation-reactivity relationship and to
              identify the mechanism  responsible for this phenomenon.  The photocatalytic
              activity of  surfaces with known orientations will be determined using direct 
              microscopic analysis.  Electron back scattered diffraction  patterns will be
              used to determine the surface orientations of  many grains in a titania
              polycrystal and Auger electron  spectroscopy will be used to assess the surface
              chemical  compositions of the same grains.  After using atomic force 
              microscopy (AFM) to determine the morphological structure of each  surface,
              they will be used to photocatalyze the reduction of Ag+  from aqueous solution.
               The amount of silver deposited on each  grain will be estimated on the basis
              of AFM images and taken as a  measure of the relative reactivity of each
              surface.  Parallel  experiments will be conducted on low index, homogeneous,
              high  purity titania epi-layers grown on sapphire. Based on such  measurements,
              we will determine the orientation dependence of the  relative photocatalytic
              activity.  %%%  The outcome from this GOALI project will be a surface 
              orientation-surface property relationship for the photocatalytic  activity of
              titania.  Defining this relationship will not only  advance our inowledge of
              titania photochemistry, it will also  demonstrate methods that can be used to
              systematically determine  the full  orientation dependence of other surface
              phenomena such  as corrosion and wear.  ***
