Title       : RPG: Quantitative Assessment of Performance in Complex Multisensory
               Human-Interface Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9712526

Award Number: 9712526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18430              (Estimated)
Investigator: Corinna E. Lathan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,9221,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The  objectives  of  this planning  grant  are  to  identify  important 
              human-interface  design  issues  associated  with  complex  multisensory 
              interface, to  identify  quantitative  measures  to  assess  performance in
              environments  that  use  these  interfaces,  and to develop projects  using 
              advanced  interfaces   in  the  rehabilitation  community.    Possible 
              applications  include  virtual  reality  therapy,  web-based  quantitative 
              assessment,  and the  interfacing  of  medical  devices with telecommunications
              to provide care in the  home  (tele-care).   The methodology will be to explore
               potential  advanced  interfaces from a human computer interface  design 
              perspective  and  also  to explore methods  for  quantifying  performance  in 
              such  environments.   Two  tasks  will   be  accomplished  during the time
              frame of the  planning  grant,  assessing interface hardware and designing
              evaluation tasks.  Theoretical models of the human as an information  processor
               can  help  to  approach the evaluation of input  and  output  devices  for  2D
              and 3D tasks.  A conceptual model  will  be  developed to identify and assess
              the important parameters of  these  devices.  In particular, the human control
              loop  will  be  focused  on  to  optimize human  performance.   Advanced 
              interface devices may include 3D mice, hand/finger trackers,  head  and  eye 
              trackers,  and  haptic  interfaces.   Haptic  interfaces   are  of  particular 
              interest   such   as   the  interaction   of   force  and  visual  feedback  
              on   human  performance.  Classic human performance methods will be used  to 
              test  the  interface devices.  A test  battery  will  be  developed  to 
              evaluate the appropriateness of using  simple  tasks  for  assessment of
              performance.   Measures  of  motor  control  will be tested using a movement
              time task based  on  Fitts law and classic teleoperator tasks such as "peg in
              the  hole" will be used to test manipulation capabilities of  the  interface
              devices.
