Title       : TQM in Education: Changing the Culture of Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9712991

Award Number: 9712991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger G. Schroeder rschroeder@csom.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Mauriel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey Maruyama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Schroeder  TQM in Education: Changing the Culture of Schools  Abstract  The
              literature on TQM is replete with examples of failed implementation due to
              unsuitable organizational culture.  However, to date there have been only
              limited attempts to rigorously delineate the type of culture associated with
              successful TQM implementation.  The proposed research seeks to directly address
              this issue by theoretically and empirically defining the type of organizational
              culture which supports, rather than hinders, implementation of TQM and by
              documenting longitudinal changes in organizational culture during TQM
              implementation.  Since public school districts are increasingly criticized for
              having cultures that inhibit organizational change and renewal, this research
              investigates transformation to TQM in US K-12 schools.  A three-stage approach
              will be used to develop an ideal culture for TQM in schools.  In the first
              stage, academics and school leaders will review the literature and convene a
              panel to theoretically define the ideal school culture for TQM implementation. 
              A multi-disciplinary team will consider organizational change, culture, and TQM
              from the literatures of Organization Theory, School Administration, Educational
              Psychology, and Quality Management in constructing multiple methods for
              measuring the level of TQM culture in schools.  In the second stage, the school
              culture of a sample of relatively successful, long-term implementers of TQM
              will be measured to determine their degree of alignment with the theoretically
              determined culture of TQM.  The beginning culture of a second sample of new TQM
              adopters will be measured and a set of hypotheses will be formed about the
              cultural changes needed if TQM is to be successfully implemented in these
              sites.  Stage three will continue the process of tracking TQM implementation
              and school culture in both samples.  As the co-variance of culture and TQM are
              studied longitudinally, tentative conclusions and an enriched theory will
              emerge about the process of changing organizational culture to be more
              TQM-supportive, thereby improving the likelihood of successful organizational
              transformation.
