Title       : The 'CG to MP' Strategy for Animation, Packing, and Related Optimization
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9712401

Award Number: 9712401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147320             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor J. Milenkovic vjm@cs.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The "computational geometry to mathematical programming" (CGtoMP)  reduction
              strategy has three parts.  1) Formulate a task  involving complex interactions
              between non-convex geometric  objects as an optimization problem.  2) Develop
              algorithms of  computational geometry that reduce the geometric problem to a
              non-  geometric optimization problem.  3) Solve the optimization  problem using
              techniques from mathematical programming: linear,  quadratic, convex, and
              integer programming.    Using the CGtoMP strategy, this project will develop
              theory,  algorithms, and software directed towards several related  application
              domains: layout and packing on isotropic materials,  glass, metal, etc.;
              stereo-lithography; molecular modeling,  computer vision, and curve/surface
              fitting; entertainment and  scientific visualization; robust computational
              geometry.  Accordingly, the work has the following specific goals.  Packing 
              and Animation: develop algorithms to pack and animate rotating  and/or three
              dimensional objects.  Geometric Conditioning: by  solving an optimization
              problem, "condition" coordinates whose  values are causing numerical/geometric
              inconsistencies and  thereby achieve robust set operations on curved and/or 
              multidimensional geometric objects.  Realism in  Animation/Visualization:
              formulate laws of motion as an  optimization problem (such as Hamilton's
              "principle of least  action") in a way that can be solved rapidly by a CGtoMP 
              algorithm.  Theory and Experiment: examine both theoretical  complexity and
              practically achievable running times of packing  and animation algorithms. 
              Service to Research Community:  organize available packing problems, make new
              industrial  contacts, gather new data, and obtain the necessary permissions  to
              make this set of problems available to the research community.  Industry
              Involvement: attract money from industry to help fund  application of
              algorithms to specific domains.
