Title       : Local and Central Control Mechanisms in the Barorecptor Vagal Reflex with
               Neuromorphic Engineering Applications to Chemical Process Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1997 
File        : a9712820

Award Number: 9712820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Frederick Bowman                     
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254288             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis J. Doyle   (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Schwaber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Babatunde A. Ogunnaike  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5345,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9712820  Doyle  The aim of this research is to perform reverse engineering of
              the  baroreceptor control mechanism to develop practical process  control
              algorithms.  The primary role of the baroreceptor reflex  mechanism is the
              modulation of blood pressure by regulating heart  rate on a short time frame. 
              From a systems perspective, the  heart is a massively instrumented actuator
              with multiple  hierarchical effector signals from the central nervous system, 
              complex local circuitry, and has as a primary objective the  regulation of
              blood pressure.   In particular, the investigators  plan to study local control
              loops in the baroreceptor reflex.  They propose that these local loops, which
              function independently  of the central nervous system, can be emulated and
              applied to  real-world process control problems.  The investigators will map 
              out motor cardiac fibers associated with the baroreceptor reflex  by using
              fluorescent labeling and confocal microscopy.  The local  control loops in the
              reflex would be carefully analyzed in order  to develop a theoretical
              formulation for locally intelligent  control algorithms.  These algorithms
              would be applied to a  difficult polymerization reactor control problem and to
              local  control valve actuation to overcome performance degradation due  to wear
              or mechanical failure.  The reactor control problem  concerns a difficult
              polymerization grade transition problem,  where the temperature is periodically
              changed to alter the free  radical polymerization of ethylene in a reactor. 
              This system is  subject to an extinction phenomena if the reactor temperature 
              exceeds a lower limit.  The intelligent controller of this  research would be
              used to obtain tight control while avoiding  extinction.  ***
