Title       : Workshop on Shape, Contour and Grouping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9712426

Award Number: 9712426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Forsyth daf@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A  new application for object recognition, indexing image sets in  digital 
              libraries, demands recognition strategies that  are  (1)  effective  in 
              cluttered  scenes and (2)  effective  for  objects  recognised  at  a class
              level - for example, people  or  animals.  These  needs can be met by
              recognition algorithms that  interpret  the  world  in  terms of stylised
              properties in  shape,  shading,  texture  and  colour,  which  are caled 
              'primitives.'   In  this  approach,  objects  are  represented by a collection 
              of  spatial  relationships between primitives.  The primitives themselves  are 
              used  as  a source of grouping constraints.  Recognition proceeds  by  grouping
              together features or regions that could represent  a  primitive,  and then
              assembling groups of primitives  that  could  have come from an object.  There
              is no explicit 3D reasoning, but  the  grouping processes may contain a great
              deal of  implicit  3D  reasoning.   This  approach to shape and  to 
              recognition  unites  themes  studied  in active research programs in computer 
              vision,  both in the United States and in the European Community.  A joint 
              workshop, involving both US and E.C. participants (for whom  E.C.  funding will
              be available), will explore representations that use  grouping  and symmetry as
              a recognition  strategy.   Topics  will  include: shading primitives, image
              shape constraints that  result  from     volumetric    primitives,    building 
                 grouping-based  representations  and  overall strategies for object 
              recognition.  The  workshop will be held in Erice, Sicily, in early 1998.   The
               proceedings will be published as a volume in the Springer Lecture  Notes in
              Computer Science series.
