Title       : Theoretical and Computational Studies of Quantum Dynamical Processes in
               Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2001   
File        : a9712884

Award Number: 9712884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $629000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Voth voth@chem.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gregory Voth is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his theoretical development   of the Centroid
              Molecular Dynamics (CMD) technique, and to apply it to a   number of important
              problems in the area of condensed phase dynamics of   systems with quantum
              degrees of freedom.  The CMD method is based on   computing trajectories of
              Feynman path integral centroids using classical   molecular dynamics
              techniques.  The trajectories are then correlated and   statistically weighted
              with the phase space Feynman path integral   centroid density.  The resulting
              time correlation function can be related   by Fourier transform to the quantum
              time correlation function.  CMD   therefore allows quantum time correlation
              functions to be approximately   calculated with a numerical effort similar to a
              classical MD calculation.    Several applications will be investigated.  Proton
              translocation in   water and the diffusive transport of solvated and hydrated
              electrons will   be treated.  A second area of research involves the
              development of an   initial value semiclassical dynamics approach for condensed
              phase   systems.  This approach would allow the study of both nonequilibrium
              and   nonadiabatic processes, and treatment of nonlinear `system-bath`  
              interactions.  Finally, a formal treatment of activated quantum dynamics   will
              be undertaken to develop a new picture of the quantum mechanical   transition
              state.  Gas phase chemical systems have been studied for a number of years, and
                excellent theoretical and computational techniques have been developed to  
              model their behavior. More recently theoretical and computational methods   are
              being developed that make it possible to treat more complex condensed   phase
              systems. Most of the current theoretical models are classical in   nature and
              cannot deal with the additional complications imposed by   quantum effects.
              Voth's research addresses this additional degree of   complexity and proposes
              the development of computational approaches   designed to permit the treatment
              of condensed phase systems that include   various quantum degrees of freedom.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
