Title       : Biodiversity: Life in the Balance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9712129

Award Number: 9712129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bayley Silleck BSilleck@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Eisner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Marvin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Blue Mountain Film Assoc
	      44 Blue Mountain Church Road
	      Saugerties, NY  12477    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9712129  Silleck    Blue Mountain film Associates Inc., a production company
              formed by the producers of the large format film, Cosmic Voyage, is requesting
              a planning grant of $50,000, of a total budget of $130,000 to conduct
              preliminary work on Biodiversity:  Life in the Balance.  A 40-minute
              large-format film will be the centerpiece of this multi-component science
              education project.  The film will be based on what appears to be a critical
              paradox:  while we humans, like all living things, have always been dependent
              upon natural systems for our survival, our unique cultural development and
              technological prowess have convinced us that we are somehow "above" nature.    
               The following a among major tasks will be accomplished during the five month
              planning period:    * The project principals, a researcher, and advisors will
              create a comprehensive project plan to include a large format film;
              complementary print materials for informal and formal settings; a website; a
              CD-ROM; a video presentation for museums, schools, and home markets; and a
              related traveling exhibit.  * Work with advisors and other scholars to develop
              detailed project content.  * Write and review a treatment for the film.  *
              Develop the museum exhibit component  * Write a detailed script for the film. 
              * Develop draft of outreach plan for advisor review.  * Develop promotion plan.
                 The principals in the project will include:  Bayley Silleck who will be PI,
              Director, Co-Producer, and Writer; Jeffrey Marvin, Co-PI and Producer; and
              Thomas Eisner, who will be a Co-PI and will serve as primary content specialist
              and chair of the advisory committee.  The advisory committee includes:  Niles
              Eldredge, American Museum of Natural History; Jane Lubchenco, Oregon State
              University; Peter Raven, Missouri botanical Garden; and Edward O. Wilson,
              Harvard University.
