Title       : PEET: The Euglenoid Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9712241

Award Number: 9712241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Triemer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Farmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9712241  Triemer      In a multi-institutional project to study the systematics
              and phylogeny of the commonly observed Euglena and its not-at-all-commonly seen
              protistan relatives, Prof. Richard Triemer of Rutgers University and colleagues
              Dr. Mark Farmer at University of Georgia and others have designed a
              comprehensive program of morphological and molecular investigatons of these
              unicellular flagellates. Morphological studies include traditional
              light-microscope observations, with electron-microscope investigations of
              subcellular features, on field-collected and laboratory-cultured material.
              Molecular studies include nucleotide sequencing of ribosomal and other genes,
              to acquire DNA data for assessing mutational differences between taxa, in turn
              for constructing phylogenetic trees that group the organisms with their
              genealogical relatives. Euglenoids include the commonly studied "green" or
              photosynthetic (autotrophic) forms, but are more commonly found in nature as
              colorless, heterotrophic forms that ingest other organisms as prey.
              Ultrastructural and new DNA data confirm that they are closely related to
              parasitic flagellates or trypanosomes, including forms that cause African
              sleeping sickness and Chagas disease. These protistan groups may be among the
              earliest known lineages of eukaryotes with mitochondria, and with a fascinating
              propensity to harbor other symbiotic or partially symbiotic organelles.  
              Research and training in a broad array of theoretical and practical issues in
              modern systematics involve colleagues in Australia and in Argentina, who also
              facilitate collecting of Southern Hemisphere taxa. The scientific names and
              classification of the euglenoids have been confused by a history of separate
              treatments under either the Botany Code (when considered "green" algae) or the
              Zoology Code (when considered predatory flagellates); one aspect of the project
              is to achieve concordance in the names of all the species and higher-rank taxa.
              Web-based products include high-quality images of the  numerous forms, many of
              which are poorly known even to scientists, along with identification keys and
              descriptive treatments of the biological variation found among these organisms
              in nature.
