Title       : Combustion Reactions Induced by Ball Milling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9712141

Award Number: 9712141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224167             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laszlo Takacs takacs@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9712141  Takacs    This grant investigates the mechanochemical processes 
              involved in the initiation of combustion by ball milling.  When a highly
              exothermic powder mixture is milled, the  mechanical agitation ignites a
              self-sustained combustion  after an activation time.  Milling is the ideal tool
              with  which to study the mechanism of mechanochemical reactions  because the
              ignition phase is a well-defined critical state  in the activation process. 
              The theoretical modeling  includes consideration of the initiation of
              combustion by  single collisions of the milling balls and the propagation  of
              the combustion front away from the impact sites.  The  modeling of ignition is
              supported by experimental studies of  the interrupted combustion effect, the
              mutual suppression of  combustion in a mixture of combustive powders, and the 
              repeated combustion effect.  Reactions with titanium,  zirconium, and hafnium
              and the formation of chalcogenides  are among the reactions to be examined. 
              Measurements  include the temperature of the milling vial and activation  times
              to combustion.  X-ray diffraction and electron  microscopy are used to
              characterize the powder at different  stages of the process with emphasis on
              samples taken just  prior to combustion.  The thermal ignition of combustion
              and  the relaxation of activated samples are studied by  differential thermal
              analysis and heating curve  measurements.  %%%  The initiation of chemical
              reactions by ball milling is used  in several technologies, including the
              preparation of  metastable alloys, refractory powders, and nanocrystalline 
              materials.  Further advancements depend on improved  fundamental understanding
              of the complex processes involved.  ***
