Title       : A Diet of Snow: Energetics and Nutrition of Leptocephalus Larvae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1999      
File        : a9712572

Award Number: 9712572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Torres   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Leptocephali are the unusually large, transparent larvae of five orders of
              bony fishes. They are found at warm temperate and tropical latitudes throughout
              the world ocean and during peak periods of reproduction form an important
              component of the blue water micronekton/macrozooplankton community. However,
              their importance is not one of numbers and biomass, it is in the fact that they
              are (polar oceans excepted) a globally distributed group of unique trophic
              specialists. For the 230 years between their discovery and 1993, a phase I
              leptocephalus was never observed with food in its gut. However, recent
              histological evidence suggests that phase I leptocephali may ingest larvacean
              houses and zooplankton fecal pellets. Further evidence suggests that
              particulate organic material (POM) and dissolved organic matter (DOM) provide
              an important source of nutrition.  Both particulate and dissolved organic
              material comprise the major carbon reservoir in the world ocean, yet their
              significance to pelagic metazoan life remains a cipher.  To describe the
              leptocephalus trophic niche, larvacean houses and the larvae will be examined
              and the proteoglycan structure of both will be determined; gut morphology will
              be examined (including gut contents, if present) in four different species.
              Sites of nutrient uptake will be determined via radiolabelled amino acids and
              autoradiography. Daily metabolic demands will be quantified by determining diel
              consumption rates of individual larvae. Growth of the larvae will be determined
              by microincremental analysis of otoliths and compared to growth indices
              determined by RNA DNA analysis. Proximate and elemental composition will
              provide values for the calories and carbon stored in the living populations and
              their daily production.  The leptocephalus larval form may be the only example
              of a vertebrate that obtains its nutrition from DOM and POM. If this is the
              case, leptocephali would comprise a unique trophic link in the pelagic food
              web. Our research will answer the riddle of how leptocephali acquire and
              utilize energy and describe the leptocephalus larva's position in the trophic
              hierarchy of the pelagial.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
