Title       : Organic Reactions and Syntheses in Water Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9712556

Award Number: 9712556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Breslow rb33@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Professor Ronald Breslow, of the Department of Chemistry at Columbia  
              University, is supported by the Organic Synthesis Program for his studies   of
              organic reactions and synthesis in water solution.  In addition to the  
              environmental advantages of carrying out chemical reactions in water   instead
              of organic solvents, water can also influence the effectiveness   of organic
              reactions. Thus, for example, the Diels Alder reaction is   found to be both
              faster and more selective when carried out in aqueous   solution.  Professor
              Breslow explores the factors influencing such   chemical reactions, focusing on
              hydrophobic effects and on polarity   issues.  He also exploits the hydrophobic
              effect in designing   cyclodextrin-based catalysts and is developing additional
                non-cyclodextrin-based synthetic binding agents which also rely on  
              hydrophobic binding.  His synthetic bifunctional catalysts permit the  
              determination of the preferred reaction geometries for such reactions as   the
              deprotonation of carbon during enolization.  With the support of the Organic
              Synthesis Program, Professor Ronald   Breslow, of the Department of Chemistry
              at Columbia University, explores   chemical reactions in water in place of
              traditional organic solvents.    While the use of water offers clear and
              significant environmental   advantages, it plays a central chemical role as
              well.  Thus, certain   chemical reactions are found to be greatly accelerated
              when carried out   in aqueous solution, and they often lead more selectively to
              specific   products.  These effects appear to be due, at least in part, to the 
               tendency of many organic molecules to aggregate in water so as to   minimize
              their interfaces with the water solvent.  Professor Breslow   exploits similar
              effects in the design and construction of molecules   which bind smaller
              molecules in solution and then carry out desired   chemical transformations of
              the bound molecules, mimicking in many ways   the function of enzymes.  These
              studies are leading to an understanding   of the factors controlling certain
              chemical reactions.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
