Title       : Heterogeneous Nucleation during Solidification of Undercooled Liquid Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  2000    
File        : a9712523

Award Number: 9712523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323475             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Perepezko perepezk@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9712523  Perpezko    Under most conditions, metal alloy solidification is 
              initiated by a heterogeneous nucleation event. While the  study of homogeneous
              nucleation requires a sample free from  all external nucleants, the study of
              heterogeneous  nucleation requires a sample which contains only well known  and
              characterized nucleants.  To circumvent difficulties  encountered in bulk
              systems, a droplet sample technique is  utilized to examine nucleation
              catalysts during  solidification.  In this approach a bulk liquid is dispersed 
              into many fine droplets to limit the influence of extraneous  nucleants.  By
              using droplet samples in peritectic or  eutectic alloys that exhibit a high
              undercooling before  nucleation and equilibrating the alloys in the
              liquid-plus-  solid two-phase field, the catalytic effects of the  different
              primary solids on subsequent nucleation in the  liquid are examined without the
              possible influence from a  foreign substrate.  A new approach with droplet
              samples  involving pure metals with incorporated stable solid  particles has
              been established which extends the scope of  nucleation catalysts that can
              examined.  With this approach,  reproducible experimental studies of
              heterogeneous  nucleation can be designed under well-defined conditions for 
              analysis of the nucleation kinetics.  The process is modeled  using the
              spherical cap model which has a number of  deficiencies that are addressed in
              order to develop real  understanding of catalysis reactions.  In past research 
              nucleation kinetics measurements during continuous cooling  in a well defined
              system have been conducted.  The results  indicate the importance of nucleation
              site dynamics, but  also point out limitations of  continuous cooling approach 
              to nucleation kinetics.  As the result, an alternate, more  effective approach
              based on isothermal holding treatments  has been developed and will be applied
              in this renewal  effort.  A suitable system based on Bi-Cd alloys, where 
              single nucleation kinetics has been isolate d, is examined  and selected sample
              modification to include alloying of both  the substrate or the nucleus is
              pursued to provide  quantitative evaluation of the effect of disregistry on 
              nucleation kinetics behavior.  %%%  Nucleation is an important aspect in metal
              alloy  solidification. This effort represents the most  comprehensive
              quantitative heterogeneous nucleation kinetics  evaluation during
              solidification that has been conducted to  date.  ***
