Title       : Cognitive Processes in Understanding Metaphor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9712601

Award Number: 9712601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sam Glucksberg sang@pucc.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     Ambiguity is an inherent characteristic of natural language use. Many
              words, for example, have multiple meanings, e.g., the word port can mean a
              wine, a harbor, the left side of a ship, etc.  Sentences can also have multiple
              interpretations, e.g., who is doing the visiting in the sentence visiting
              enemies can be dangerous?  Despite such ambiguities in natural language, people
              are able to understand one another reasonably well.  How people decide among
              alternative interpretations has been studied extensively and is now fairly well
              understood.  However, there is an additional type of ambiguity that remains
              unexplored and is not well understood:  the ambiguity between literal and
              nonliteral interpretations of utterances.  How do people choose among the
              several possible interpretations of any utterance?       Traditional theories
              of nonliteral language use do not go beyond the notion that people will search
              for a nonliteral interpretation whenever a literal interpretation does not make
              sense in context.  How this search is done remains a mystery.  We plan to study
              how people arrive at nonliteral interpretations in various contexts.  We will
              focus on three important types of nonliteral language:  metaphor, irony and
              idioms.  The central question is, how do people combine the literal meanings of
              utterances with the conversational context so that a speaker's intended meaning
              is understood?  The first step will be to determine the communicative functions
              of these types of nonliteral language use.  With respect to metaphors, for
              example, why do speakers choose to use the metaphor form, such as my job is a
              jail instead of the presumably simpler literal form, my job is like a jail? 
              The uses of metaphor, irony and idioms will be assessed by determining what
              people understand and remember when various forms of communication are  used. 
              Information transmission will be assessed, as well as connotations and
              perceptions of speakers' intentions and attitudes.  The second step will be to
              identify the contextual cues that people use to understand utterances as
              literal or nonliteral.  We have already shown that people will arrive at
              nonliteral interpretations even when literal interpretations do make sense,
              suggesting that the standard literal-first theory is incomplete, at best.      
              The overall goal of the research program is to develop a more adequate
              description of how people understand nonliteral language.  This is a necessary
              component of the theory of language use and comprehension.  Such a theory, in
              turn, is necessary for developing more effective educational methods and
              materials, and for developing workable machine language recognition and
              comprehension devices.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
