Title       : Center for Documentation of Endangered Languages Sound Laboratory Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1997    
File        : a9712479

Award Number: 9712479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45016              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Parks parksd@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1327,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Douglas Parks will purchase
              computer related equipment which will permit a significant upgrade to his
              Center for the Documentation of Endangered Languages Sound Laboratory (CDEL). 
              The goal of this unit is to record Native North American languages which are in
              imminent danger of extinction and the approach taken permits incorporation of
              sound and written information in a single format. Therefore researchers,
              students and native speakers of a language can view a word in written form,
              hear it spoken at the same time and also obtain supplementary information. This
              system is currently in the beta testing stage and the NSF-provided equipment
              will provide a valuable upgrade and addition. The components include a Iomega
              Jaz drive archiving system which will provide a large storage capacity; a  high
              performance multimedia-equipped laptop computer, an indispensable tool for
              linguistic fieldwork; a Marantz CD recorder which allows the creation of Cds
              for distribution and storage; a DAT recorder system; and desktop PC sound
              machine system.  During the next ten years the languages of some of the most
              prominent American Indian tribes - Arikara, Assiniboine, Comanche, Delaware,
              Mandan, Osage, Pawnee - are going to die out when the last elderly speakers of
              those languages pass away. For each of them there are fewer than a dozen fluent
              speakers still living. For many other languages the decline in use of the
              native language has reached a crisis stage. For young Native Americans who wish
              to learn their natal languages, suitable examples and instructional materials
              are not available. To meet both preservation and educational concerns the CDEL
              has developed a multimedia dictionary format and has begun to enter data from a
              series of languages. It is also designing teaching modules. Language not only
              provides a source of identity for cultural groups, but they also offers
              valuable insights into the functioning of the human mind. This award will help
              to provide an invaluable data base for future generations.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
