Title       : The Application of Archaeometric Ceramic Data to Questions of State-Level
               Organization: A Case Study from Messenia, Greece
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1997    
File        : a9712431

Award Number: 9712431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9025               (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. T. Douglas Price, Mr. Michael Galaty will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He work has both substantive and
              methodological goals. On a substantive level he wishes to determine the degree
              to which centralized economic control played a role in the rise of early Greek
              state level societies. Methodologically, Mr. Galaty will compare the usefulness
              of petrographic vs. weak acid analysis of ceramics to determine ceramic
              groupings. Anthropologists wish to know how state level societies arise and are
              maintained. What forces in technologically simple societies allow elites to
              establish and maintain control? Many have argued that control over crucial
              economic resources plays a significant role and early Greek texts suggest that,
              in this region of the world at least, this factor comes into strong play. Based
              on the results of preliminary research however Mr Galaty believes that the
              situation is more complicated. In a chemical analysis of ceramic `course wares`
              - non-ritual ceramics which served every day functions such as cooking and
              storage - individual regions produced their own pots according to their own
              formulas from clays collected at a number of sources. This implies lack of
              centralized control over a vital resource. In the current project Mr. Galaty
              will increase his sample size to determine whether this conclusion is, in fact,
              statistically significant. He will also analyze a class of fineware which
              served as wine drinking cups and likely had a ritual function. He postulates
              that centralized control, if exercised, occurred in this more formal realm.
              Chemical analysis will permit him to determine if clay sources and production
              methods are more standardized as theory would predict. In this research both
              trace element analysis via weak acid extraction and more standard and widely
              accepted petrographic analysis will be conducted. Comparison of the results
              will serve to evaluate the validity of a weak acid extraction approach. If its
              validity is confirmed it will provide a rapid and low cost tool for trace
              element studies.  In addition to its methodological and substantive
              contributions, this research will assist the professional development of a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
