Title       : SGER: Same-Age Unrelated Siblings: A Unique Test Within- Family Environmental
               Influences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1998    
File        : a9712875

Award Number: 9712875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5630               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Segal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER).  Unrelated siblings of the same
              age, reared together from early infancy, uniquely replicate the rearing
              situations of dizygotic twins. These dyads offer a new behavioral-genetic
              research design for examining genetic and environmental influences on behavior.
              Early findings show a substantially smaller IQ correlation for unrelated
              siblings reared together than for monozygotic twins, dizygotic twins and
              siblings, respectively. This finding supports an explanatory model of
              intelligence that includes genetic factors. The very modest IQ similarity
              between unrelated siblings reared together, despite their common rearing since
              infancy, suggests that the shared environment has a very small effect on
              intellectual development, and supports the position that individuals respond to
              environments in ways consistent with their genetic predispositions. The results
              also challenge the views of some critics that the behavioral resemblance of
              monozygotic twins is primarily a function of shared experience. An additional
              ongoing analysis is examining the similarity of unrelated siblings reared
              together on scales from the Child Behavior Checklist and comparing the
              magnitude of similarity with published data for twins, siblings and adoptees.
              Outcomes from this study can assist parents and educators concerned with the
              progress of near-in-age siblings, both unrelated and related. Differences in
              intellectual outcome, despite similarity of educational and social
              opportunities, should increase sensitivity to the individual talents of each
              child, and encourage informed appraisal of the educational aims and goals for
              each sibling.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
