Title       : Transition-Metal Nitrido Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9712775

Award Number: 9712775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy M. Doherty nmdohert@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program with a contribution for instrumentation from the Office of  
              Multidisciplinary Activities supports reseach on bridged nitrido   compounds by
              Dr. Nancy M. Doherty, Chemistry Department, University of   California at
              Irvine.  New polynuclear, oligomeric, and polymeric   compounds in which
              nitrido ligands link transition metals will be   synthesized.  A variety of
              metals would be used, including vanadium,   tungsten, ruthenium, and osmium. 
              Although a simple ligand, nitride   engages in pi-bonding that can result in
              large metal-containing   structures with a variety of electronic, magnetic, and
              optical   properties.  Spectroscopic and physical methods will be used to  
              characterize the compounds so that composition and structure can be  
              correlated  with reactivity and electronic properties.  The goal of the  
              investigation is to achieve a molecular level understanding of  
              polymetallonitrides by building a series  of compounds ranging from   small,
              soluble polynuclear species that are amenable to characterization   in solution
              to large polymeric materials.  In this way, more systematic   approaches to
              synthesis and control of bulk properties might be achieved.  Metal compounds
              containing nitride have potential for development as   electronic materials,
              but a controlled route to their synthesis has not   been found.  By examining
              the steps in the formation of crystalline   metal-nitride chain compounds,
              understanding of the details of formation   and of the relationship of
              structure and properties may result.  The   findings are relevant to the
              rational design of metal nitrides and the   mechanism of forming polymeric
              inorganic materials in general.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
