Title       : Development of Polymer Bonded Magnets with Enhanced Magnetic Properties for High
               Temperature and Aggressive Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a9712688

Award Number: 9712688
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337136             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua U. Otaigbe otaigbe@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1024,1504,1771,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9712688  Otaigbe    This GOALI research program investigates the role of 
              magnetic particle morphology, concentration and distribution  on the
              processing, and magnetization behavior of bonded  magnets. The heat resistance
              of bonded magnets can be  improved by selecting heat resistant binders and high
               temperature polymers.  However, the use of high temperature  engineering
              polymers is limited by the oxidizing behavior of  the magnetic alloy powders at
              the polymer processing  temperatures.  Thermal stability of the rare earth
              magnetic  powders at the desired temperature ranges can be improved by 
              suitable surface treatments.  The energy product can be  improved by optimizing
              the fraction of magnetic powders and  careful control of the particle
              morphology and particle size  distribution.   A fundamental understanding of
              the  interaction between the polymer matrix and magnetic powders  is essential
              in developing suitable powder coatings to  improve the thermal stability of the
              powders.  Surface  coatings which are chemically compatible with the polymer 
              binder are investigated.  The study focuses on evaluating  various types of
              polymer binders, such as polyphenylene  sulphide (PPS) and liquid crystal
              polymers (LCP).  In  addition the rheological behavior of the polymer 
              binder/powder mixtures is studied for improving  processability.  Based on the
              experimental data obtained,  theoretical models are developed to predict the
              optimal  concentrations and distributions of magnetic powders.  The  project
              involves a collaboration between Iowa State  University and Arnold Engineering
              Company, a leading  manufacturer of magnetic materials in the United States. 
              The graduate student will spend three summer months at  Arnold Engineering
              assisting in elevated temperature testing  of the samples.  This project is
              jointly funded by the MPS  Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and the
              Division of  Materials Research.  %%%  Polymer bonded magnets are widely being
              used in many  automotive and nonautomotive appli cations.  A need exists to 
              develop bonded magnets with higher energy products that can  withstand
              operating temperatures of at least 180 C and  higher.  A key issue is the
              identification of suitable  magnetic powders and polymer matrices which can
              perform  satisfactorily at the desired higher temperatures.  ***
