Title       : Community Development and Structure at Hydrothermal Vents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1997   
File        : a9712233

Award Number: 9712233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200169             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lauren S. Mullineaux lmullineaux@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1319,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     The community ecology of hydrothermal vents has only begun to be
              investigated by examinations of the physiological ecology of adaptations in
              component vent biota and descriptive analyses of species occupation patterns.
              In Dec 1994, these scientists initiated a project at 9Ý50' N on the East
              Pacific Rise to take true advantage of the power of the deep submersible ALVIN
              to conduct experimental interventions in this deep sea environment, testing
              hypotheses to explain observed patterns of community development in space
              (zonation) and time (succession). During 3 cruises over 13 mo, 352 basalt
              settlement blocks were deployed in each of 4 zones (Tubeworm, Bivalve,
              Suspension feeder, and Periphery) at 3 vents to test experimentally how
              recruitment patterns are influenced by larval supply, physiological
              adaptations, and species interactions.        This renewal award involves
              transplantation and recovery of the 123 blocks still remaining on the seafloor,
              on which sufficient colonization and growth will have occurred to enable the
              test of how biological interactions modify development of zonation and
              succession patterns after the early colonization phase.  The focus will be
              specifically on the role of ( I ) competition for space among tubeworms (Riftia
              vs. Tevnia and Oasisia; and mussels vs. Riftia), (2) suppression of larval
              colonization by adult mussels, (3) predation by crabs and fishes in mediating
              interactions between competing guilds (grazing gastropods vs. sessile space
              occupiers), and (4) historical faunal occupation in repressing community change
              as venting fluxes wax or wane. Analysis of how different biological
              interactions influence community development along the environmental stress
              gradient with distance from venting source has fundamental ecological
              significance because the spatial gradients in physiological stress and
              environmental productivity in vents are confounded in the opposite way from the
              rocky intertidal and virtually all other communities from which comes our
              present understanding of how biological interactions vary along environmental
              stress gradients. The project will  also address whether larval settlement is
              altered by the species composition and cover of pre existing biota, a theme
              specific to objectives of the RIDGE LARVE (Larvae At Ridge VEnts) Project and
              fundamental to the Temporal Variability component of RIDGE.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
