Title       : Object Recognition in Cluttered Scenes Using Appearance-Based Parts and
               Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9712598

Award Number: 9712598
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir J. Lumelsky                    
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257606             (Estimated)
Investigator: Octavia I. Camps camps@whale.ee.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The recognition of general three-dimensional objects in cluttered  scenes 
              remains a challenging problem. In particular, the  design  of  a  good 
              representation suitable to model  large  numbers  of  generic objects that is
              also robust to occlusion and segmentation  problems,  has been an stumbling
              block in achieving  success.  In  this  research, a new representation using
              appearance-based parts  (ABPs)  and   relationships (ABRs) is proposed to
              overcome  these  problems. ABPs  and ABRs are defined in terms of closed 
              regions,  segmented  using the Minimum Description Length principle,  whose 
              appearance  is obtained from collections of images and  compactly  stored  in 
              a  hierarchical structure of parametric  eigenspaces.  This  new 
              representation allows the representation of free  form  objects and has several
              appealing features, namely (1) robustness  to  segmentation  problems, since it
              is  learned  from  segmented  images; (2) robustness to occlusion steming from
              the fact that it  is  based  on  parts  rather than on global properties;  and 
              (3)  ability to handle large object databases, due to its hierarchical  nature.
               As  part of this research a probabilistic model  of  the  discriminatory power
              of the proposed representation will be  also  developed.   This  model  will be
              used in a  Bayesian  framework,  based  on the PI's previous work, to design a
              recognition system.  The  new  representation and the associated probabilistic 
              model,  coupled  with  a   Bayesian  reasoning engine,  will  enable  the 
              system  to automatically recognize and locate generic objects  in  cluttered 
              scenes.  The main contributions of this research  are:  (1)  a  new  object
              representation capable of representing  large  databases  of generic objects
              that is also robust to segmentation  problems  and  occlusion;  (2)  a 
              probabilistic  model  of   the  discriminatory  power  of  the  proposed 
              representation  and   a  recognition  system based on a Bayesian framework that
               does  not  require  the  use  o f  ad  hoc heuristics;  and  (3)  a  rigorous 
              experimental  protocol  to characterize the  performance  of  the  system in
              the presence of occlusion.
