Title       : Surface Science Studies of Model Supported Vanadia Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1998      
File        : a9712774

Award Number: 9712774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Vohs vohs@cheme.seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Vohs 9712774     Professor John M. Vohs, of University of
              Pennsylvania, will investigate the structure and reactivity of model vanadia
              catalysts supported on single crystal titania, ceria, zirconia, and magnesia. 
              This fundamental research is of relevance to various industrial processes, such
              as selective oxidation and ammoxidation of hydrocarbons and alcohols, reduction
              of nitrogen oxides by ammonia and hydrocarbons, and hydrotreatment of
              heteroaromatics.  HREELS, Auger, RBS, XPS, LEEDS, STM/AFM; TPD of methanol,
              formic acid, water, ammonia and ethylamine; reaction kinetics of the
              atmospheric pressure oxidation of methanol; and reduction of NOx with NH3 will
              be the primary techniques to characterize structure and reactivity.  The
              distinctive feature of this investigation is the vapor deposition of uniform
              (possibly epitaxial) vanadia overlayers and the determination of the strength
              of the support-O-V bonds -- to which the selectivity of supported vanadia is
              usually attributed.  Such strength will be correlated with local structure and
              probe molecule reactivity, and will be varied by the composition and structure
              of the support.  The vibrational characteristics of both supported vanadia and
              chemisorbed probe molecules will be determined with an HREELS technique having
              spectral resolution as low as 8 cm-1.  In addition, the author will study the
              surface-O stretching modes, and the O-V-O bending modes, which are more
              indicative of support interaction than the V=O mode.  Surface species
              (hydroxyl, amino, nitrosyl, methoxy) will be produced by chemisorption and
              desorbed by TPD.  The steady state reactions (methanol oxidation or NOx SCR
              with NH3) will be carried out on a side microreactor chamber to which samples
              can be transferred without air exposure.
