Title       : Paleosol Isotopic Evidence for Environmental Change at Hadar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9712749

Award Number: 9712749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Aronson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel M. Savin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Hadar region of Ethiopia is today a hot, dry, desert zone that lies adjacent
              to the higher, cooler, and more moist Ethiopian Plateau.  The Hadar formation,
              accumulated between 3.4 and 2.3 million years ago, harbors much evidence of the
              history of the tectonic boundary between these regions and has yielded abundant
              fossils of Pliocene age, including Australopithecus afarensis.  The lower 80%
              of this formation, and the source of A. afarensis fossils, was deposited in a
              sedimentary basin characterized by an environment much wetter and cooler than
              that seen today, similar to the modern plateau.  The upper portion of the
              formation reflects the dryer, warmer conditions of today, and is distinct from
              the preceding periods by a recently discovered geological disconformity.   
              Geological strata above and below the disconformity contain carbonates from
              which a climatic stratigraphy can be measured using stable isotopes of carbon
              and oxygen.  Carbon isotopes in paleosols provide a measure of the relative
              abundance of wet-adapted versus dry-adapted plants in earlier time periods,
              while oxygen isotopes in the same strata may be used to infer
              paleo-temperature, -elevation, and relative precipitation.  Comparison of the
              isotopic signals from the stratified paleosols in the Hadar formation to
              contemporary standards in the region will permit a more precise and detailed
              reconstruction of these ancient environments.   Jointly supported by the SBER
              and INT divisions, this project will provide a better understanding of  1) the
              environmental context of A. afarensis,  2) the nature of the physiographic,
              climatic, and environmental transitions at the disconformity, and  3) their
              relationship to biological change and speciation at Hadar.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
