Title       : Transient Intermediates in the Gas Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9712570

Award Number: 9712570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frantisek Turecek turecek@.chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Professor Frantisek Turecek, of the Department of Chemistry at the   University
              of Washington, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular   Chemistry
              Program for his studies of the formation and properties of   transient
              intermediates in chemical reactions in the gas phase.    Molecules and radicals
              of sulfur oxyacids and nitroalkane radicals   relevant to tropospheric
              oxidations, and intermediates in the addition of   hydrogen atoms and hydroxyl
              radicals to nucleic bases, are generated by   fast neutralization of cations
              and anions and studied by   neutralization-reionization mass spectrometry. 
              These studies, combined   with complementary ab initio, density-functional
              theory, and RRKM   calculations, address the stabilities of these transient
              intermediates in   their ground and excited states and permit the analysis of
              their   energetics and the kinetics of their unimolecular dissociation. 
              Chemical reactions often proceed by consecutive elementary steps, each  
              generating a transient and reactive intermediate.  Characterization of   such
              intermediates represents a formidable experimental challenge given   their
              typically short lifetimes and low concentrations.  An especially   challenging
              class of transient intermediates to study is comprised of   those formed by
              high-energy processes such as those that occur in the   stratosphere and
              troposphere, in combustion, and in radiolysis by   ionizing radiation.  With
              the support of the Organic and Macromolecular   Chemistry Program, Professor
              Frantisek Turecek, of the Department of   Chemistry at the University of
              Washington, studies the formation and   properties of transient intermediates
              in chemical reactions in the gas   phase.  Professor Turecek uses
              neutralization-reionization mass   spectrometry, a `non-chemical` technique,
              for the production of the   desired intermediates from simple precursor ions,
              avoiding the structural   ambiguities which can result from their attempted
              production by other   means.  These studies, complemented by computational
              analyses, address   the stabilities and reactivity of these transient
              intermediates, shedding   light on the fundamental events which occur during
              high-energy processes.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
