Title       : U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Quantum and Nonlinear Optics of Strongly
               Interacting Systems and Effects of Atomic Coherences, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2001   
File        : a9712760

Award Number: 9712760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12097              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. S. Agarwal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Physical Research Lab
	      
	      Ahmedabad, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9712760  Agarwal  Description:  This award will initiate a collaborative program
               between the University of Rochester, New York and the Physical  Research
              Laboratory (PRL), Ahmedabad, India under the direction  of U.S. PI Joseph
              Eberly and Indian PI G.S. Agarwal.  The subject  of the research is Quantum and
              Nonlinear Optics of Strongly  Interacting Systems and Effects of Atomic
              Coherences.  Professor  Agarwal, the newly appointed Director of the PRL, is
              leading a  buildup of activities in quantum and nonlinear optics which 
              provides the opportunity for Indian scientists to initiate  research
              collaborations with U.S. scientists having similar  interests.  The topics of
              research are: Atomic Coherence-  Controlled Optical Physics; Quantum Theory of
              Phase Conjugation  and Phase Conjugate Lasers; Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics; 
              Methods for Reconstruction of States of the Field, Radiance 
              Functions--Generalized Tomography.    Scope:  The PIs are highly accomplished
              physicists who have made  many important contributions to the field.  Under
              their  direction, this initiative linking their institutions should lead  to
              new and interesting discoveries in all the proposed research  topics.  Students
              and post-docs at both institutions will be  involved in the opportunities
              afforded by this new initiative.    ***
