Title       : Quasi-One-Dimensional Correlated Electronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  1999   
File        : a9712765

Award Number: 9712765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Campbell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9712765  Campbell  Quasi-one-dimensional  correlated electronic materials offer 
              a unique opportunity for progress in quantum many-body  physics.  The
              theoretical problems are tractable, better  than in higher dimensions.  The
              numerical and theoretical  techniques can be developed and compared with
              experiments  and often against available exact solutions.  This grant to  a
              senior theorist supports work on two related classes of  physically relevant 1D
              models, spin -Peierls and Peierls-  Hubbard models.  Both classes involve
              strong interplay  between electron-electron interactions and electron- phonon 
              interactions, including the quantum phonons.  The research  makes use of many
              of the state-of-the-art techniques, two of  the recently developed variants of
              quantum Monte Carlo, the  Stochastic Series Expansion and Constrained Path
              Monte  Carlo.  In addition,  use will be made of the exact  diagonalization
              techniques, exploiting Maximum-Entropy  techniques for analytic continuation
              and also boundary  condition averaging for extrapolations to the thermodynamic 
              limit.  The calculations will be carried out for the  physical observables such
              as, spin susceptibility, dynamic  structure factors, NMR relaxation rates which
              will also be  compared to the experiments.  %%%  With the advent of
              technological interest in conducting  polymers, the community of condensed
              matter theorists has  found a wonderful opportunity.  Here we have complex
              systems  with subtle electronic and mechanical properties in one  dimension. 
              The latter is mathematically the simplest  configuration to look for complex
              solutions.   It also  proves to be a remarkable touchstone, one where the
              complex  theoretical techniques can be tested for their applicability  and
              accuracy.  This grant is to consider some of the newly  discovered materials
              with novel properties and to search for  ways one can calculate them
              theoretically using cutting edge  techniques.  ***
