Title       : Equality Reasoning: Word and Unification Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1997    
File        : a9712396

Award Number: 9712396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161887             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paliath Narendran dran@cs.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deepak Kapur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns equational reasoning, with emphasis on  word and
              unification problems. The investigation comprises  graphs, congruence closure
              and equational unification, along  with further development of these topics,
              and combinations  of these topics. The objective is to develop new 
              decidability and complexity results, and to design and  implement efficient
              algorithms.  The approach to word  problems will use the rewriting paradigm,
              concentrating on  procedures and data structures for computing 
              complete/canonical sets of rewrite rules.  In particular,  the method using
              SOUR graphs for completing rewrite systems  will be investigated, particularly
              the way in which SOUR  Graphs can be used to develop procedures for solving the
               word problem in certain classes of theories.  The first part of the research
              will be to examine the  procedure in its simplest form, on string rewriting
              systems.  Once methods are developed to solve the word problem in its  simplest
              form, those methods will be moved back into pure  equational logic, and finally
              into full first order  equational logic.  For ground equational theories, the
              plan is to investigate  techniques for computing congruence closures based on
              the  rewriting paradigm developed in studying Shostak's  congruence closure
              method.  Applications to combinations of  decision procedures will be
              investigated.  The relationship  between the congruence closure method and SOUR
              graphs will  be investigated and exploited.  In unification, the concentration
              is on semantic  unification, where some of the function symbols have  semantics
              associated with them, usually specified in the  form of an equational theory. 
              The main focus of the  applications is automated reasoning and symbolic 
              computation.  E-unification problems arising in process  algebra. Knowledge
              representation and constraint solvers  will also be investigated.  Both
              theoretical and practical  issues will be studied: (1) on the theoretical side,
               decidability and complexity issues on various eq uational  unification and
              disunification problems will be investigated-  --this is a continuation of work
              done over the past several  years; (2) on the practical side, the goal is to
              come up  with efficient algorithms along with fast implementations,  making use
              of heuristics. Implementations will be  incorporated into the Unification
              Workbench, a library of  unification algorithms.
