Title       : Wireless Laboratory for Interpersonal Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9712440

Award Number: 9712440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45372              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bertram F. Malle bfmalle@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Orbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1327,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Bertram Malle and John Orbell will
              develop a wireless laboratory for the study of interpersonal cognition at the
              Hill Center, University of Oregon. The instrumentation provided through this
              award will be used to permit wireless communication among subjects and to
              record and monitor the subjects' behavior. The communication system will be
              assembled from commercially available material as off-the-shelf systems are
              considerably more expensive and limited in range. An audio-visual system will
              also be assembled and installed from commercial sources and includes four
              cameras, two computer-controlled video recorders and three 20 inch color
              monitors. The proposed facility will be used by 11 researchers from the
              psychology, economics, political science, sociology and anthropology 
              departments and the individual research projects address a wide group of topics
              from social psychology (intentionality and theory of mind, empathy and
              perspective-taking, personality, stereotyping) and decision and game theory
              (prisoner's dilemma task, collective decision making in juries, emergence of
              structure in groups.)  The equipment will primarily be used in a suite of rooms
              with built-in audio and video capabilities, and with portable information
              devices to provide two-way communication with the experimental subjects. The
              portable information devices serve both for the subjects to enter responses or
              judgments during the experimental sessions, and for the experimenters to
              provide feedback and information to the subjects. The equipment will provide a
              significant advance over the traditional pen and paper methods more typical of
              social psychology and hopefully will provide a prototype for other
              laboratories.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
