Title       : PPD: SPECIAL PROJECT: Interactive Scientific Graph Analysis Project (ISGAP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9712608

Award Number: 9712608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397427             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald A. Morford autofunc@tmn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice McInerney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Automated Functions Inc
	      7700 Leesburg Pike, Suite 420
	      Falls Church, VA  22043    703/883-9797

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9712608  MORFORD  Many middle and high schools encourage students to use
              graphing  scientific calculators to assist in mathematics and science  courses.
               They are used widely in higher mathematics (Algebra I  and above) and in the
              physical sciences.  These calculators  perform scientific functions and have
              built-in screens to display  graphs of analyzed data.  They are valuable tools
              both for  students and teachers.  Unfortunately, graphing scientific 
              calculators are not accessible to visually impaired students.   The Interactive
              Scientific Graph Analysis Project (ISGAP) will  investigate strategies for the
              design, development, and  evaluation of technology that will provide better
              access for  visually impaired students to graphs and scientific expressions.  
              Investigations will be conducted for the purpose of identifying  and testing
              economical materials and procedures that will provide  real time interactive
              independent comprehension of two  dimensional graphs by visually impaired
              students.  The project  should increase the knowledge base regarding
              interactive graph  analysis and interactive scientific calculation for visually
               impaired people.  The project will involve visually impaired  students,
              teachers, and parents in all phases of the research  project.  Training will be
              required so students and teachers  understand how to operate this new
              technology.  Online help  assistance will be designed into the system from the
              beginning.   The project will begin with the development of customized 
              software that will run on a PC.  Off-the-shelf peripherals will  be used to
              keep final product costs low.  Specific project  objectives are:  (1) 
              Determine ISGAP requirements and design  user interfaces, (2) Interface
              peripherals and design and develop  software, (3) Design, develop, and test
              functions for  interpreting graphs, and (4) Field test and evaluate product.  
              This project should significantly impact the ability of visually  impaired
              students to succeed in math and science courses.  A  su ccessful conclusion to
              this project will lead to production of  an economical hand-held device
              enabling visually impaired  students to have increased equity with their peers.
