Title       : Asymmetric Synthesis Based on Chiral Heterobicyclo{2.2.1}heptanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9712201

Award Number: 9712201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xumu Zhang xumu@chem.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Xumu Zhang,   of
              the Department of Chemistry at the Pennsylvania State University,   explores
              the use of chiral heterobicyclo(2.2.1) heptanes as catalysts and   auxiliaries
              for enantioselective organic transformations.    Phosphine-catalyzed (3+2)
              cycloaddition reactions afford chiral   cyclopentenes with a high degree of
              regio- and enantioselectivity when   mediated by chiral
              phosphabicyclo(2.2.1)heptanes.  Related asymmetric   catalysts are explored for
              their applicability in nucleophilic gamma   addition reactions with alkynes
              bearing electron withdrawing groups, the   Baylis-Hillman reaction, and
              thioether-mediated epoxidation and   aziridination of aldehydes.  Chiral
              azabicyclo(2.2.1)heptanes are   employed as chiral auxiliaries for asymmetric
              deprotonation, enamine   alkylation, and cycloaddition reactions.  It has
              become increasingly important to develop synthetic methods which   allow
              precise control over the three-dimensional form of organic   molecules, since
              even the seemingly minor difference in structure   displayed by two molecules
              related to one another as mirror images not   infrequently leads to a dramatic
              difference in chemical properties.    Professor Xumu Zhang, of the Department
              of Chemistry at the Pennsylvania   State University, with the support of the
              Organic Synthesis Program,   explores methods to effect such highly controlled
              syntheses of organic   molecules.  By exploring and developing reactions which
              are mediated by   specifically designed and tailored phosphorus- or
              nitrogen-containing   molecules, Professor Zhang is able to impart specific
              three-dimensional   forms to the products of these reactions.  In addition to
              developing   practical synthetic methods, Professor Zhang explores the
              mechanisms by   which these molecular transformations take place and targets
              important   drugs and pharmaceutical intermediates to demonstrate their
              synthetic   utility.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
