Title       : Structure and Strategy in Collective Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9712277

Award Number: 9712277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Chwe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Project Abstract  There are many situations in which a new social trend
              `diffuses`  throughout society, including buying a certain brand of computer,
              using  new planting and irrigation techniques, and participation in a political
               interest group.  In these situations, there are two crucial elements.   One is
              the element of individual choice: each person's decision is  influenced by the
              decisions of others (if all my friends buy Macintosh  computers, I would rather
              buy a Macintosh also), but it still comes down to my personal decision.  The
              other is social structure: my choice is  influenced by who my friends are. 
              Although both elements are crucial,  currently in the social sciences, there
              are very few explanations which  include both.  This project develops
              mathematical models of collective  action which incorporate both individual
              rationality (people try to  further their goals) and social structure (the
              patterns in which people  know and interact with each other).  Hence the
              project uses concepts  from both game theory and social network theory.  The
              key assumption is  that explicit communication is the most basic mechanism for 
              coordination, and hence people are modeled as members of a  communication
              network, in which each person talks to her friends.  The  main preliminary
              result is that cliques, subgroups in which each member  knows every other
              member, are sufficient and in some sense necessary for  collective action. 
              Cliques, a basic concept of social network theory,  are crucial for collective
              action because they generate common knowledge, a basic concept of game theory. 
              This result has implications  for understanding the importance of ``strong''
              versus ``weak'' links,  centrality, and dispersion, and suggests an empirically
              verifiable  distinction between ``strategic locality'' and ``information
              locality.''    Rather than seeing structural and strategic perspectives as
              opposed, by  combining them this project can find insights not obtainable from
              either  perspective alone.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
