Title       : Archaeological Survey on Finnish/Russian Border
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9712437

Award Number: 9712437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ezra B. W. Zubrow zubrow@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Milton Nunez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under a NSF Archaeology Program `High Risk Exploratory Grant` Drs. Ezra Zubrow
              and Milton Nunez and their collaborators will survey a 500 meter wide strip on
              the Finnish side of the Finnish - Russian border. For security purposes both
              countries cleared similar areas on each side of the border and only now, with
              the easing of international tensions is the Finnish portion available for
              scientific research. Since much of this region in central Finland is heavily
              vegetated and dense forest will regenerate quickly a unique opportunity with a
              narrow time window has presented itself. The team will conduct a systematic
              surface survey to locate as many sites as possible. These will carefully
              recorded with a global positioning system and particular attention will be paid
              to clusters of occurrences. A magnetometer will be employed to search for
              underground features and surface materials will be recorded. On the basis of
              these remains it should be possible to date the sites to a general time
              interval and to determine basic subsistence mode.  This region of Finland was
              colonized ca. 8,000 BC after the retreat of the terminal Pleistocene glaciers.
              The earliest inhabitants were Mesolithic hunter gatherers. Later peoples
              practiced both reindeer herding and subsistence agriculture. The long term goal
              of the project is to study human ecology and subsistence adaptation in this
              environmentally marginal area. The investigators wish to understand how these
              three distinct subsistence lifestyles interacted: whether they followed each
              other in a linear fashion or co-existed and alternated in a more complex way.
              They also want to determine the relationship of these adaptations to the
              different environmental zones located within the survey area.  This research is
              important because it will provide basic archaeological information on a
              geographic region which is almost archaeologically unknown. It addresses a
              significant question in human ecology and hopefully will lay the groundwork for
              a larger scale research effort.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
