Title       : Dissertation Research: Structure and Dynamics of the Inka Frontier
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9712711

Award Number: 9712711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc P. Bermann bermarc+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Marc Bermann, MS Sonia Alconini will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct six months of archaeological survey
              and excavation in the Chaco region of eastern Bolivia. This area marks the
              western edge of the Amazonian lowland rain forest and the start of higher
              ground which leads to the Andes. It also marks the boundary of the Inka empire.
              The Inka were a highland people who extended their influence through most of
              the Andean Mountain chain and westward to the desertic Pacific coastal margin.
              However they were not able to conquer lowland Amazonian peoples and the Chaco
              marks the border between these groups. Through archaeological evidence and
              early Spanish chronicles anthropologists have learned much about how the Inka
              empire was governed. Much power was exercised indirectly and previous local
              rulers were allowed to retain immediate control. However less is understood
              about what happened at the boundaries of the empire and several models have
              been proposed. One envisions a military situation with forts and other
              fortified strong points and interaction of a hostile nature across the
              frontier. Others see various kinds of exchange and acculturation and movement
              of goods and people across cultural groups. Through a program of survey and
              excavation MS Alconini will examine this question. Inkan sites are known to
              exist in the Chaco and two have been selected for study. Surface collection and
              limited excavation will be conducted. In particular the presence and nature of
              fortifications will be noted and the presence/absence of trade goods indicative
              of exchange will be determined. Survey in the areas surrounding each site
              should yield additional information on the nature of settlement and the types
              of groups present.  This research is important for several reasons. It will
              shed new light on the nature of inter-cultural interactions and boundaries
              between ethnic groups. It will provide basic data of widespread interest from a
              poorly known archaeological region and will assist in training a promising
              young archaeologist.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
