Title       : Science and Technology of Ultrasonic Devulcanization of Rubbers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9712043

Award Number: 9712043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312504             (Estimated)
Investigator: Avram I. Isayev aisayev@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9187,MANU,
Abstract    :
               The main objective of this research project is to develop basic knowledge and
              to design high capacity equipment for the new technology of continuous
              devulcanization of different kinds of reinforced and nonreinforced vulcanized
              elastomers.  Through the application of certain levels of ultrasonic amplitudes
              in special devices, the three-dimensional network can be broken down within a
              short period of time of the order of a second or even less.  As the most
              desirable consequence, ultrasonically treated rubber becomes soft thereby
              enabling this material to be reprocessed, shaped, and revulcanized.  Under
              certain processing conditions, the tensile strength of revulcanized rubber is
              much higher than that of original vulcanizates.  This study outlines a series
              of experiments to (1) identify the effect of the chemical structure of
              vulcanized rubber on the devulcanization process; (2) evaluate the effect of
              the type and amount of filler on the devulcanization process; (3) investigate
              the effect of the ratio of bond energy of the main chain and that of crosslinks
              and rubber-filler bonds on the break up of the three dimensional rubber
              network; (4) establish optimal conditions for the devulcanization and
              revulcanization process enabling one to obtain reclaimed rubbers with better
              mechanical properties; (5) design new equipment for continuous devulcanization
              of vulcanized elastomers; and, (6) develop the theory of ultrasonic
              devulcanization based not only on the process of cavitation collapse but also
              accounting for the network degradation owing to dynamic fatigue in the vicinity
              of stable pulsating cavities.  Since the dynamic fatigue processes are specific
              to polymer chemical structure as well as to rubber network topology, the theory
              may be able to predict optimal conditions of ultrasonic devulcanization for
              different types of crosslinked rubbers.   The development and application of
              this novel technique for reclaiming all industrially important types of rubber,
              including tire rubber, will have a signific ant impact on the further expansion
              of recycling technology.  Development of a theoretical model of the process of
              ultrasonic devulcanization, allowing one to predict optimal conditions of
              recycling, will help to devise a methodology to control the properties of
              reclaimed rubber products.  The new science-based technology can revolutionize
              the way rubber is recycled.
