Title       : A Bayesian Decision Model for Process Development Based on Cost and Quality
               Outcomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1998 
File        : a9712997

Award Number: 9712997
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298670             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Pollock pollock@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl D. Majeske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shannon W. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A Bayesian Decision Model for Process Development Based on Cost and Quality
              Outcomes  Abstract  Automobile manufacturers currently use two approaches to
              determine when to accept a production tool: Conformance to Specifications (the
              tool produces products within design specifications) and Functional Build (the
              tool produces products that function as the customer expects).  This project
              will develop an analytic framework for deciding which of these is appropriate,
              and the associated policies for optimal tool testing before using the tool in a
              production setting.  The objective of this research is to provide manufacturers
              with a decision tool, based on available cost of quality data from existing
              accounting systems, that will reduce total manufacturing costs.  This is in
              contrast to current accounting practices, which drive separate cost centers
              within a large organization to suboptimize performance relative to their own
              budget.  Thus, the decision models developed by this research will cut across
              organizational boundaries to provide manufacturing firms with optimal financial
              and quality results.  The first phase of the research will benchmark die
              buyoff.  This will allow identification of the metrics (financial and quality)
              currently used to track process development.  The output of this initial
              research will be a set of die construction and product quality performance
              measures that will form the framework of the decision model.  The second phase
              of the research will focus on the development of methods for obtaining and
              tracking the performance measures previously identified.  The third phase will
              represent the construction of models, combining methods from decision analysis,
              Bayesian statistics, and accounting systems, to focus on developing the
              methodology that optimizes the decision process for the entire organization.
