Title       : Simulation of Chemical Processes in Condensed Phases Using Hybrid Quantum and
               Molecular Mechanical Potentials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1999  
File        : a9712709

Award Number: 9712709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiali Gao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jiali Gao is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational  
              Chemistry Program to continue his development of a hybrid quantum   mechanical
              and statistical mechanical technique to simulate chemical   processes in
              solution and in heterogeneous catalysis.  The objective of   the research is to
              obtain reasonably quantitative agreement with   experimental solvation
              energies.  The approach provides new insights on   the nature of intermolecular
              interactions, in particular, specific   contributions from the polarization
              effects for processes of biochemical   and materials interest in condensed
              phases.  Applications involve the   thermolysis of alpha-chloroethers and
              hydrolysis of model compounds for   glycosyl derivatives in organic and aqueous
              solutions.  Another major   thrust of the research is the study of adsorption,
              binding, and chemical   reactions associated with methanol-to-gasoline
              conversion using zeolite   catalysis.  Most chemical processes of commercial
              importance take place in solution.    Computer simulations of chemical
              reactions in solution provide important   molecular level insights into the
              factors that influence reaction rates.    Many of the more interesting bond
              breaking reactions, however, exhibit   quantum effects that cannot be modeled
              effectively using empirical   potentials. Gao's approach involves the use of a
              combined simulation   approach which uses Monte Carlo and molecular orbital
              theory to treat the   quantum degrees of freedom undergoing change during the
              chemical   reaction.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
