Title       : TQO: Organizational Learning and Knowledge Management Practices for Improving
               Business Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9712868

Award Number: 9712868
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387749             (Estimated)
Investigator: Soumen Ghosh   (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd J. Maurer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Fedor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vinod R. Singhal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Organizational Learning and Knowledge Management Practices for Improving
              Business Processes  Abstract  The focus of this research is to study factors
              that enhance organizational learning.  Specifically, the broad objectives are
              to investigate the following:  What are the key drivers of learning?  What are
              the mechanisms that organizations use to acquire, process, create, and
              disseminate knowledge?  How do organizations monitor and manage the learning
              process, and how do they measure the effectiveness of the learning process? 
              What impact does a well functioning learning and knowledge management process
              have on business process capabilities and business performance?  These research
              objectives are an outcome of extensive interactions and discussions over the
              past 12 months among the five partnering organizations and the research team. 
              The interdisciplinary research team consists of four faculty members from the
              School of Psychology and the School of Management from the Georgia Institute of
              Technology.  This research will focus on the study of organizational learning
              within the context of the integrated product development process.  Qualitative
              information about the different mechanisms that organizations use to learn and
              share knowledge, and the impact these mechanism have on business process
              capabilities and business performance will be gathered.  The methods use to
              gather information will include in-depth case studies at various sites of the
              partner organizations, panel discussion, and focus groups.  Analyses of this
              information will result in preliminary findings on the type of mechanism used,
              and their impact on performance.    These findings will be used to create a
              standardized, psychometrically sound research instrument to quantify the degree
              to which various learning mechanisms are used.  The instrument will measure
              such things as the existence of a specific learning mechanism at different
              levels of the organization, the perceived impact of the mechanism on learning
              at each level, and the perceived ease of use of the mechanism.  Statistical
              methodologies will be used to analyze the survey responses received from the
              partnering organizations and linked to performance.  The significance of this
              research is that it will provide new insights on how to effectively manage the
              learning and knowledge creation processes in organizations.
