Title       : Dynamic Chemical Processes of Radicals and Carbenes at Carbonaceous Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9712263

Award Number: 9712263
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Miller John.B.Miller@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9712263
This research project, supported by the Analytical and Surface 
              Chemistry Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities,  focuses on
              the study of the chemistry of modifying and  controlling the surface properties
              of amorphous and diamond forms  of carbon.  Professor Miller and his students
              at Western  Michigan University will use a broad range of ultrahigh vacuum 
              surface tools to characterize these surfaces.  The chemical  modification of
              these surfaces will involve photochemically  initiating reactions of these
              carbon surfaces with a variety of  radical species.  This thrust offers promise
              in developing ways  to chemically modify the highly unreactive surfaces of
              carbon,  particularly in the form of diamond.  In addition to these 
              fundamental experimental activities molecular dynamics  calculations will be
              applied to better understand the chemistry  that occurs at these surfaces
              involving carbenes and radicals and  to develop simulations of these reactions
              that can be used in  undergraduate and graduate teaching settings.    The use
              of carbon materials in the semiconductor field is limited  by the unreactive
              nature of their surfaces.  In this work  photochemically initiated reactions
              that have been shown to be  feasible on both amorphous carbon and diamond
              surfaces will be  further studied to optimize the control of these chemical 
              reactions.  Successful chemical modification of these carbon  surfaces offers
              the potential to use carbon, especially diamond,  in a number of practical
              applications that require the  availability of particular surface
              functionalities including  microelectronic devices, materials requiring robust
              adhesion, and  semiconductors.



