Title       : Optical, Infrared, and X-ray Properties of Be/X-Ray Binaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9712013

Award Number: 9712013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17567              (Estimated)
Investigator: Windsor A. Morgan morganW@dickinson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1206,1215,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-9712013  Abstract - Morgan    The stellar binaries that are X-ray binary 
              consist of  either a main-sequence star or post-main-sequence star  (called the
              companion) and a compact object. The compact  object is usually either a
              neutron star or a black hole,  although sometimes it can be a white dwarf star.
               These  binary systems emit X-ray light generated by material,  released by the
              companion star, falling upon the compact  object.    These interesting objects
              were first detected in  the X-ray region of the electromagnetic spectrum during
              the  very first astronomical X-ray observations in 1962, which  detected the
              low-mass X-ray binary system Scorpius X-l.  Ever since then, astronomers have
              been trying to understand  these systems.  The interpretation of the
              observations of  these objects can yield interesting answers into the nature 
              of how stars evolve, the physical properties of stars, and  the deaths of
              stars.    The systems may be divided into two main classes: low-mass  (LXRB)
              and high-mass  (HXRB).  The terms "low-mass" or "high-mass" refer to the  mass
              of the companion star.   In general, LXRB companions  have masses greater than
              two solar masses. The Be/X-ray  binaries, a certain type of HXRB, have masses
              between eight  and fifteen solar masses.    The X-ray binary stellar systems
              emit light in several  spectral regions, including X-ray, optical, and infrared
               wavelengths.  By the analysis of  the data from the various  spectral regions,
               and the relationships between the  emissions from these regions, astronomers
              can better  understand the nature of these stars and perhaps find clues  to
              help astronomers find out more about the evolution of  stars.  There are only
              thirty known Be/X-ray binaries.   A  large percentage of the stars are in
              binary systems and  several X-ray binary stellar systems may  not have been 
              discovered yet.    The research plan to be carried out is designed to help the 
              principal investigator better understand the underlying  properties of Be/X-ray
              binary syst ems.   During the research  period supported by this award, the
              Principal Investigator  (PI)  will spend time educating himself  in the subject
               through researching the scientific literature, meeting other  researchers in
              the field (and eventually beginning  collaborations with them), and analyzing
              archival data of X-  ray binaries  taken by several X-ray, optical, and
              infrared telescopes,  including data from the satellites known as Rosat, Asca,
              and  the Hubble Space Telescope (HST).   The award will enable  the PI,  who
              has extensive experience with the X-ray data  analysis of quasars (using data
              from the satellites  IRAF/PROS and Xspec) , will easily move into the area of 
              the study of X-ray binaries.    This award will  make it possible to determine
              if a more  extensive project in the study of X-ray binary stellar  systems is
              reasonable and feasible.   This award is  supported jointly by the Division of
              Astronomical Sciences  and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the 
              Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences at NSF.
