Title       : Study on the Gelation, Consolidation, and Rheology of Sol- Gel Coated Ceramic
               Suspensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9712773

Award Number: 9712773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei-Heng Shih shihwh@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wan Y. Shih  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9712773  Shih    The objective of the research is to obtain fundamental 
              understanding on the gelation, consolidation, and rheology of  coated ceramic
              suspensions and establish their structure-property  relationships.  The
              approach that will be taken includes both  experimental and theoretical work. 
              The experimental system that  will be studied is aluminum oxide-coated silicon
              carbide  suspensions.  There are several practical benefits of selecting  this
              system for study.  The yielding properties of aluminum oxide-  coated silicon
              carbide gel network will be measured by dynamic  and static rheological tests. 
              The same yielding properties will  be calculated based on a recently developed
              network yielding  theory.  The zeta potential needed for the calculation of 
              interparticle interaction will be measured, and will be compared  to the
              predictions of numerical simulation of ceramic coating on  particle surface. 
              The consolidation behavior of the aluminum  oxide-coated particle suspensions
              will be investigated with  sedimentation, centrifugation, and pressure
              filtration.  The  structural information about the coated particulate network
              will  be characterized by light scattering.  It is expected that by  making the
              connection between theory and experiment, a systematic  picture of
              structure-property relationship can be established for  the coated ceramic
              suspensions.  %%%  Ceramic powders coated with another ceramic material have
              been  used in many applications in colloidal ceramic processing.  The  ceramic
              coating can protect the core particles from dissolution.  The coating may
              modify the interaction between the core  particles, thereby improve the
              rheological properties of  suspensions.  Although the applications of
              ceramic-coated  particles are many, the understanding of the suspension 
              properties of coated particles is very limited. Intuitively, one  might think
              that the property of the coated powder would be  similar to that of the coating
              material.  However, as shown by  the results from rec ent studies, the
              consolidation and  rheological properties of coated-powder suspensions can be
              quite  complex.  There is a need to perform a systematic study on the 
              colloidal properties of coated powders so that their full  potential benefits
              can be harvested.  The research will have a  significant impact on the
              applications of silicon carbide and  alumina ceramics.  ***
