Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Processing Properties and Characterization of
               Ferroelectric Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2000   
File        : a9712182

Award Number: 9712182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12194              (Estimated)
Investigator: D. C. Agrawal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst Tech Kanpur
	      
	      Kanpur, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9712182  Agrawal  Description: This award supports the U.S.-India  Cooperative
              Research: Processing, Properties,  and Characterization of Ferroelectric Films.
                The collaborators are R.S. Katiyar, University  of Puerto Rico, S.B. Desu,
              Virginia Polytechnic  Institute, and D.C. Agrawal, Indian Institute  of
              Technology, Kanpur.  The researchers will  study thin films of novel
              optoelectronics and  ferroelectrics with the aim of enhancing  understanding of
              synthesis and processing,  materials characterization and modelling of  thin
              film growth and properties.  Various  techniques will be used to probe the
              micro-to  nano-scale compositions, structure and  characterization in order to
              establish  structure-property relationships in these novel   materials. 
              Fundamental research on  ferroelectric thin films holds great potential  for
              eventual application in electro-optical  devices, microwave electronics, micro
              sensors,  and high density packaging.    Scope: This project supports a new 
              collaboration between two U.S. research  institutions and the Indian Institute
              of  Technology, Kanpur.  All facilities are  equipped with state-of-the-art
              instrumentation  for the proposed synthesis, characterization  and modelling
              work.  The research is expected  to stimulate a long-term science and 
              engineering link among three centers-of  excellence.  The project is mutually
              beneficial  and meets INT criteria for support.      ***
