Title       : PEET: Monographic Research in the Moss Family Calymperaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9712347

Award Number: 9712347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $740000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent D. Mishler bmishler@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9712347  Mishler      Bryophytes are a group of three distinct lineages (mosses,
              liverworts, and hornworts) that are thought to constitute the remnants of the
              earliest evolving groups of land plants. There are an estimated 23,000 species
              of bryophytes, with new species continuing to be described from tropical
              regions of the world. Because of the small and haploid (single set of
              chromosomes) nature of the vegetative stage of growth, select species of
              bryophytes serve as convenient laboratory models for basic studies in
              physiology, genetics, and ecology. A major limitation in the use of bryophytes
              as study systems for evolutionary and ecological processes has been the lack of
              basic taxonomic knowledge of many groups, particularly in the tropics. With
              assistance from colleagues in the U.S., Australia, Malaysia, and elsewhere,
              Prof. Brent Mishler at the University of California-Berkeley has designed a
              multidisciplinary program of study and training that focuses on the large
              tropical family of mosses, Calymperaceae. Field collecting in Asia and
              Australasia will augment existing herbarium collections, and provide materials
              for molecular (DNA) sequencing to complement morphological and anatomical
              studies, as well as mating tests in the laboratory. Laboratory studies include
              new technologies of electron microscopy, DNA sequencing, and morphometrics, to
              add new characters for taxonomic discrimination and phylogenetic resolution. A
              monographic or species-intensive emphasis will focus on the genus Mitthyridium
              and parts of the larger genera Calymperes and Syrrhopodon.    Training at
              undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate levels is an aspect of the program,
              along with extensive field work, mostly in southeast Asia and the South
              Pacific, areas of high species diversity. Collaboration with specialists in
              Malaysia like Dr. Haji Mohamed and in the U.S. like Drs. Daniel Norris and
              William Reese extend the field and herbarium experiences for all the students
              involved. Training in modern DNA sequencing for popu lation-genetic and
              phylogenetic studies provides students with skills that are highly marketable.
              Products of the research will also be made available in electronic formats over
              the Web, capitalizing on UC-Berkeley's extensive resources in modern
              technologies of science dissemination.
