Title       : Nonlinear Bubble Dynamics and Medical Ultrasound
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1997 
File        : a9712179

Award Number: 9712179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190613             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Szeri aszeri@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9712179  Szeri  High frequency sound waves, known as ultrasound, are used in  an
              increasing number of diagnostic and therapeutic modes in  medicine.  The
              beneficial effects of ultrasound can often be  increased when microbubbles are
              present; these may either be  produced by the sound field itself or injected
              into the  patient.  Hence, the nonlinear dynamics and control of  volume
              oscillations of microbubbles is of great importance  in a variety of medical
              applications of ultrasound.  In  medical imaging, microbubbles are valuable as
              contrast  agents.  Owing to their compressibility relative to  surrounding
              tissue, bubbles return a stronger echo from an  incident sound field that can
              be used to construct an image  useful to physicians.  The echo from bubbles can
              be enhanced  by exploiting the nonlinear oscillations of bubbles which  return
              an echo at a simple fraction or multiple of the  incident frequency, further
              differentiating the bubbles from  the surrounding tissue.  In a second
              application known as  sonodynamic therapy, ultrasound interacting with 
              microbubbles drives chemical reactions that release radicals  from injected
              reagents to destroy  tumor tissue.  The rate-limiting step is the slow growth
              of  microbubbles to useful size by uptake of dissolved gases  from the
              surrounding liquid.  When the slowly growing  bubbles become large enough,
              violent collapses initiate the  therapeutic effect.  The importance of
              nonlinear dynamics to  these developing applications is clear, yet much is
              unknown  about the physics of bubbles undergoing nonlinear  oscillations at
              medically-relevant conditions.  Therefore,  research is proposed into nonlinear
              dynamics of resonances,  damping, ultrasound-induced bubble growth, effects of 
              encapsulation, and control of bubble oscillations.  New  control capabilities
              are under development that involve a  novel technique for optimizing bubble
              dynamics by alteration  of the driving acoustic waveform from a simple sine
              wave.  The optimization can be constructed so a s to increase the  echo from
              microbubbles used in imaging, or to increase the  rate of ultrasound-induced
              growth of bubbles used in  sonodynamic therapy.  These enhancements do not
              require  more intense ultrasound, but rather alterations in the  acoustic
              waveform, and so can be obtained without additional  risk to the patient.  ***
