Title       : Collaborative Research: The Nature and Predictability of The Madden and Julian
               Oscillation in the Coupled Ocean- Atmosphere System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9712855

Award Number: 9712855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105627             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Jones cjones@icess.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine H. Gautier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9712855  Jones     This grant represents one of the two awards that provide
              support for a collaborative project between Dr. Charles Jones of UC - Santa
              Barbara and Dr. Duane Waliser at SUNY - Stony Brook (under ATM-9712483).  The
              principal investigators seek to improve our understanding of, and ultimately
              our capability to forecast, a tropical intraseasonal phenomenon known as the
              Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO).       The Madden-Julian Oscillation is one of
              the most important modes of tropical intraseasonal variability that may have
              important influences on medium- to extended-range weather forecasting in the
              extratropics, the Asian-Australian monsoon activity, and even the variability
              of the equatorial Pacific Ocean thermocline structure via its close association
              with westerly wind bursts.  A growing body of evidence, including recent
              modeling results obtained by the principal investigators, suggests that air-sea
              interaction processes, particularly the influence of sea-surface temperature
              (SST) variations on surface fluxes, may be important in the maintenance of the
              MJO.   The principal investigators will continue their investigation by (1)
              further exploring the role of SST and surface processes in determining the
              strength of and maintaining the MJO using coupled ocean-atmosphere models and
              (2) assessing the impact of the representation/forecast of the  MJO on the
              overall extended range forecast skill in an operational medium-range weather
              forecast model.  The research will involve the use of  diagnostic and
              statistical analyses as well as numerical simulations.  The PIs will employ
              several different models in their study.     This research has important
              implications for improving dynamical extended range forecasting at both
              intraseasonal and seasonal time scales.  Therefore, both the Climate Dynamics
              and Large-scale Meteorology Programs will share in the support of this
              collaborative project.
