Title       : Characterization of an Indian Ocean Hydrothermal Vent -- CIR 24 degrees S:
               Biogeography and Ecology Within a Geochemical and Geological Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  2001   
File        : a9712358

Award Number: 9712358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cindy L. Van Dover cindy_vandover@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1319,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Over the past decade, biologists have learned that hydrothermal faunas are not
              globally cosmopolitan and that biogeographic provinces of the known fauna may
              be correlated with geographic and tectonic parameters. The result is a
              biogeographic puzzle, from which several major pieces are still missing due to
              their remote locations. Of these missing pieces, the Indian Ocean ridge systems
              stand out as one of the most important, perhaps serving as the link between
              Pacific and Atlantic faunas. This project will test this hypothesis by locating
              and sampling a hydrothermal vent on the Central Indian Ridge for which there is
              a full suite of existing preliminary data, including bathymetry and plume data.
              The site is "mature", ready for detailed investigations according to standards
              established by the RIDGE community.  Six major approaches will be utilized in
              this study:  Plume Prospecting will relocate plumes observed by German and
              Japanese scientists and trace these plumes to their source on the seafloor.
              Biogeography and Evolutionary Biology will include taxonomic identifications of
              invertebrates and molecular characterization of selected fauna. Ecological
              Investigations will examine trophic interactions with an emphasis on clarifying
              the role of symbiosis in the system and will include microbial diversity
              studies, faunal distributions, biodiversity measures, and other descriptive
              ecology. Studies in a Geological Context will identify proximal geological
              controls on fluid flow and map the distribution of hydrothermal sites within
              the vent field. Hydrothermal Fluid Chemistry will establish end-member fluid
              chemistry and measure availability of reduced compounds in low-temperature
              fluids for chemoautotrophic production. Sulfide and Basalt Characterization
              will provide a mineralogical context for the hydrothermal setting.  Each of
              these program elements are critical for interpretation of biogeography of the
              fauna. This study will provide a preliminary perspective of an Indian Ocean
              hydrothermal system and the data required to place it within the spectrum of
              global mid-ocean ridge hydrothermal processes.
