Title       : Vibration Control Using Optimized CMAC Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9712823

Award Number: 9712823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365910             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Gordon Kraft gordon.kraft@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the use of CMAC neural networks for the control of
              vibrations.  Vibration control problems can be large scale, non-linear and
              difficult to model mathematically.  Traditional control methods depend on
              assumptions (models) about the system structure and generally involve extensive
              real-time calculations.   In contrast, CMAC develops the control signal from an
              experience based of measured system data.  One analogy is the sailor who
              develops `sea legs`.  the sailor uses previous experiences to compensate for
              boat motion,  not modeling or real-time calculation.  The UNH Robotics Lab has
              reported many applications of CMAC including robot control, process control,
              pattern recognition and signal processing.  The real-time operational speed and
              reduced memory requirements make CMAC an attractive alternative to there neural
              networks.  Other neural networks do not offer the bandwidths required for
              typical vibration control problems.  The CMAC approach offer the ability to
              work with multiple frequency disturbances.    The investigation will be both
              theoretical and applied.  The theoretical investigation will be to optimize the
              CMAC weight patterns improved dynamic range, and better functional
              approximation  (and hence better vibration cancellation)  characteristics than
              the traditional CMAC. the Theoretical investigation of CMAC network are
              expected to extend the range of applications of CMAC control to include
              approximate dynamic programming, the adaptive critic, and non-linear
              optimization problems.  The application in this study will be the reduction of
              hull noise for submarines subject to internal vibration sources.  A fully
              instrumented reduced scale submarine at the underwater test facility at the
              University of New Hampshire will be used for real-time testing of the CMAC
              control concepts.  the submarine application are has many of the same
              characteristics as other vibration control problems such as noise reduction in
              automobile and aircraft cabin interiors and hence, this investigation will
              impact a variety of applications.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
