Title       : Using Option Pricing to Value Commitment Flexibility in Multi-Agent Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9712607

Award Number: 9712607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katia P. Sycara sycara@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9179,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research aims to develop a domain-independent computational model to
              support, in a uniform manner, many complex issues that arise in multi-agent
              contracting, such as modeling commitment flexibility in a contract, valuing a
              contract under assumptions of uncertainty, risk reduction, making decisions in
              situations of asymmetric information, or situations of sequential
              subcontracting where each agent must decide to subcontract part of its current
              contract to others. The approach is based on financial option pricing theory.
              This research will extend this theory to model contracts that have no analogs
              in financial options, such as contract quality guarantees and multiple
              sequential subcontracting. To evaluate the research, a multi-agent simulation
              testbed will be developed and utilized to conduct empirical studies that can
              answer significant theoretical questions. Questions to be studied for
              evaluation include the effects on the overall multi-agent society of different
              model assumptions such as stationary vs. non-stationary stochastic processes
              for modeling environmental uncertainty, different contracting strategies, and
              examinations of the value of information especially for asymmetrical
              information scenarios. Real world domains of theoretical and practical
              significance such as supply contracting and electronic commerce will be used to
              provide realistic problem scenarios. It is expected that the proposed research
              will contribute to the development of general computational models of
              multi-agent contracting that can answer fundamental research questions and can
              serve as a basis for designing efficient automated contracting systems.
