Title       : Eye Movements and Language Representation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9712448

Award Number: 9712448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27483              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary E. Raney Geraney@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1327,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Gary Raney will purchase a
              Dual-Purjkinje-Image eyetracker with autostaging and video upgrades. It has a
              rated accuracy of 3 minutes of arc and a response time  of less than 1 ms which
              allows fixation position to be sampled at a high rate. The enhanced video
              upgrade provides the experimenter with alignment feedback so the system may be
              continually monitored without disturbing the subject. Three minutes of arc
              represents 1/4 the width of a character in a typical reading study and this
              will allow Dr. Raney to determine a subject's letter focus with a high degree
              of accuracy.  The proposed research will explore how passages of text are
              stored and retrieved from memory. In each of several studies, individuals will
              read a passage once and then read the passage a second time. A common finding
              is that people read a text faster during a second reading and this is known as
              a repetition effect. The size of the repetition effect will be used as a
              measure of how much the first reading facilitates processing during the second.
              Two contrasting theoretical models of text repetition effects have been
              proposed.  One argues that the effect is based on a word's abstract meaning -
              that `grass` will have a priming effect if, in a second passage the word `lawn`
              is substituted. The other argues that priming is more word and less meaning
              specific. To discriminate between these models, individual features of texts
              will be systematically manipulated between first and second readings. How these
              changes influence reading behavior and repetition effects will be measured by
              examining readers' eye movements.  The eye tracker will also serve a more
              general function and be employed for specific experiments conducted by other
              faculty members. It will also be available to undergraduates for specific
              research projects.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
