Title       : Impacts of Cooperative R&D on Participating Firms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1998   
File        : a9712349

Award Number: 9712349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99949              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher T. Hill chill@osf1.gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9149,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              During the past two decades, industrial firms have become increasingly engaged
              in and dependent on R&D partnerships involving competitors, other firms,
              academic institutions, government laboratories, and foreign sources. These
              partnership, or cooperative, arrangements are entered into with the expectation
              that they will help control the rising costs of R&D, avoid unnecessary
              duplication of effort, take advantage of economies of scale in combined
              efforts, or bring into the participating firms sets of capabilities that they
              don't have and would be expensive or unfeasible to obtain. Despite the enormous
              commitment of resources and strategic energy to these partnerships, relatively
              little is known about how effective they are at accomplishing their goals. Even
              less is known about what other impacts, positive or negative, these
              arrangements have on the participants. The primary focus of this inquiry will
              be on firms, since there is a large literature on the impacts of cooperation
              with industry on academic institutions, and the impacts of federal laboratories
              on industry, as well as a large but uncritical literature extolling the virtues
              of R&D cooperation in general as well as in specific instances. This pilot
              project will undertake literature reviews, interviews, case studies, and data
              source identification to begin to identify, assess, and understand the nature
              of key impacts of R&D cooperation between and on firms. The goal is to examine
              both immediate and delayed effects. An essential feature of the proposed work
              is a comparison between R&D partnerships among competitors and those that
              involve two or more firms that have complementary strengths to contribute. The
              project will interview ten to 20 industrial R&D leaders to refine initial
              hypotheses, and test these with two to four case studies of firms or
              partnerships.  A list of consortia that can provide the basis for a detailed
              survey to be addressed to several hundred firms known to be engaged in R&D
              partnerships will be compiled. The comparisons will be made primarily between
              firms in vertical and horizontal partnerships, rather than between firms that
              are and are not involved in R&D partnerships. It is intended that results from
              this pilot and any follow-on studies be useful both to industrial R&D managers
              considering R&D partnerships, as well as to the many government policy makers
              and R&D program managers who have become advocates for and supporters of R&D
              cooperation as a key tool in ensuring the nation's future.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
