Title       : Social Science Data Service Equipment Upgrade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9712279

Award Number: 9712279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49304              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Olmstead alolmstead@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean S. Stratford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1327,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Social Science Data Service is a centralized facility which provides data
              management and computational and statistical support to social scientists at
              the University of California, Davis. Its current computer system is outdated
              and unable to support the large data bases or the complex analyses required for
              cutting edge research. With NSF support instrumentation necessary to upgrade
              and expand the system will be provided. A DEC Alphaserver 4000, modem pool, 2
              Micron Millennia Pro 2 400 pentium Pcs,  database management and content
              analysis software and networking utilities will: improve system performance for
              large-scale data analysis and modeling through augmentation of the existing
              multi-user workstation system. It will improve the ability to manage and merge
              information from large and diverse data sets and provide new resources for
              content analysis work. Researchers from the departments of economics, political
              science and sociology will make extensive use of the system.   Within economics
              the instrumentation will improve the ability to use quantitative methods to
              examine a wide array of topics in areas ranging from economic history to
              industrial organization, international trade, labor economics and public
              economics. A number of users work with large data sets, some several gigabytes
              in size. Within political science the nine potential most active users examine
              issues such as the diffusion of mass political conflict, the escalation of
              disputes, the linkage between trade, capital and immigration policies in
              developed nations and the impact of causality levels on Congressional election
              outcomes in the United States. Within sociology major topics amenable to large
              scale data analysis include economic sociology, industrial sociology, political
              sociology, criminology, demography, gender, family and race issues, small group
              processes and development. Current projects look at such issues as the impact
              of population growth on the environment and pollution levels in California, the
              Filipino immigrant community in Vallejo, California and the labor force
              participation of women in the United States. The facility will also be used
              extensively by both undergraduate and graduate students                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
