Title       : PEET: Monographic Studies of Hypocrealean Fungi: Hypocrea and Hypomyces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9712308

Award Number: 9712308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $885533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elwin L. Stewart els4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Samuels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9712308  Stewart   Fungi in the ascomycete order Hypocreales are extremely
              diverse and range from species parasitic on plants and on other fungi as well
              as on humans, to saprotrophic forms that decompose organic matter in soils and
              litter. Hypocrealean fungi produce powerful mycotoxins, some of which have
              found pharmaceutical application like cyclosporin and ergonovone. Most are
              inhabitants of bark, wood, and herbaceous parts of angiosperms and are common
              in both temperate and tropical regions. About 80 genera and 1500 species are
              currently recognized in classifications of Hypocreales. In addition to their
              ascomycetous (spores in a sac, or ascus) or sexual manifestation, many
              hypocrealean fungi form conidia or asexual spore-forming structures, and may
              live many generations as asexually reproducing entities. Many of these have
              been given scientific names under the artificial order Moniliales, perhaps the
              most important being the genus Trichoderma, a source of severe pathogens. Prof.
              Elwin Stewart at Pennsylvania State University and Dr. Gary Samuels at the
              Beltsville USDA laboratories are cooperating to supervise several students who
              will conduct taxonomic monographic research on select groups of Hypocreales and
              Moniliales, to define species limits, assess reliable characters for
              identification, test mating barriers between closely related species, and
              reconstruct phylogenetic or genealogical relationships based on DNA sequences
              obtained for targeted genes.   Two major goals of this PEET enterprise are to
              assess overall biodiversity in the hypocrealean and monilialean fungi of the
              world, especially in the tropics where new taxa can be expected, and to
              integrate the current classifications of the sexual (teleomorphic) and asexual
              (anamorphic) forms of the fungi into a general phylogenetic framework, based on
              a large data set of DNA sequences. Such work will complement ongoing studies
              supported by NSF on other ascomycetes like Clavicipitales toward the goal of a
              phylogenetic framework for all ascom ycetes. Training of four new graduate
              students and of postdoctoral associates is integrated with the research
              projects, and includes collaboration with specialists throughout the U.S. and
              in Japan. Select products from the research are to be available over Internet,
              taking advantage of the USDA's Web operations.
