Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Investigations of
               AtmosphericChemistry-Aerosols-Climate Interactions, Award in India Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9712611

Award Number: 9712611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12903              (Estimated)
Investigator: P.C.S. Devara devara@tropmet.ernet.in  (Principal Investigator current)
              Venkatachalam Ramaswamy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst. of Trop Mete
	      Hmmi Bhabha Marg, Pashan
	      Pune, IN      /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              0313010   Air Pollution                           
Program Ref : 1303,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9712611  Devara  Description:  This award supports the "U.S.-  India Cooperative
              Research: Investigations of  Atmospheric Chemistry-Aerosols-Climate 
              Interactions".  The collaborators are V.  Ramaswamy, NOAA/Geophysical Fluid
              Dynamics  Laboratory (GFDL), Princeton, New Jersey and  P.C.S. Devara, Indian
              Institute of Tropical  Meteorology (IITM), Pune, India.  The PIs will  study
              aerosols and the effects of radiative  forcing on the weather and climate
              systems.   Using a unique long-term data set collected at  IITM, the PIs will
              employ sophisticated  radiative transfer modeling tools available at  the GFDL
              to determine the radiative effects of  aerosols,typical of Indian
              subcontinental urban  locations.  This research will improve current  estimates
              of radiative forcing which are  inadequate due to limited knowledge of 
              physical-chemical variability in atmospheric  composition at tropical urban
              sites.      Scope:  This award provides initial support for  a new U.S.-India  
              research collaboration on  the environment and global change.  The field  of
              investigation is critical for the South Asia  region.  This project promises to
              stimulate  further international collaborative research in  a strategically
              important area.  The project is  supported by NOAA/GFDL and the Division of  
              International Programs.     ***
