Title       : Nonlinear Control of Underactuated Mechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9712170

Award Number: 9712170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Spong m-spong@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project investigates fundamental issues in the  design, analysis,
              and real-time implementation of nonlinear  control laws for underactuated
              mechanical systems. This  class of systems is quite broad and encompasses
              balancing,  brachiating, and walking robots, flexible structures of all  kinds
              including flexible link robots, and flexible joint  robots, airplanes and
              helicopters, underwater and  space  vehicles, electric motors, redundant
              robots, as well as  mechanical system models that include actuator dynamics,
              and  many of the classical control problems like the ball and  beam and
              cart-pole systems. Global and semi-global stability  and tracking results for
              classes of underactuated mechanical  systems are investigated in this project.
              The tools used are  Lagrangian and Hamiltonian methods of nonlinear dynamics, 
              geometric nonlinear control theory, hybrid control, and  saturation. The
              results also apply to a larger class of  systems than have heretofore been
              investigated using these  techniques. The unifying theme of this research is to
               exploit the underlying structure of the nonlinear dynamics  to generate
              `natural closed loop motions` that make  efficient use of passivity and energy.
              This work complements  and extends existing energy and passivity methods and
              more  recent backstepping methods, all of which attempt to exploit  more fully
              the inherent nonlinearities of the system, by  `shaping` rather than by
              `canceling`  all of the  nonlinearities in the system. On the experimental
              side, a  number of testbed systems are used to test analytical  research
              results. The laboratory includes several `gymnastic  robots,` (Acrobots,
              Pendubots), a three degree-of-freedom  air hockey playing robot, two direct
              drive robots, and a  flexible joint robot. The experimental component of the 
              research project is of vital importance both to the present  project and to the
              ultimate goal of creating dextrous  machines.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
