Title       : Approximate Polynomial System Solving and Generic Groebner Bases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9712219

Award Number: 9712219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75830              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lakshman Yagati lakshman@mcs.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Symbolic computation is exact -- the result of a computation  is guaranteed
              correct. This comes at a cost -- the computations  are sometimes very slow
              and/or memory intensive; at times, the  correct results of a computation are
              too huge to be of use.  Numerical computation, on the other hand, is faster,
              and, on well  conditioned input problem instances, one can expect correct 
              solutions in the sense of backward error analysis. The numerical  approach has
              been very successful in solving a wide spectrum of  computational problems in
              science and engineering. However, there  are situations where this approach is
              not completely  satisfactory. In several applications of polynomial system 
              solving arising in areas such as geometric modeling and  kinematics, one needs
              the exact answer to a given problem  instance and not to a near-by instance. 
              On the flip side, in  many application problems, the input polynomial system is
              not  known exactly but to within small error bounds. This changes the  nature
              of questions that can be asked of a solver.  For instance,  a question such as
              ``does a given system of polynomial equations  have a root of multiplicity r?''
              changes to ``is the given system  of polynomial equations near a system that
              has a root of  multiplicity r?'' with respect to some appropriate measure of 
              nearness. Existing symbolic/numeric algorithms are not equipped  to handle such
              questions well. Some of the issues that need to be  addressed in this framework
              are: characterization of the  solutions to a system of polynomial
              equations/inequalities in the  presence of small input errors; design of
              efficient algorithms  for solving polynomial systems that work in limited (or
              adaptive)  precision; understanding the factors that affect the stability of 
              these algorithms; investigation of ways to arrange the sometimes  independent 
              symbolic phase and numerical phase in polynomial  system solving to take
              maximum advantage of the strengths of each  other.    This project investigates
              some specific instance s of polynomial  system solving in the above framework
              with particular focus on  approximate polynomial greatest common divisors and
              several  special families of systems of polynomials. A new parametric 
              minimization technique is being studied and applied to the  approximate GCD
              problem and  several of its variants.  The  concept of generic Groebner bases
              is introduced and in  combination with eigenvalue computations, their
              effectiveness in  the approximate solving of certain special families of
              polynomial  systems is being investigated. The investigation of generic 
              Groebner bases throws fresh light on some well-known unresolved  issues in
              Groebner base theory. The new techniques will be  applied to polynomial systems
              arising in geometric modeling and  kinematics.
