Title       : Automatic Identification of Significant Topics in Domain Independent Full Text
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9712069

Award Number: 9712069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270314             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith L. Klavans klavans@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nina Wacholder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to investigate the relationship between the
              occurrence of significant topics in a document and the structure of the
              document. The unique contribution of this research lies in the combination of
              methods to be used for the production of a list of significant topics, built on
              both statistical and rule-based techniques for the identification of term
              variants as a function of their distribution in focus areas in documents.
              Applications that can employ these methods include information retrieval,
              passage retrieval, relevance feedback, information extraction, and
              summarization. The results can be used directly in ongoing research projects on
              automatic summarization of documents, using both statistical and information
              extraction techniques, i.e., combining information retrieval (IR) and natural
              language processing (NLP). To the extent that these techniques are based on
              linguistically-motivated patterns and not on domain-dependent vocabularies,
              these patterns should apply to general text. This approach will be applied to
              several domains to test its generality and applicability across document types.
              This will permit measuring the cost of porting across genres. Formative and
              summative evaluation procedures will be developed and performed at each step of
              the analysis. This research is undertaken in the context of the Digital Library
              Research Program at Columbia University, in conjunction with the Center for
              Research on Information Access. The resulting techniques grounded in the novel
              combination and cross-fertilization of IR and NLP methods are expected to
              improve information access based on significant topics across domains and
              genres.
