Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Comparative Study of Numerical Representations: Human
               Infants and Nonhuman Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9712103

Award Number: 9712103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197927             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Carey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Language is what distinguishes adult human beings  from both human infants and
              other primates.  The development of language in the species and in the child
              are two of nature's most profound mysteries. The aim of this collaborative
              project is to shed light on these mysteries by assessing similarities between
              natural language and spontaneous non-linguistic knowledge in both human infants
              and other primates (macaques and cotton-top tamarins). The project also aims to
              determine how the non-linguistic knowledge differs from language, for this will
              tell us what special features of language must be accounted for in analyses of
              the evolution and acquisition of natural languages.   The focus of the research
              is one restricted arena of conceptual and linguistic knowledge: natural number.
               Three aspects of nonlinguistic representation of number will be studied:  (1)
              the nature of infant and non-human primate representations of integers;  (2)
              the representations of quantifiers such as `an,` `another,` and `more`; and (3)
              the criteria for individuating objects and assessing numerical identity
              (sameness in number). The proposed studies have several specific goals. First,
              given that human infants, macaques, and tamarins pass simple tests of
              `addition` and `subtraction,` a series of experiments will be carried out to
              uncover the nature of the underlying representations.  Second, the upper
              numerical limit of the addition/subtraction ability will be determined, for all
              three subject populations.  Third, experiments will be conducted to probe
              whether all three populations are tracking number of objects in the
              addition/subtraction studies or total mass/volume.  Fourth, studies will be
              carried out to assess whether nonhuman primates and human infants spontaneously
              represent which of two numerical quantities is larger, and whether this ability
              is subject to the same upper limit as the addition/subtraction ability. 
              Finally, the relationship between the acquisition of language and the
              conceptual representations associated with basic object kinds (e.g., cup,
              apple) will be explored in all three species.    The findings will shed light
              on fundamental problems of development and evolution.  Specifically, the
              project will provide an explicit account of how humans spontaneously develop
              numerical competence from birth to the first year of life, and will also
              generate an evolutionary explanation for why numerical competence evolved, and
              when during primate phylogeny it originated.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
