Title       : Impact of the Keweenaw Current on Cross-Margin Transport in Lake Superior:
               Physical Processes, Chemical Gradients, and Biological Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9712872

Award Number: 9712872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2677447            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah A. Green sgreen@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy A. Auer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Noel R. Urban  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith W. Budd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin T. Auer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W.Charles Kerfoot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9712872  Green    Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement
              of   Opportunity (NSF 97-38) for Coastal Studies in the Great Lakes.  This is  
              a collaborative research project involving eleven  investigators from   five
              academic research institutions.  The research is being conducted   under the
              auspices of the NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program and   the NOAA
              Coastal Ocean Program.  This collaborative, interdisciplinary   5-year research
              program will entail an integrated program of field and   laboratory studies and
              mathematical modeling to quantify the role of   coastal currents and thermal
              fronts in mediating cross-margin transport   in Lake Superior.      The western
              shore of Lake Superior's Keweenaw Peninsula exhibits a   dramatic coastal jet
              known as the Keweenaw Current.  A strong, shore-  parallel density front, the
              thermal bar, also is characteristic of this   region and persists long into the
              summer. The goal of the proposed work   is to determine the physical, chemical,
              and biological effects that   arise from the intense physical forcing on this
              system, and   specifically, to elucidate how these effects interact temporally
              and   spatially to define distinct nearshore and offshore environments in Lake 
               Superior.  This project represents the first effort to model coupled  
              physical, chemical, and biological processes in the coastal zone of Lake  
              Superior where both vertical and horizontal thermal structure and   transport
              processes are important.    Investigators on this award are responsible for
              overall project   management and they are involved with three research
              subgroups: Physical   Processes, Chemical Gradients, and Biological
              Communities.  The Physical   Processes group will examine the relative
              importance of all forcing   factors (e.g., wind-driven variability, baroclinic
              instability) that   govern cross margin transport using in situ observations,
              numerical   modeling, and satellite observations.  The Chemical Gradients group
              will   characterize nea rshore-offshore differences in distributions of
              chemical   species, evaluate chemical tracers of water and sediment movement,
              and   investigate differences (inshore vs. offshore) in chemical cycles  
              induced by the current.  The Biological Communities group will determine   how
              gradients in primary production, trophic structure, and rates of   material
              transformation develop. All three groups will interact closely   throughout the
              project to obtain and share complementary data sets and   to derive a coupled
              physical/chemical/biological model of the system.    The detailed,
              process-level understanding achieved by this project will   advance our
              quantitative understanding of the processes that regulate   the transport,
              transformation and fate of biologically, chemically and   geologically
              important matter in coastal regions and provide a firm   basis for future
              management decisions on how best to preserve the   pristine nature of Lake
              Superior.
