Title       : Net Scout Internet Resource Discovery and Search Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9712163

Award Number: 9712163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3182578            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence H. Landweber LANDWEBER@CS.WISC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Calcari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Net Scout project is an Internet resource location and technology service
              oriented primarily to the higher education community. It  currently provides
              four services that are used by thousands of faculty, staff, and students in
              higher education: the Scout Report, Net Happenings, the Scout Toolkit, and the
              KIDS Report. The Scout Report is a weekly electronic newsletter summarizing the
              best new Internet resources of use to higher education. Net Happenings is an
              electronic service that provides immediate notification of 50-70 Internet  
              announcements each day via a mailing list, a newsgroup, and a Web site.  The
              Scout Toolkit summarizes the best Internet search services and other tools
              needed by researchers and educators to use the Internet effectively. The KIDS
              Report is a biweekly newsletter written by students in elementary, middle, and
              high school classrooms who select and describe the Web sites they find the most
              interesting and useful.     The Net Scout project will continue and expand
              these services in two ways:  First, to provide additional services, including
              publication of three biweekly Scout Reports produced by specialists  in the
              specific areas of Science and Engineering, Social Sciences, and Business and
              Economics, and, second, to implement new tools which aid in the   location of
              Internet resources in a specific subject area. A prototype   service will be
              built using as its initial base the three year archive of the highly selective
              resources that have been included in the Scout Report. Specialized
              authenticated collections of quality resources at higher education institutions
              will also be identified and included in the prototype.   
              http://wwwscout.cs.wisc.edu/
