Title       : Molecular Modelling of Fluid Mixtures in Nanoporous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9712138

Award Number: 9712138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105522             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Gubbins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9712138  K. Gubbin/Cornell    Nanoporous solids find widespread
              use in the chemical, oil, pharmaceutical and food industries as adsorbents and
              membranes for separation processes and materials is largely empirical.  The aim
              of this project is to provide more powerful methods, based in molecular theory
              and simulation, for prediction of adsorbed fluid behavior and for the design of
              improved processes.  Modern statistical mechanical methods, including molecular
              simulation and kinetic theory, will b employed to carry our studies in three
              areas:    1. Phase separation in porous media will be studied by novel
              molecular simulation methods (including quench molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo
              with histogram reweighting, etc.).  Three separate investigations are planned. 
              The first will aim to model capillary condensation in well-characterized
              controlled pore glasses (CPG), for which high quality experimental data have
              been recently become available; a goal of this work will be to develop
              sophisticated models that will be useful in other CPG studies.  The second will
              be a study of freezing and melting of fluids confined within nanoporous
              materials; systems studied will include the adsorbates neopentane, carbon
              tetrachloride, water and water/methane mixtures in carbons and oxides.  The
              third project will be an examination of the importance of interpore correlation
              effects in inducing phase separation in small pore zeolites.  2. Selective
              adsorption of trace components in gas streams.  Calculations will be made to
              elucidate the role of pore and system variables on the selective adsorption of
              trace contaminants in nitrogen and air streams for materials with pores of
              various geometries.  The effect of the presence of water vapor on such
              selective adsorption on activated carbons will be studied to elucidate the
              mechanism for the large effects of humidity in industrial adsorption operations
              of this kind.  The goal of this work is to develop methods for designing
              improved adsorbents for removal of trac e contaminants.  3.   Diffusion in
              pores.  Nonequilibrium molecular dynamics methods will be used to         
              study mutual diffusion in mixtures in pores.  The goal of this work will be to 
                     develop an understanding of the role of fluid-wall interactions, pore
              shape and size,         and pore entrance effects on diffusion in real
              nanoporous materials.
