Title       : Multi-Use "Plug-And-Play" Software Packages for Black Box and Inexact Symbolic
               Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9712267

Award Number: 9712267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215233             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich L. Kaltofen kaltofen@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project conducts research in the design of efficient  algorithms, their
              implementation in software packages, and  in making the programs accessible to
              non-specialist users of  symbolic computation systems.  Packages for the black
              box  representation of symbolic objects and for symbolic objects  containing
              imprecise, that is, floating point data will be  constructed.  The packages are
              generically programmed as C++  template classes with abstract underlying
              arithmetics; they  can be compiled with a variety of fast libraries for the 
              basic field, floating point, and polynomial operations.  A  server/client
              interface seamlessly attaches the packages  to all widely-used general purpose
              symbolic systems such as  Maple and Mathetmatica.  Parallel execution of the 
              implemented algorithms will be facilitated.    Black box objects are stored as
              functions.  For instance: a  black box polynomial is a procedure that takes
              values for  the variables as input and evaluates the polynomial at that  given
              point; a black box matrix is a procedure that takes an  arbitrary vector as
              input and computes the matrix times  vector product.  The FoxBox system is a
              package for  computing greatest common divisors and factoring black box 
              polynomials.  The aim is to eliminate algorithmic  bottlenecks in FoxBox and
              add black box linear algebra.  For  sake of speed, the project focuses on
              algorithms over finite  fields.    Efficient server/client bridge code to a
              variety  of general purpose systems will be developed.    The project will also
              investigate how inexact (e.g.,  floating point) data can be handled in the
              course of a  symbolic computation.  The allowance of floating point 
              coefficients in a symbolic, i.e., parameterized model, is  crucial for a
              symbolic approach to problems from the  physical world.  Moreover, floating
              point arithmetic is  faster than exact arithmetic, especially for algebraic 
              numbers.  Several numerical models, such as a-posteriori  iterative improvement
              and sensitivity analysis for perturbed   input data, will be considered.  The
              problems of Toeplitz  matrix rank, polynomial complex root location, and
              factoring  complex polynomials in many variables will be investigated.  The
              design of a plug-and-play symbolic/numeric package will  be studied.
