Title       : Examining Sediment Transport and Dynamics as Part of the Lake Superior KITES
               Project in collaboration with Cross-Margin Transport... Solids in Lake Superior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a9712889

Award Number: 9712889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1003135            (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Churchill jchurchill@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert J. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9712889  Churchill    Research will be undertaken in response to an
              Announcement   of Opportunity (NSF 97-38) for Coastal Studies in the Great  
              Lakes.  This is a collaborative research project involving   investigators from
              several academic research institutions.    The research is being conducted
              under the auspices of the   NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program and the
              NOAA   Coastal Ocean Program.  This collaborative,   interdisciplinary 5-year
              research program will entail an   integrated program of field and laboratory
              studies and   mathematical modeling to quantify the role of coastal   currents
              and thermal fronts in mediating cross-margin   transport in Lake Superior.     
              The western shore of Lake Superior's Keweenaw Peninsula   exhibits a dramatic
              coastal jet known as the Keweenaw   Current.  A strong, shore-parallel density
              front, the   thermal bar, also is characteristic of this region and   persists
              long into the summer. The goal of the proposed work   is to determine the
              physical, chemical, and biological   effects that arise from the intense
              physical forcing on this   system, and specifically, to elucidate how these
              effects   interact temporally and spatially to define distinct   nearshore and
              offshore environments in Lake Superior.  This   project represents the first
              effort to model coupled   physical, chemical, and biological processes in the
              coastal   zone of Lake Superior where both vertical and horizontal   thermal
              structure and transport processes are important.    The research team is
              divided into three subgroups: Physical   Processes, Chemical Gradients, and
              Biological Communities.    The Physical Processes group will examine the
              relative   importance of all forcing factors (e.g., wind-driven   variability,
              baroclinic instability) that govern cross   margin transport using in situ
              observations, numerical   modeling, and satellite observations.  The Chemical  
              Gradients group will characterize nearshore-offshore   differences in
              distributions of chemical species, eval uate   chemical tracers of water and
              sediment movement, and   investigate differences (inshore vs. offshore) in
              chemical   cycles induced by the current.  The Biological Communities   group
              will determine how gradients in primary production,   trophic structure, and
              rates of material transformation   develop. All three groups will interact
              closely throughout   the project to obtain and share complementary data sets
              and   to derive a coupled physical/chemical/biological model of   the system. 
              The detailed, process-level understanding   achieved by this project will
              advance our quantitative   understanding of the processes that regulate the
              transport,   transformation and fate of biologically, chemically and  
              geologically important matter in coastal regions and provide   a firm basis for
              future management decisions on how best to   preserve the pristine nature of
              Lake Superior.        The basic objective of this component of the Project is
              to   better understand and model the dynamics of sediments off   the Keweenaw
              Peninsula. The field program will focus on   factors controlling the movement
              of solids along the   Peninsula as well as processes which carry solids from  
              shallower to deeper waters of the lake. Processes to be   examined include
              storm-induced currents, surface and   internal wave motions, variations in the
              strength of the   Keweenaw current and instabilities of the Keweenaw current.  
              Special attention will be given to the influence of thermal   bar circulation.
              The study will also include an   investigation of small-scale processes
              influencing sediment   resuspension and motion in the bottom boundary layer. A 
               modeling effort will build on the findings of the field   observations in
              developing a 3-D model of fine sediment   transport. Also to be addressed as
              part of our modeling   program are issues of how settling particles become  
              incorporated into the bottom, and how sediment movement   influence the
              long-term fluxes and distribution of   constituents within the lake.
