Title       : Dissertation Research: Zooarchaeology of Bed II, Olduval Gorge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1997      
File        : a9712211

Award Number: 9712211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Blumenschine rjb@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Blumenschine, MS Amy Cushing will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct laboratory analysis in Arusha
              Tanzania and examine the ca. 8,000 vertebrate fossils collected by Dr.
              Blumenschine and his colleagues in their multi-year ongoing research project at
              Olduvai Gorge. The team has focused on a single well defined stratigraphic
              horizon in lower Bed II which dates to ca. 1.5 million years ago. It has been
              sampled, and test excavations conducted across a 300 km .sq. area which
              includes six distinct paleogeographic zones. Seventy one trenches have been
              excavated.  MS Cushing will first identify bones to taxon and, when possible,
              species. She will conduct a taphonomic analysis to determine how natural
              factors such as water and carnivore action have affected these materials. With
              these forces controlled, she will then search for human caused actions which
              will shed light on early hominid behavior. Preliminary study indicates that
              many of the specimens were broken by human percussion and this indicates either
              hunting or scavenging for food.   Ms Cushing will: 1. test the
              representativeness of faunal data from individual trenches which contain high
              densities of remains ( and which could be called `sites`) as opposed to that of
              landscape samples. 2. determine in which habitats on the paleo-Olduvai
              landscape hominids preferred to carry out carcass processing activities; 3.
              identify where on the paleolandscape such animal resources were clustered by
              determining which habitats would have been more productive in terms of
              available carcass abundance; 4. understand how variation in the nature of
              animal communities affected early hominid behavior.  Most archaeologists
              collect from and excavate `sites` where large concentrations of bone and other
              cultural materials provide clear cut evidence of a human presence. However such
              occurrences constitute one end of a continuum and a focus on `sites` alone
              ignores less dense scatters and patches of remains which are common on many
              landscapes. Such has been the case over several decades of research at Olduvai
              Gorge and archaeologists do not know how representative sites in fact are, or
              how site focused archaeology has biased our understanding of early human
              behavior. The Blumenschine project is unique because it has collected across
              the entire range of material densities and MS Cushing's analysis will allow a
              comparison across the span. It will not only increase understanding of
              prehistoric human behavior at Olduvai Gorge but also help archaeologists
              improve the techniques they use to collect and analyze excavated remains. It
              will also assist in training a promising young scientist.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
