Title       : Dissertation Research: Political Economy and Household Organization at Jachakala
               Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9712592

Award Number: 9712592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6360               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc P. Bermann bermarc+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Marc Bermann, MS Christine Beaule will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct excavations at the site of
              Jachakala  as well as two nearby archaeological occurrences located in the La
              Joya region of the Bolivian Andean highlands. The sites extend in time from ca.
              800 to 1,200 AD and thus cover a period which predates, is contemporary with
              and postdates the nearby Tiwanakian empire. Through a series of both test pits
              and more extensive lateral excavations she will recover information from a
              sample of domestic structures which will allow her to determine the degree of
              synchronous economic and status variability among households and how this
              changed over time. She is interested in both the degree of craft specialization
              which is present and the extent to which this correlates with elite status
              within a community. MS Beaule will also collect datable ceramics from an
              extensive series of irrigation canals associated with these sites to determine
              when they were constructed and how large scale cooperative agriculture related
              to social and political changes which form the core of her study.  While
              archaeologists have focused on the development of social complexity at major
              Andean sites, relatively little is known about the processes that led to
              smaller scale social changes which took place in more rural hinterland areas.
              Thus extensive excavations have been conducted at Tiwanaku which served as
              empire capital. La Joya lies just beyond the boundary of this empire and MS
              Beaule wishes to understand whether the rise of a stratified culture there was
              essentially independent or was stimulated by Tiwanakian influence. The project
              has a second theoretical component. Archaeologists have come to realize that
              family groups play an important role in cultural change and have speculated
              about the relative significance of different aspects of family economic
              production on this process. In particular they have considered the potential
              relationships between craft specialization within a family context and
              emergence of an elite class. The data collected by MS Beaule will allow her to
              address this question.  This research is important for several reasons. It will
              shed new light on the rise of social complexity. It will provide basic
              archaeological data for a poorly known and potentially important region and it
              will contribute to the professional development of a promising young scientist.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
