Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Survey of the NW Jezireh, Syria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1997      
File        : a9712984

Award Number: 9712984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11883              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Zettler rzettler@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard Zettler, Mr. Richard Dante will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. Following preliminary field research in the area
              carried out over the last several years, Mr. Dante will conduct an
              archaeological survey of a region located in northern Syria along the east bank
              of the Euphrates river, ca. 65 km from the Turkish border. This upland
              hinterland is associated with the site of Tell se-Sweyhat which was occupied
              during the Early Bronze Age in the 3rd millennium BC. The site itself consists
              of a 14 meter high oval mound situated amid a rectangular lower tell. It covers
              ca. 45 hectares and documents the rise of an urban way of life in the Near
              East. At a nearby satellite community situated at a lower elevation near the
              Euphrates river Mr. Dante has discovered numerous storage silos and botanical
              analysis suggests that they contained winter feed for livestock. These results,
              together with ethnographic counterparts, suggest a system of seasonal pastoral
              transhumance with livestock moved to the uplands to graze during summer and
              then down to riverine locations to feed on stored silage during winter months
              of the year. To test this model, Mr. Dante needs to search for upland sites and
              this forms the focus of the proposed research. Mr. Dante and his colleagues
              will rely on detailed analysis of satellite photographs to locate promising
              archaeological areas. These will then be surveyed and sites located will be
              plotted and mapped in detail. Surface materials will be collected to allow
              ceramic dating. With this information it should then be possible to combine
              upland and lowland data to reconstruct a year round settlement pattern.  In
              both prehistoric as well as modern times marginal rainfall conditions has made
              dry water farming in northern Syria extremely risky and archaeologists wish to
              understand how complex urban societies developed in a seemingly unlikely area.
              Mr. Dante believes that pastoralism which is adapted to environmental
              uncertainly played a crucial role and that civilization developed on this base.
              This project will provide data needed to evaluate this hypothesis. It will also
              assist in training a promising young scientist.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
