Title       : Population Structure and Dynamics of the Lemon Shark, Negaprion Brevirostris on
               a Local and Global Scale: Microsatelite and Mitochondrial DNA Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2000  
File        : a9712793

Award Number: 9712793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166437             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel H. Gruber sgruber@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Comprehensive field and laboratory investigations will be undertaken to
              determine the local mating system and geographic population structure of the
              lemon shark, Negaprion brevirostris, a large coastal shark and a tropical apex
              predator.  The research objectives are to: 1) genetically characterize, for the
              first time, the mating system of a cartilaginous fish; 2) clarify the use of a
              tropical nursery ground by juvenile sharks and females in paturition; and 3)
              examine population structure at both a local and extensive geographic scale. 
              The study site at Bimini is unique in that nearly the entire juvenile
              population in the lagoon can and will be sampled, and genetic analysis of these
              samples will in large part provide the data for the first two objectives.
              Specifically, the field component includes a five-year sampling program of
              which three years have been completed.  The data from juveniles will be
              supplemented by genotyping adults sampled in and around Bimini.  The genetic
              and field data together will provide estimates of the total population size of
              pups, their growth, survival and movements, the number of females using Bimini
              as a nursery ground, and the relative reproductive success of males and females
              within and across years.  Finally, the data can document whether individual
              females are returning to the Bimini nursery areas to give birth and if so, the
              interbirth intervals for females and the number of males siring their young.  
              The third objective of the study will allow placement of the detailed local
              genetic structure documented at Bimini within the framework of the species
              genetic structure as a whole. Population structure at larger geographic scales
              will be accomplished through sampling 20-30 lemon sharks at four other
              locations that represent multiple spatial scales and potential barriers to
              dispersal.  These sites include 1) a second Bahamian site (Grand Bahama Island)
              approximately 100 km across the NW providence channel from Bimini; 2) a second
              known lemon shark nursery west of the Florida Keys (Marquesas) separated from
              Bimini by 350 km and the Florida current; 3) a distant Atlantic site off the
              east coast of Brazil approximately 5000 km from Bimini; and 4) samples from the
              Pacific coast of Mexico completely isolated from the Atlantic sites by the
              Isthmus of Panama.  Two methods of genetic analysis, microsatellites and
              mitochodrial DNA (mtDNA), will be employed in this study. Microsatellites
              exhibit the levels of variability necessary for inferring parent/offspring and
              sibship relationships at Bimini, especially when supplemented by additional
              genetic information provided by the maternally inherited mtDNA.  The use of
              unlinked genetic markers having different transmission genetics (mtDNA is
              maternally inherited and microsatellite loci exhibit Mendelian inheritance)
              will provide separate but complementary estimates of genetic variation within
              and among populations, provide estimates of population differentiation and
              migration rates between the five sites in our study, and distinguish putative
              differences in patterns of male and female mediated gene flow.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
