Title       : MII: Integrated Dual Engineering/Enhanced Computer Science Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9712081

Award Number: 9712081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen R. Mahaney                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38147              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben Wongsaroj wongsaro@fmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail E. Kaiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc L. Resnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carrol Christian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Khokiat Kengskool  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Memorial College
	      15800 N W 42nd Avenue
	      Miami, FL  330546199    305/625-4141

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9712081  Wongsaroj, Ben  Florida Memorial College    CISE MII:  FMC/FIU
              Integrated Dual Engineering and Enhanced Computer Science Program    This
              proposal supports the development of a plan that integrates the
              Dual-Degree/Pre-Engineering Program at Florida Memorial College, a historically
              Black institution, with Florida International University's   Engineering and
              Computer Science bachelor degree programs.  The endeavour is expected to
              increase the retention and graduation rates of FMC computer science students by
              giving them access to FIU's advanced research facilities and of FMC
              pre-engineering students by allowing them to register for FIU upper-level
              engineering classes, including computer engineering. Graduates will be
              positioned for employment after graduation and for entrance into graduate
              programs at FIU by the enhancement of the computer science and pre-engineering
              programs at FMC.  The net effect will be to increase the number  of minority
              computer scientists and engineers in the workforce.    The integration of the
              programs utilizes strong collaboration between the faculty at FMC and FIU
              through distance learning, parallel course development, and collaborative
              computing through the Internet.  Hands-on laboratory exercises and design
              projects create an exciting and innovative academic environment.  A structured
              and well-organized management process is being developed through which the
              responsibilities   of all personnel can be delegated and an attainable schedule
              for appropriate milestones developed.
