Title       : Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry in the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1990     
File        : a9051901

Award Number: 9051901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1990     
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Stemmler estemmle@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dana W. Mayo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Page  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter K. Trumper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Through this project, the institution was able to purchase a gas               
              chromatograph/mass spectrometer with direct insertion probe and                
              positive chemical ionization capabilities.  The students use this              
              instrument in required introductory level organic and inorganic                
              courses, in  upper level instrumental analysis and molecular                   
              structure determination courses, and in independent study and                  
              honors research.  Students in the inorganic chemistry and                      
              Microscale Organic chemistry laboratories are introduced to basic              
              principles of mass spectrometry when they use the direct                       
              insertion probe capabilities for the characterization of                       
              synthetic products by electron impact ionization.  After the                   
              experience with basic electron impact mass spectrometry, students              
              enrolled in upper level instrumental analysis and molecular                    
              structure and determination courses use electron impact in                     
              conjunction with positive chemical ionization to make molecular                
              weight and structure determinations.  Students use the gas                     
              chromatograph for the analysis of mixtures.  All capabilities of               
              the mass spectrometer are used by students participating in                    
              independent study and honors research in areas of organic                      
              chemistry, environmental studies, and analytical chemistry.                    
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to this project in an amount nearly                
              twice the NSF funds.
