Title       : Development of an Instrument-Based Environmental Laboratory Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1991      
File        : a9051044

Award Number: 9051044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21656              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wen K. Shieh shieh@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Keenan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1365      PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              An instrument-based environmental laboratory course entitled:                  
              ENVIRONMENTAL SYSTEMS ANALYSIS will be developed in this project.              
              It is a core course to be offered by the newly established                     
              Bachelor of Applied Science (BAS) program in Environmental                     
              Systems.  This new BAS program provided the students with an                   
              understanding of the techniques for quantitative description on                
              environmental phenomena, the technologies for environmental                    
              control, and the laboratory skill for environmental analysis.                  
              The proposed course will achieve the last objective of the                     
              program.  It will be offered to upper level undergraduates.                    
              A key element in the course is the experiments to be performed by              
              students that directly relate to the topics covered in two other               
              core courses: one deals with treatment technologies for                        
              environmental control, and the other deals with mathematical                   
              modeling of environmental systems.  Meanwhile, students will                   
              learn to operate modern laboratory instruments/equipment through               
              classroom lectures (2 hrs/week) and hand-on laboratory exercises               
              (3 hrs/week).  This represents a significant departure from                    
              traditional environmental laboratory courses, which tend to only               
              emphasize laboratory skills,  Student will perform eight                       
              experiments in this course.  In addition, a laboratory safety                  
              session will be offered prior to laboratory experiments to equip               
              students with necessary knowledge for safety precaution and                    
              hazard prevention.  The materials covered will be suitable for a               
              one-semester course.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The instruments/equipment requested will be suitable to                        
              accommodate for up to 20 students in a class.  The                             
              instrument/equipment requested will allow student to perform                   
              reliable and accurate experiments thereby maximizing the benefits              
              offered by such a course.  Results and experience obtained                     
              through development of this course will be disseminated via                    
              publications of journal articles and presentations at                          
              conferences. Ultimately, a monograph on the subject will be                    
              published.
