Title       : Advanced Classroom Computing Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1990        
File        : a9051112

Award Number: 9051112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35492              (Estimated)
Investigator: Istvan Simon simon@mcs.csuhayward.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chi Fai Ho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Hayward
	      25800 Carlos Bee Boulevard
	      Hayward, CA  94542    415/881-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              A computer algorithm in execution is a dynamical object.  To                   
              understand how a particular algorithm works, one has to visualize              
              the dynamical changes that occur to the state of the algorithm at              
              each step of its execution.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Traditional classroom technology, such as chalk and blackboard or              
              viewgraphs and overhead projectors are inadequate to illustrate the            
              dynamics of the execution of algorithms.  Therefore instructors are            
              faced with difficulties in carrying out simulations of algorithms in           
              the classroom.  This is a problem in almost every course in Computer           
              Science, since algorithms form a central part of the discipline.               
                                                                                             
              The advent of relatively cheap high resolution fast graphical                  
              workstations makes it possible to simulate the execution of an                 
              algorithm, and display dynamically appropriate graphical                       
              representations of the state of its execution on a screen.  The                
              result of these simulations is an interactive "movie" of the                   
              execution of the algorithm providing students with immediate visual            
              feedback about the concepts being explained.                                   
                                                                                             
              This project equips a classroom and implements curricula adjustments           
              to take advantage of the new environment.  Key components consist of           
              high resolution graphics workstations connected to a special output            
              device that permit students to view workstation displays on a large            
              projection screen.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The award is being matched by an equal amount from the principal               
              investigator's institution.
