Title       : Computer-Based Work Stations or Physiology Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9051717

Award Number: 9051717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall K. Packer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Biological Sciences             
              at George Washington University to help purchase equipment that                
              will allow redesign of two undergraduate physiology human                      
              laboratories around microcomputer-based work stations.  Apple                  
              Macintosh SE personal computers will be interfaced with World                  
              Precision Instruments MacLab data acquisition systems.  The WPI                
              MacLab includes both the necessary hardware and software                       
              specifically designed to emulate a polygraph and a storage                     
              oscilloscope.  The most innovative feature of the redesigned labs              
              will be that PCs will be used as interactive "electronic lab                   
              manuals".  The software which will be designed for the manual will             
              make possible an auto-tutorial approach which will greatly improve             
              learning during the conduct of an exercise.  In responding to                  
              queries, students will be required to answer questions, provide                
              data, or produce graphical or tabular data summaries.  The PC-based            
              work stations will also allow the addition of new lab exercises to             
              the curriculum, including simulations.  The proposed PC-based work             
              stations will be less expensive to purchase and much easier to use             
              and maintain than high quality pen and ink recording systems.  No              
              laboratory courses in the Department currently provide students an             
              opportunity to use PC's regularly for data acquisition and                     
              analysis.  Using PC-based work stations in physiology will better              
              prepare students to enter the work force or to continue their                  
              education at the graduate level.  The grantee is matching this                 
              award with non-Federal sources.
