Title       : "Experiments in Membrane Pervaporation for Undergraduate Chemical Engineering
               Laboratories"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1990       
File        : a9051549

Award Number: 9051549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14250              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Stewart Slater   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Manhattan College
	      Manhattan College Parkway
	      Bronx, NY  104632216    212/920-0100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The area of separation and purification has been                               
              revolutionized in the past decade by the development of                        
              membrane systems.  These have received much notice for their                   
              direct integration into the traditional chemical industry as                   
              partial or total replacement for costly and complex processes                  
              such as azeotropic or extractive distillation.  New                            
              technologies are rapidly being incorporated into modern                        
              chemical engineering with applications found in the expanding                  
              fields of biological engineering/biotechnology; hazardous                      
              waste management; specialty chemical and biochemical                           
              production; food and beverage processing; and, reuse and                       
              recovery systems engineering.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This project focuses on the development of instructional and                   
              laboratory experiences in membrane pervaporation processes.                    
              The project goal is to provide students with both theoretical                  
              and working knowledge of the membrane pervaporation process.                   
              This is accomplished through a supplement to a current course,                 
              a new course, and the introduction of new laboratory                           
              experiments covering the fundamentals of membrane                              
              pervaporation and the operation and application of this                        
              process.  Experiments illustrate the concepts of the driving                   
              force for pervaporative mass transport through membranes, the                  
              mechanism for transport as represented by the solution-                        
              diffusion model, the parameters quantifying membrane                           
              separation, and basic membrane material science.                               
                                                                                             
              The award is being matched by an equal amount from the                         
              principal investigator's institution.
