Title       : Temporal Measurements in Upper Level Undergraduate ChemistryLabs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9051249

Award Number: 9051249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57901              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Werner wernert@gar.union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Hayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie A. Hull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This college is one of a select group of small, primarily                      
              undergraduate institutions that has been particularly successful               
              in preparing undergraduates for graduate work in chemistry.                    
              Success is attributed to a long tradition of strong undergraduate              
              research participation and to the department's ability to expose               
              undergraduates to modern instrumentation.  Through this project,               
              new instrumentation was acquired to enable the faculty to develop              
              innovative experiments involving temporal dependent measurements               
              in the upper level labs.  The instrumentation, which was a natural             
              extension of previous facilities, allowed the department to expose             
              students to equipment which can probe time scales from nanoseconds             
              to seconds and energetic processes from the UV/VIS to the                      
              radiofrequency range.  The equipment made a major impact on the                
              Chemical Instrumentation, Physical Chemistry, Biochemistry and                 
              Senior Research courses.  The specific items acquired were a                   
              fluorescence lifetime instrument, a variable temperature probe for             
              the NMR, and components for the addition of an IR laser to their               
              flash photolysis apparatus.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to this project in an amount equal to              
              the NSF funds.
