Title       : Gas Chromatograph/Mass Spectrometry in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1990        
File        : a9051582

Award Number: 9051582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35952              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony P. Toste   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tamera S. Jahnke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard N. Biagioni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wyman K. Grindstaff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Missouri State U
	      901 South National
	      Springfield, MO  658040027    417/836-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Chemistry Department has augmented its undergraduate                       
              curriculum by introducing chemistry students to gas                            
              chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS).  Access to GC/MS has                 
              enriched all aspects of a previously already diverse                           
              undergraduate chemistry curriculum, ranging from the core areas                
              of chemistry, e.g., organic, to biochemistry and environmental                 
              chemistry.  The theories and hands-on application of GC/MS                     
              analysis have been incorporated into most of the Department's                  
              courses, beginning with sophomore-level courses and extending to               
              the advanced courses, both in lecture and, particularly, in the                
              laboratory.  Organic chemistry students use GC/MS to identify                  
              unknowns and products in reaction mixtures.  Environmental and                 
              instrumental chemistry students analyze "real-world" samples for               
              pesticides and other pollutants.  Biochemistry students analyze                
              complex biological samples like plants for bio-molecules such as               
              sterols.  The acquisition of GC/MS also enhanced numerous                      
              undergraduate research projects.  The general aim of this project              
              is to enrich the chemistry students' educational experiences by                
              introducing them to state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation,               
              specifically GC/MS.  Exposure to modern hyphenated modes of MS                 
              like GC/MS, in addition to the more traditional MS, is better                  
              preparing the students for continued study in graduate school                  
              and/or for a career in chemistry.                                              
                                                                                             
              The institution is contributing to the project in an amount equal              
              to the NSF funds.
