Title       : Improving Electronics Preparation at the Undergraduate Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1990      
File        : a9051099

Award Number: 9051099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15603              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brad Halfpap HalfpapB@acad.ripon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary E. Williams-Norton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ripon College
	      300 Seward St P O Box 248
	      Ripon, WI  54971    414/748-8118

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              There exists a real need for solid courses in analog and digital               
              electronics at the undergraduate level in four year institutions.              
              A course in analog electronics is an excellent laboratory                      
              experience.  Beyond this general appeal, physics majors who intend             
              to find industrial positions will be well served if they have a                
              good understanding of electronics.  For those students of physics              
              (and increasingly chemistry) who go on to graduate school, good                
              preparation in analog electronics is important in research                     
              laboratories where such knowledge is taken for granted.  All of the            
              above can be said for digital electronics, which, in addition, is              
              required for substantial numbers of students taking a computer                 
              science major.  To teach these classes well, every two students                
              should have at their disposal five major pieces of equipment:  a               
              dual trace oscilloscope, a good function generator, a D.C. power               
              supply, a frequency counter and, for more sophisticated digital                
              circuits, a logic analyzer.  In the past, each of these would be               
              physically separate instruments.  Ripon is integrating four of them            
              (all but the power supply) by acquiring plug in boards for IBM ATs.            
              This will reduce the cost and, more importantly, it will allow                 
              digital processing of the waveforms (principally Fourier Analysis)             
              resulting in an increased ability to do quantitative analyses of               
              experiments.  The college is matching the award with an equal                  
              amount of funds.//
