Title       : The Modern Software Development Laboratory: Enhancing the Practical Experience
               of Advanced Undergraduate Computer Science Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9051227

Award Number: 9051227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25387              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine S. Larason   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan T. Yaung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon A. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana - Monroe
	      700 University Avenue
	      Monroe, LA  712090001    318/342-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project provides advanced Computer Science undergraduates with            
              laboratory experiences needed to broaden their knowledge of the                
              principles of software engineering and "programming-in-the-large"              
              which they previously acquired only through class lectures and                 
              assigned reading.  This permits students to relate a sound                     
              theoretical understanding of software engineering techniques to                
              laboratory assignments.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Funds have been provided to enhance and expand the current                     
              university-wide network of DEC machines so that students enrolled              
              in Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, and other upper              
              level courses have access to the automated resources necessary for             
              the practical investigation of topics such as prototyping, the                 
              development and use of automated front-end life cycle tools, object            
              oriented design, and module reusability.  Further, students gain               
              hands-on familiarity with the software development techniques and              
              tools that they will use after they graduate.  The equipment                   
              permits students, through previously acquired software, to                     
              undertake and complete reasonably realistic projects more easily               
              and efficiently, thus allowing them to concentrate on broad general            
              aspects of software development.  The award is being matched by an             
              equal amount from the principal investigator's institution.
