Title       : Fluid Mechanics Modular Laboratory and Exhibit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9051857

Award Number: 9051857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16630              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Houghtalen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew R. Mech  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Richards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to introduce a laboratory component             
              into an introductory fluid mechanics course.  This is accomplished             
              by the purchase of a specially designed and fabricated modular                 
              fluid mechanics laboratory and exhibit.  The modular laboratory                
              will consist of a series of experiments which depict various fluid             
              dynamic and hydrostatic principles.  In a museum exhibit fashion,              
              water is pumped to an overhead reservoir and sent cascading through            
              the various experimental stations which are interconnected by                  
              siphons, open channels, and weirs.  The experimental stations,                 
              fabricated using clear acrylic pipes and tanks, display principles             
              ranging from buoyancy to momentum in visually appealing settings.              
              Questions accompany each experimental station to promote student               
              interest ant to test their intuition.  While serving as a                      
              stimulating course introduction, the key feature of the laboratory             
              exhibit is the modularization. Each break-away experiment is self-             
              contained and easily understood, allowing for data acquisition and             
              analysis by students in an open-lab format during the quarter.  The            
              lab exercises, which can be accomplished quickly, will serve to                
              verify or dispel the student's original intuitive predictions.  To             
              conclude the course, the individual experiments are reattached to              
              the exhibit.  The principles which have now been solidified in the             
              student's minds are once again depicted in the fascinating, museum-            
              like exhibit.  The institution is contributing an amount equal to              
              the award.***//
