Title       : An Undergraduate Workstation Laboratory for Scientific Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1990       
File        : a9051792

Award Number: 9051792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25306              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Ward   (Principal Investigator current)
              William N. Owen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Ted Huddleston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project introduces lower division engineering students to                 
              state-of-the-art scientific computing environment.  Key components             
              of this environment include two high-performance workstations, a               
              widely-used scientific subprogram library, and a very high-level               
              problem solving environment.  A color PostScript printer provides              
              state-of-the-art printing capability.  Equipment support for the               
              introductory course in scientific computing previously consisted               
              of an IBM mainframe and attached terminals;  this new                          
              instrumentation expands an existing NSF-funded laboratory, thus                
              allowing the course to demonstrate modern methods in problem                   
              solving and scientific software development.  Students gain a                  
              knowledge of the capabilities of existing software libraries and               
              systems and then learn to critically evaluate problems in order to             
              recognize which ones require custom-designed software, which may               
              be approached using library routines, and which may be rapidly                 
              solved with a very high-level programming language.  Problems                  
              requiring varying amounts of computational resources will be solved            
              so that students will acquire expertise in the selection of the                
              appropriate hardware environment.  The award is being matched by               
              an equal amount from the principal investigator's institution.
