Title       : An Upper Division Course in Environmental Awareness for BothScience and
               Non-Science Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1990        
File        : a9051877

Award Number: 9051877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11536              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Dininny   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albion College
	      611 East Porter
	      Albion, MI  492241831    517/629-5511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The chemistry department has devoted considerable effort during                
              the past eight years to curriculum development and the                         
              preparation of instructional materials, based on their premise                 
              that a chemistry curriculum should: (1) be designed for specific               
              students which it serves; (2) serve majors and non-majors equally              
              well; (3) provide maximum flexibility; (4) reflect current                     
              practice in chemistry and chemical education at all levels in the              
              curriculum, both in the classroom and the laboratory.  Current                 
              laboratory practice implies the intorduction of students to                    
              modern instrumentation, an area in which the department has made               
              significant gains in the last five years, due in part to a CSIP                
              grant from NSF.  They planned to offer a new course for both                   
              science and non-science majors.  The faculty structured a                      
              laboratory experience that involves some of the senior majors                  
              working with the non-majors in a cooperative environmental study               
              project.  The institution sees this grouping of students as a                  
              microcosm of our society, i.e., a few scientifically aware                     
              persons working with a larger number of persons having marginal                
              scientific literacy.  Through the project, the department                      
              acquired a gas chromatographic system capable of analyzing for                 
              volatile organic compounds, including halogenated compounds.                   
              This instrument along with atomic absorption, dc-plasma, and                   
              anode stripping instruments allows the students to seek answers                
              to analytical problems involving both inorganic and organic                    
              contaminants in the ground water.                                              
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to this project in an amount equal to              
              the NSF award.
