Title       : A Graphics Workstation in the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1990     
File        : a9051461

Award Number: 9051461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16149              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur Glasfeld   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald W. McClard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Shusterman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reed College
	      3203 S E Woodstock Blvd
	      Portland, OR  972028138    503/771-1112

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The computer acquired through this project was a Silicon Graphics              
              4D/25G graphics workstation with 12 MB of memory and two 380 MB                
              hard disk drives.  The graphics and calculational capabilities of              
              the computer are being used to support two biochemistry courses,               
              a course in computational chemistry, and the senior thesis                     
              program.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The workstation filled a gap that existed between what the                     
              chemistry undergraduates were taught and modern chemical                       
              research.  The rapid growth of information regarding molecular                 
              structure in biochemistry has given rise to the need for a more                
              effective method of representing large molecules in three                      
              dimensions than was available at the institution.  The graphics                
              workstation provided such a method.  Using available software                  
              packages, students are introduced to the intricacies of                        
              macromolecular structure throughout the one year biochemistry                  
              course.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              An additional need arose from the lack of instruction that                     
              undergraduates received in computational chemistry.  The                       
              acquisition of the workstation permitted the development of a                  
              course designed to teach the theory and practice of molecular                  
              calculations.  To teach such a course effectively, the Chemistry               
              Department required a more powerful computer than was available.               
              The Silicon Graphics workstation provided not only the necessary               
              processing power, but also the advantage of graphics capabilities              
              to assist in the presentation and interpretation of results from               
              sample calculations.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The senior thesis program also made extensive use of the graphics              
              workstation.  Student projects that were affected included site-               
              directed mutagenesis studies, enzyme inhibitor design and                      
              mathematical modelling of the relationship between structure and               
              mutagenicity.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed in an amount slightly in excessof the              
              NSF funds.
