Title       : Interferometry and Laser Spectroscopy in Undergraduate Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1990      
File        : a9051382

Award Number: 9051382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22706              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard T. Brundage   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Macalester College is introducing interferometry into the                      
              undergraduate physics program through an advanced laboratory course            
              on laser spectroscopy and faculty/student collaborative research.              
              This is accomplished through the use of three different                        
              interferometers:  a Michelson interferometer, a high finesse                   
              spherical interferometer, and a large aperture plane-parallel                  
              Fabry-Perot interferometer.  All of these instruments are used to              
              illustrate the concepts of free spectral range, finesse, and                   
              instrument profile introduced in the Laser Spectroscopy course.                
              The Michelson interferometer is used to investigate optical Fourier            
              transform spectroscopy as an example of the power and limitations              
              of the transform techniques that have become so widespread in                  
              modern science.  The spherical interferometer is used to study the             
              cavity modes of different laser systems, such as He-Ne, dye, and               
              diode lasers.  The plane-parallel interferometer is used as a high             
              resolution spectrometer to study laser, atomic vapor, and solid                
              state light sources.  The latter two instruments illustrate the                
              hierarchy of optical bandwidths, from the inhomogeneous Doppler                
              profile of a gas to the gain limited bandwidth of a single mode                
              laser.  Two general purpose computers control and analyze the data             
              from the new instruments.  A graphic programming language allows               
              students to program these computers quickly and efficiently.  The              
              instruments support faculty/student research in solid state                    
              spectroscopy, fiber optics, and astronomy when the Laser                       
              Spectroscopy course is not in session.                                         
                                                                                             
              The College is matching the award with an equal amount of funds.4
