Title       : Establishment of a Surface Profile Measurement Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1990     
File        : a9051240

Award Number: 9051240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. N. Balasubramanian   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project establishes a profile measurement laboratory.  The                
              equipment includes state of the art equipment to trace the profiles of         
              engineering surfaces, necessary filters, a powerful microcomputer              
              system for on-line date recording and analysis, and a high resolution          
              monitor to display the profiles and results.  The system uses standard         
              specimens from the National Bureau of Standards for reference                  
              measurements.  This project enables students in four manufacturing             
              engineering courses to use the equipment and measure the profiles and          
              roughness of engineering surfaces.  It also effectively illustrates            
              several manufacturing concepts including the usefulness of surface             
              roughness data in determining the functionally of parts as well as in          
              diagnosing the condition of production processes.  Experiments focus on        
              the effect of cutoff, cutting conditions, use of cutting fluid, wear,          
              and different production processes on the surface roughness of parts.          
              Databases developed as a part of this project are used by students for         
              the improvement of their skills in designing quality specifications and        
              selecting manufacturing processes to meet customer quality requirements        
              with optimum cost effectiveness.  The award is being matched by an             
              equal amount from the principal investigator's institution.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     //
