Title       : Improving an Undergraduate Program in Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1990    
File        : a9051025

Award Number: 9051025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60975              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Spotila Spotila@coasmail.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 9120      CROSS-DIRECTORATE PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Bioscience and                  
              Biotechnology at Drexel University to purchase equipment which will            
              help to improve an existing undergraduate ecology program, to                  
              increase the number of women and minorities in ecology, and to                 
              improve the science education of prospective teachers.  Using a                
              research boat, field vehicle (van), and modern instruments a group             
              of faculty from the Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology                 
              teach undergraduates how to conduct modern scientific research on              
              aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems in the Philadelphia area.  This             
              involves formal course work and independent student research                   
              projects in aquatic ecology, biophysical ecology, and animal                   
              behavior.  In addition, this project also seeks to increase the                
              number of minorities and women in ecology by a coordinated effort              
              at the undergraduate and high school levels.  Local community                  
              groups and officials are involved in the selection of undergraduate            
              scholars that will receive full tuition scholarships from the                  
              University and in the selection of students to participate in                  
              Saturday morning science programs.  Prospective teachers will also             
              be involved in the undergraduate ecology program through                       
              coordination with the teacher preparation program at Drexel.  Major            
              items of equipment in this award include a research boat, field                
              vehicle, a water quality data system, a portable photosynthesis                
              apparatus, and microclimatology instruments for field experiments;             
              a controlled climate chamber, telemetry data logging system, and               
              video system for lab experiments in ecology and animal behavior;               
              and microcomputers for data analysis and mathematical modeling in              
              ecology.  The grantee is matching this award with non-Federal                  
              sources.
