Title       : Equipment to Improve the Teaching of Behavioral Neurosciencein an Undergraduate
               Psychology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1990     
File        : a9051668

Award Number: 9051668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47735              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry Goldman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly Pomona Fdn, Inc
	      
	      Pomona, CA  91768    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The laboratory section of the course in physiological psychology               
              is being upgraded so that students will experience the research                
              methods of modern behavioral neuroscience. The focus is on                     
              behavioral testing and biopotential recording systems. The                     
              behavioral testing equipment consists of a 4 station operant                   
              conditioning system, a figure-8 activity device with                           
              photoelectric sensing, a radial arm maze, a water maze with                    
              photoelectric sensing and video monitoring, a rota-rod treadmill,              
              and a rotometer. The human biopotential recording equipment                    
              consists of a 24 channel "Neurosearch" system for acquiring and                
              processing human biopotentials, and an AST 390C computer. The                  
              animal biopotential equipment consists of a remote telemetry                   
              system for EEG, EKG, and temperature, and interfaces with the                  
              computer for data collection. The laboratory experiments using                 
              this equipment are designed to enable students to explore the                  
              behavioral consequences of biological manipulations, and directly              
              observe the physiological activity that accompanies ongoing                    
              behavior. Students thus gain a better understanding and                        
              appreciation of the biological bases of all behavior, and are                  
              better prepared for graduate work in areas related to                          
              neuroscience. The equipment is also used in independent student                
              research projects. The university will contribute an amount equal              
              to the award.
