Title       : Purchase of a 100MHz FT-NMR for Undergraduate Instruction and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1990     
File        : a9051447

Award Number: 9051447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tito Viswanathan Txviswanatha@UALR.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dominic T. Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank L. Setliff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Little Rock
	      2801 South University
	      Little Rock, AR  72204    501/569-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Through this project, the institution was able to purchase an FT-              
              NMR spectrometer to use as a laboratory tool for the structure                 
              identification of organic compounds.  Most of the compounds are                
              synthesized by students in one of several organic and polymer                  
              chemistry laboratory courses offered in the department.                        
                                                                                             
              In this project, a variety of experiments were carefully chosen                
              to enable the students to gain an appreciation and understanding               
              of the instrument as a spectroscopic tool for structural                       
              analysis.  These include (a) analysis of polymer tacticity,  (b)               
              residual monomer and microstructural product analysis of polymers              
              synthesized by ring-opening and ring-closing                                   
              polymerizations, (c) simplification of spectra of some amides and              
              alcohols by use of chiral/non-chiral lanthanide shift reagents                 
              and by deuterium exchange of acidic protons, (d) demonstration of              
              rotameric transformation in amides by variable temperature NMR,                
              and (e) general utility in synthetic organic chemistry.                        
                                                                                             
              The instrument has also been useful in several student research                
              projects in progress at the department.  The instrument improved               
              the quality and effectiveness of teaching in relevant lab-                     
              associated courses and better prepared the students for advanced               
              careers in chemistry.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to this project in an amount equal to              
              the NSF funds.
