Title       : Improvement of an Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum with Gas
               Chromotography-Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1990     
File        : a9051159

Award Number: 9051159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ching S. Woo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Curtiss D. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Macmillan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Recent developments in low cost, benchtop Gas Chromatograph/Mass               
              Spectrometer systems offer new approaches to undergraduate                     
              education in chemistry.  The objective of this project is the                  
              enhancement of the undergraduate chemistry curriculum at the                   
              institution through the inclusion of extensive laboratory                      
              experience in concepts and techniques of GC/MS.  The addition of               
              GC/MS has affected a broad range of courses including                          
              Instrumental Analysis, Microscale Organic Laboratories and                     
              Environmental Chemistry.  In addition, students participate in                 
              laboratory-based studies, involving independent projects and                   
              undergraduate honor's research.  The project has been designed to              
              introduce students to new chemical and technological advances in               
              the component or hyphenated technique, while making basic                      
              concepts of mass spectrometry clear in a simple, rational and                  
              interesting manner.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Modern GC/MS methodology, currently used in industrial chemical                
              laboratories is being utilized to solve a variety of problems in               
              analytical and organic laboratory courses.  Thus, students are                 
              exposed to equipment and techniques that they may reasonably                   
              expect to use in their future professional careers.  The project               
              also includes featuring the equipment in the departmental                      
              sponsored workshops and demonstrations for high school science                 
              teachers and senior students.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The institution has contributed to the project in an amount equal              
              to the NSF funds.
