Title       : MRI: Development of a Surface Scattering System for Real-time X-ray Studies of
               Growth and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0116567

Award Number: 0116567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl F. Ludwig ludwig@buphy.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore D. Moustakas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Eddy  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award funds the development of a system for the in-situ synchrotron x-ray
              study of thin film growth with molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) and of surface
              modification with plasma processing. The system will permit extensive x-ray
              access to the sample and incorporate standard characterization tools (e.g.
              RHEED) to better correlate the synchrotron results with in-house studies.  In
              the area of film growth, particular attention is paid to surface structure
              during the MBE growth of III-V nitride films, both GaN and Ga-Al-In nitride
              alloys. Among other issues, research will focus on buffer layer formation and
              atomic ordering/phase separation in the alloy systems.  Investigations of
              surface structure during plasma processing will initially focus on silicon,
              since it has been widely studied with complementary methods.  Future
              experiments will be directed at processing of compound semiconductor surfaces,
              such as those of the arsenides and nitrides.  Students trained with the system
              will be exposed to a broad range of materials issues ranging from basic surface
              structure research to understanding how surface structure can effect device
              performance. They will be well prepared to bring their experience and new
              insights to industry and academia following graduation.

This award funds the
              development of a surface scattering system for real-time x-ray studies of
              growth and processing. The system will enable the fundamental study of two
              processes that are vital for the semiconductor industry. These are, first,
              Molecular Beam Epitaxy, which allows the highly controlled growth of thin films
              a single atomic layer at a time, and, second, the modification of surfaces with
              energetic particles in a set of processes that is known collectively as "plasma
              processing". Using a very intense beam of x-rays from a synchrotron source, the
              atomic structure of surfaces will be investigated as these technologically
              important processes are occurring. The basic understanding gained from these
              experiments may eventually lead to methods for growing new high quality
              materials for the optoelectronics and high power industries and to better
              methods of etching and passivating semiconductor surfaces throughout the
              electronics industry.  In addition, this equipment will provide a unique
              resource to train students in these rapidly developing interdisciplinary areas
              that cut across traditional boundaries of physics, materials science and
              electrical engineering.

