Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Automated DNA Sequencer for Undergraduate Research and
               Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0116086

Award Number: 0116086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Evans bevans@gw.lssu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Kirkpatrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Superior State Univ
	      650 West Easterday Ave.
	      Sault Ste. Marie, MI  49783    906/632-6841

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Evans at Lake Superior State University to
              acquire an automated Genetic Analyzer. The equipment will advance faculty
              research and undergraduate research training involving DNA sequencing and DNA
              fingerprinting. The goals of the project are as follows: 1) to discover how
              photoreceptor opsin gene expression changes during retinal development in a
              variety of teleost fish species. 2) to characterize the cross-breeding
              (hybridization) occurring between pink salmon and chinook salmon in the St.
              Marys River. 3) to determine if specific DNA markers can establish whether
              Great Lakes sea lamprey return to their natal streams to spawn. 4) to provide
              research training in DNA sequencing for Biology and Clinical Laboratory Science
              majors, and to train students majoring in Criminalistics, and Fisheries &
              Wildlife Management in DNA fingerprinting techniques.
Three faculty projects
              will incorporate undergraduate research training: 1) Spectral sensitivity in
              the eye is mainly determined by the opsin proteins in the photoreceptor cells
              of the retina.  In the winter flounder, these opsin proteins change as the
              animals go through metamorphosis. Before a cell can produce a protein,
              messenger RNA (mRNA) must be copied  from the cell's DNA. At selected
              developmental stages, fish retinas will be examined for opsin mRNA expression,
              photoreceptor morphology and cell specific opsin expression. Using "polymerase
              chain reaction" (PCR), the opsin genes will be amplified and then sequenced
              using the Genetic Analyzer. Once sequences are identified, mRNA tags will be
              created to follow the change in photoreceptor opsin as the fish retina
              transforms from larval to juvenile state. 2) Hybrids between Chinook and pink
              salmon are frequently encountered in the St Marys River, but apparently these
              hybrids only result from crossbreeding between Chinook females and pink salmon
              males. Why the hybrids are occurring this way is unclear. Mitochondria are only
              inherited from the mother; thus DNA fingerprints created using mitochondrial
              DNA (mtDNA) will allow the maternal species of the hybrids to be identified.
              Using the Genetic Analyzer, a database of mtDNA fingerprints will be
              established for the chinook, pink and "pinook" salmon hybrids to determine if
              the hybrid crosses are truly restricted. If so, further studies will examine
              the mechanisms involved. 3) Sea lamprey are a serious parasite on native Great
              Lakes fishes. Protein (isozyme) analysis has indicated that lamprey return to
              their natal spawning grounds. The current study will test the utility of using
              DNA fingerprints of lamprey populations to assess the gene flow between
              populations. Population genetic surveys commonly create DNA fingerprints using
              microsatellite DNA, which are unique regions of the DNA. Such methods have been
              used for many fish populations, but not for lamprey. The Genetic Analyzer will
              be used create DNA fingerprints for the lamprey using microsatellite DNA
              markers. The results from these genetic analyses will be compared with the
              previous isozyme studies to assess their usefulness for monitoring lamprey life
              cycles. 4) Undergraduate students will be hired as research assistants on these
              projects. In addition, several courses will incorporate DNA sequencing for
              Biology and Clinical Laboratory Science majors and DNA fingerprinting
              technology for Criminalistics, and Fisheries & Wildlife Management majors. Both
              techniques will be available for students to use in their senior thesis
              research. 
The project contributes to several fields of basic science
              research. 1) The neural retina of the eye is an accessible part of the central
              nervous system where structure and function are clearly related. Understanding
              how the retina is "built" gives insight into how other neural networks develop.
              The teleost fish retina is a typical vertebrate retina and presents a useful
              model for understanding normal development (i.e., how cells divide and
              differentiate into specific tissues). In addition, the change in opsin gene
              expression in the winter flounder eye may answer questions of how cell-cell
              interactions determine a cell's fate. 2) In their natural habitat, there are
              few opportunities for Chinook and pink salmon to crossbreed, but in the St.
              Marys River, the number of 'pinook' hybrids appear to be increasing. In the
              laboratory, pink and chinook crosses have been made in both directions
              suggesting no physiological barriers to hybridization. The presence of
              restricted crossbreeding in the wild may be a result of behavioral barriers
              such as territoriality or courtship rituals. 3) Sea lampreys are a major
              problem in the Great Lakes, and a solution may reside in understanding their
              life history and spawning behavior. Protein analysis indicates that lamprey do
              return to the region of their birth to spawn. Use of microsatellite DNA markers
              to create DNA fingerprints is a method that can be automated, allowing fast,
              routine analysis of gene flow. A better understanding of lamprey population
              genetics may allow these populations to be brought under control in the future.
              4) Student learning, by active participation, is central at Lake Superior State
              University, and faculty consider their personal research interests to be a
              mechanism to stimulate student curiosity. DNA technology is becoming
              increasingly prominent in our everyday lives. It is important that we not only
              train students how to perform these techniques for research careers, but also
              train them to recognize when these methods are being applied and interpreted
              correctly.

