Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Micro-Scale Fabrication Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0116274

Award Number: 0116274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123334             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darren L. Hitt Darren.Hitt@uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dryver R. Huston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter J. Varhue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funds for the
              acquisition of equipment necessary for the establishment of a Micro-Scale
              Fabrication Facility at the University of Vermont.  Specific equipment to be
              acquired are a reactive ion etcher for microscopic patterning of substrates, a
              wedge bonder for the attachment of electrodes, a vacuum furnace for annealing,
              a diamond saw for dicing of individual micro-structures from substrates, and a
              miniature clean environment for handling and assembly of structures. This
              equipment will permit the precise microscopic fabrication of physical
              structures necessary for a number of  interdisciplinary micro- and/or
              nano-scale engineering and scientific initiatives. Planned  research projects
              include micro-scale fluid mixing systems; design and development of micro-scale
              satellite thruster prototypes; advanced materials and thin film/membrane
              development; micro-scale environmental contaminant models; nanobiology of human
              molecular "motors"; and micro-scale ultrasonic bio-sensors for chemical vapor
              and gas detection.  In addition to research efforts, the Micro-Scale
              Fabrication Facility will be used to develop new interdisciplinary curricula
              for undergraduate and graduate students centering broadly on issues of
              microfabrication, micro-scale engineering systems and nanotechnology.  Lecture
              and lab curricula, which focus on micro-fabrication science and technology and
              make extensive use of the lab facilities, will be developed.

The benefits of
              this equipment include enhanced research capabilities; improved educational
              opportunities and curricula; and increased opportunities with local Vermont
              industry.  The ability to perform in-house micro-fabrication will benefit and
              expedite research in the areas of micro-electromechanical systems, satellite
              micro-propulsion concepts, microfluidic mixing, chemical analysis and
              detection, and advanced materials development.   Results of these projects
              could in turn aid the advancement of miniaturized devices and sensors relevant
              to space satellite propulsion, pharmaceutical, biomedical, automotive,
              semiconductor and environmental monitoring applications.  The equipment will
              also lead to new graduate and undergraduate curricular and research
              opportunities.  Students will directly benefit by obtaining advanced and
              highly-marketable job skills.  Finally, opportunities for collaborations
              between the University of Vermont  and state and local industry will be
              improved.  Companies which lack sufficient infrastructure to pursue micro-scale
              initiatives will have the ability to partner with the University of Vermont and
              its researchers.   



