Title       : Acquisition and Development of a Prototype Instrumented City
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0116099

Award Number: 0116099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hesham A. Rakha rakha@vtti.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray Pethtel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1631,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
There is an urgent need to develop tools for evaluation of the
              efficiency, energy, environmental, and safety impacts of traffic flow
              improvement projects, including Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) and
              Intelligent Vehicle Initiative (IVI) alternatives. The development and
              validation of such tools requires comprehensive field data. This proposal
              attempts to develop a state-of-the-art real-life and comprehensive data
              collection environment that can be utilized for the development, validation,
              and testing of these highly demanded evaluation tools, and that can also be
              used as a test bed for testing emerging communication, traffic management, and
              traveler information systems.  This test facility can set the stage for the US
              to establish its lead in field traffic, energy, and environmental data
              collection and the development and validation of transportation modeling
              tools.
The goal of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) acquisition
              project is to develop a comprehensive instrumented test bed in the Town of
              Blacksburg to achieve the following objectives:
1. Develop a real-life test
              facility that can be used for the evaluation and enhancement of traffic flow
              theory. The test facility will also be utilized to develop, enhance, and test
              alternative traffic control strategies, as well as other ITS and IVI
              alternatives.
2. Develop a database that can be utilized for research on
              alternative means of disseminating real-time traveler information to the
              public.
3. Develop a real-life test facility for enhancing and developing
              tools for the evaluation of network-wide energy and environmental impacts of
              operational-level transportation projects.
4. Develop a real-life test
              facility for enhancing and developing tools for quantifying the noise impacts
              of operational-level transportation projects.
5. Develop a test facility to
              evaluate emerging ITS technologies that can benefit transit operations.
6.
              Develop a test bed for the evaluation of emerging surveillance and
              communication technologies.
7. Develop a unique educational tool that will
              allow practitioners, undergraduate students, and graduate students to access
              and analyze real-life traffic data.
In achieving these objectives,
              surveillance technology will be installed at a total of 20 out of 38
              intersections in the Blacksburg area. Funding will also be allocated to
              purchase on-board vehicle emission instrumentation, a fully equipped emission
              measurement van, in-situ emission measurement sensors, noise measurement
              instrumentation, transit vehicle passenger counting instrumentation,
              instrumentation for a Traffic Management Center, and the use of US Wireless
              geolocation technology to track vehicles.  In particular, the proposed
              instrumentation will be added to the use of an existing state-of-the-art Smart
              Road test facility.
With the requested instrumentation, multi-modal
              transportation research will be conducted to develop modeling tools that are
              reflective of real-world driving conditions.  This effort includes research on
              vehicle acceleration behavior, car-following, lane changing and lane selection
              behavior at signalized intersections, as well as merge, diverge, and weaving
              sections.  In the area of ITS and IVI systems, research will be conducted on
              emergency vehicle pre-emption and transit priority, on the evaluation of
              technologies that can benefit transit operations such as automatic passenger
              counting and automatic vehicle tracking and display, and on the dissemination
              of traffic information using web-based and in-vehicle traveler information
              systems.  The Instrumented City will also serve as a test bed for the
              development, evaluation, and testing of geolocation algorithms using wireless
              technology.  Other research will involve the development of comprehensive
              vehicle fuel consumption and emission databases, the development and validation
              of statistical tailpipe fuel consumption and emission models, and the modeling
              of emission dispersion.
The proposal involves collaboration with four public
              agencies including the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT), the Town
              of Blacksburg Department of Public Works, and Blacksburg Transit. In addition,
              the proposal involves collaboration with a number of private agencies including
              CleanAir Technologies and US Wireless.  Further collaboration will be sought
              between Virginia Tech and the University of Virginia's Smart Travel Laboratory
              to collect and exchange data in Blacksburg, the Washington DC Area, and the
              Hampton Roads Area.  

