Title       : Acquistion of a Laser Confocal Microscope for an Integrated Microscopy Facility
               at Union College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0116320

Award Number: 0116320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226832             (Estimated)
Investigator: Quynh Chu-LaGraff chulagrq@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara C. Boyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Lauzon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Danowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Stephen Horton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Quynh Chu-LaGraff, Barbara Boyer, Barbara
              Danowski, Stephen Horton, and Robert Lauzon at Union College to acquire a
              confocal microscope to be the centerpiece for a renovated Integrated Microscope
              facility. This instrument would substantially enhance and expand the research
              capabilities of five faculty with interests ranging from cellular motility,
              invertebrate development and evolution, genetic development, programmed cell
              death, to molecular neuroscience.  Moreover, confocal technology as an
              innovative tool will be integrated into classroom laboratory training and
              individual student-faculty projects to enrich the research experience of 
              undergraduates.
	Within the Biology Department, there are currently numerous
              projects that represent the integration of cellular, genetics, molecular, and
              developmental approach to biological science. Specifically, research include
              using fly and mouse model systems to better understand human neurological
              diseases, evolution of segmentation in primitive organisms, the role of
              centrosome reorientation in migrating cultured cells, genetic and molecular
              mechanisms governing mushroom development, and basic understanding of
              programmed cell death in colonial sea squirt Botryllus schlosseri.  
	The
              instrument represents a critical investment to maintain and enhance academic
              research excellence both for faculty research and for the training of
              undergraduate researchers.  It will also facilitate more active and productive
              faculty and student research interactions at Union College by bypassing the
              need to gain access to a confocal microscope elsewhere.

