Title       : Development of a Very Large CCD Area Detector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0116615

Award Number: 0116615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin M. Westbrook edwin.westbrook@mbc-als.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Molecular Biology Consorti
	      835 South Walcott (MC790)
	      Chicago, IL  606127344    312/996-2286

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Edwin M. Westbrook at the Molecular Biology
              Consortium (MBC) in Chicago, to develop a state-of-the-art X-ray detector for
              structural molecular biology research.  When the prototype has been completed,
              it will set the standard for future detectors in this class.  The application
              for this detector is protein crystallography, to be conducted at a synchrotron
              beamline of the Advanced Light Source (ALS) at Lawrence Berkeley National
              Laboratory (LBL).  Protein crystallography is progressively taking advantage of
              the nation's synchrotron X-ray sources, because they provide million-fold
              brighter X-ray beams than can be had at home laboratories, and the beam is also
              much narrower and of more uniform energy.  Once the molecular biology community
              learned to use these magnificent beamlines, enormous advances have been made in
              structural knowledge of biological systems at the molecular level.  Recent
              determination of the molecular structures of the ribosome subunits and of the
              RNA polymerase II are merely examples of results that could not have been
              achieved without synchrotron X rays.  The detector that will be developed in
              this project will further amplify the capabilities of the synchrotron beamline
              on which it will be installed.
While the science of molecular biology is the
              driving reason for developing this detector, the project itself will be
              predominantly one of electronic engineering.  The detector will feature
              advanced new Charge-Coupled Devices (CCDs) that have recently been developed
              that have lower noise and faster performance than previous CCDs. 
              Application-Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) and Field-Programmable Gate
              Arrays (FPGAs) will be integrated into the control system of the detector, and
              its readout system will be the new S-LINK parallel fiberoptic interface.  The
              MBC electronics group is well known for its extremely low-noise analog
              electronics, but this detector will also feature radically new digital signal
              processing to reduce the uncertainty of reading the electronic charge of each
              CCD pixel, permitting up to 18-bit readout registration.
The new detector will
              have a square active area 32 cm on each side, that can be repetitively observed
              every 0.67 seconds.  It will have a dynamic range- the ratio of
              strongest/weakest signals it can simultaneously detect- exceeding 250,000:1. 
              Its spatial resolution will permit neighboring Bragg spots to be measured even
              when they are only 0.6 mm apart, so this detector will be able to resolve over
              500 spots across its 32 cm width.  All of these characteristic parameters
              exceed those of existing crystallographic detectors, and taken together as a
              whole this detector will be dramatically better than any now available.

