Title       : Acquisition of an Analytical Field Emission Environmental Scanning Electron
               Microscope for Interdisciplinary Multi-User Access at the University of
               Arkansas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0116634

Award Number: 0116634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $572034             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Shultz jshultz@uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Ungar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Proctor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia F. Bailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard K. Ulrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to the University of
              Arkansas is for the acquisition of a field emission environmental scanning
              electron microscope. The system is expected to provide a spatial resolution of
              two nanometer at thirty kilovolt accelerating voltage and at elevated chamber
              pressure up to ten Torr. This allows imaging of biological or other wet samples
              without the requirement of conducting coating. The system will be equipped with
              hot/cold stages and micromanipulators. It includes additional features such as
              computerized image processing with capability to capture videos of sample
              evolution. Faculty and students from universities in Arkansas with
              underrepresented minorities will have remote access to the instrument. The
              instrument will be used by twenty faculty members along with students and
              postdocs. The instrument will also support the research and training activities
              of the Arkansas-Oklahoma Center of Instrumentation and Science for Planetary
              Surfaces, the Center for Advanced Technology and the MRSEC.  

This award
              from the Major Research Instrumentation program to the University of Arkansas
              is for the acquisition of a field emission environmental scanning electron
              microscope. The system is expected to provide a spatial resolution of two
              nanometer at thirty kilovolt accelerating voltage and at elevated chamber
              pressure up to ten Torr. This allows imaging of biological or other wet samples
              without the requirement of conducting coating. The system will be equipped with
              hot/cold stages and micromanipulators. It includes additional features such as
              computerized image processing with capability to capture videos of sample
              evolution. Faculty and students from universities in Arkansas with
              underrepresented minorities will have remote access to the instrument. The
              instrument will be used by twenty faculty members along with students and
              postdocs. The instrument will also support the research and training activities
              of the Arkansas-Oklahoma Center of Instrumentation and Science for Planetary
              Surfaces, the Center for Advanced Technology and the MRSEC.

 

