Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Measurement of Trace Gas Fluxes in the
               Arizona Highlands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0116773

Award Number: 0116773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183251             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Herring jherring@prescott.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy E. Crews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Prescott College
	      220 Grove Avenue
	      Prescott, AZ  863012912    928/778-2090

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jack Herring and Dr. Tim Crews at Prescott
              College. The sophisticated research instrumentation provided by this grant will
              allow measurement of the exchange of variety of trace gases between the
              atmosphere and the land surface.  The primary goal of the research is to better
              understand the cycling of nitrogen in the highlands of central Arizona.  A
              secondary goal is to study the relationship between the cycling of nitrogen and
              carbon in these ecosystems.  Additionally, the instruments will play a central
              role in training students at Prescott College in these analytical techniques. 
              Initially, the instrumentation will be installed in chaparral, an important
              plant community in the southwestern U.S. for which there is little information
              on the dynamics of nitrogen cycling.  Chaparral is interesting because it has
              among the highest, if not the highest, density of nitrogen-fixing woody plants
              in the United States.  Due to the potentially high inputs of nitrogen via
              biological fixation, and an annual precipitation regime that favors extreme
              drying and wetting events, it is suspected that the interior chaparral
              ecosystem may support at least periodically high to very high rates of nitrogen
              oxide emissions.  Specifically, this equipment will be used to make continuous,
              long-term measurements of exchanges of NO2, NO + NO2 (NOx), and N2O using a
              laser-based technique.  The instrument tower will also be equipped with a
              special device for measuring vertical winds and a device for measuring CO2 and
              H2O concentrations.  In addition to these measurements of gas
              exchange,
supporting short-term chamber studies of N2O emissions by gas
              chromatography and chamber measurements of NO emissions will be conducted.
              These chamber studies will be conducted both in chaparral and in other
              ecosystems that are characterized by human alteration of the N cycle; these
              include fire-treated ponderosa woodlands, arid agricultural land and
              livestock-grazed arid grasslands. The results will guide the use of the
              instrumentation when the chaparral study is completed.
	As scientists from
              many disciplines work toward a better understanding of the processes underlying
              global change, it becomes increasingly clear that the knowledge of the
              interactions between living organisms and the atmosphere needs to be improved. 
              The linkage between nitrogen cycling and global change is both direct (due to
              the greenhouse effect of N2O emissions) and indirect (due to the effects of
              nitrogen availability on the net absorption or release of key greenhouse gases
              CO2 and CH4).  A good understanding of these ecosystem dynamics is key
              to
understanding the potential for the biosphere to absorb the CO2 currently
              being released by fossil fuel combustion as well as to understanding how
              ecosystems will respond to the many environmental changes they are now being
              exposed to.  Such information is vital to policymakers who are currently
              wrestling with issues such as that of global climate change.  The answers
              to
these questions will only come from extensive networks of such
              instrumentation; this will necessitate the training of large numbers of
              scientists in the specialized techniques involved in these measurements. 


