Title       : The Identification of Nonpoint Sources of Escherichia Coli in Freshwater
               Ecosystems by DNA Fingerprinting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0116387

Award Number: 0116387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75584              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald T. Stephens rstephens@ferrum.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ferrum College
	      
	      Ferrum, VA  24088    540/365-2121

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

A grant has been awarded to Ronald Stephens at Ferrum College, to
              purchase equipment for molecular biological techniques in order to support
              research which determines the sources of fecal bacteria in freshwater
              ecosystems by DNA fingerprinting of Escherichia coli bacteria.  In 1972 the
              federal government passed the Clean Water Act whose mission is to "restore and
              maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the nations
              waters."  In Virginia, many streams are classified as being impaired because of
              high levels of fecal bacteria.  The EPA has mandated that these problems be
              mediated by the implementation of the TMDL (Total Maximum Daily Load) Program. 
              Successful water remediation cannot occur until reliable methods of identifying
              the source(s) of the fecal contamination can be developed.  Fecal bacteria are
              found in the intestines of all warm-blooded animals. Therefore, potential
              sources of E. coli contamination could be from humans, domestic animals, wild
              life, or livestock.  The presence of fecal bacteria indicate the possibilities
              of the presence of pathogenic bacteria or viruses.

The purpose of this
              project will be to determine nonpoint (unknown) sources of fecal bacteria in
              the Blackwater and Pigg River watersheds in Franklin County, Virginia.  The
              specific objectives of the project will be to:

 Collect fecal bacterial
              strains from known sources (fecal samples) and unknown sources (water
              samples).

 Determine the DNA fingerprint profile of the bacterial samples
              using the equipment provided.

 Compare DNA fingerprint profiles from known
              and unknown sources with existing profiles.

 Determine the sources of the
              bacteria in the unknown samples.

 Increase the DNA fingerprint library
              database.

With the establishment of methodologies to determine the sources
              of fecal bacteria in the nations waterways, this problem can be more directly
              addressed and remediation more accurately designed.  Otherwise, without
              specific knowledge of the sources of fecal pollution, expensive remediation
              programs such as TMDL's will be based on guesswork.  The establishment of a DNA
              fingerprint library database will greatly increase the scientist's ability to
              determine the sources of fecal pollution. This database could not be
              established without the purchase of the molecular biology equipment.
