Title       : Multiscale Research on the Effects of Anthropogenic Disturbance on Carbon and
               Nitrogen Dynamics: Major Research Instrumentation for Enhancing Research and
               Research Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0116011

Award Number: 0116011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287237             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherri J. Morris sjmorris@bradley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Frase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet L. Gehring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly D. McConnaughay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bradley University
	      1501 West Bradley Avenue
	      Peoria, IL  616250001    309/676-7611

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Morris, McConnaughay, Gehring and Frase at
              Bradley University to acquire instrumentation needed to support integrated
              studies of C and N dynamics including controlled environment growth chambers,
              photosynthesis and soil respiration equipment and a nutrient auto-analyzer. The
              equipment requested will be used within the department for individual projects,
              interdepartmental collaborative projects and integrated research-training of
              undergraduate and graduate students.

The instrumentation will support
              on-going collaborative research efforts to examine the effects of altered C and
              N dynamics on native and invasive plants in restored prairie ecosystems. 
              Specific projects will examine plant growth characteristics in the field and in
              the laboratory under controlled environmental conditions in chambers subjected
              to elevated CO2 and N deposition.  Soil nutrient dynamics, including C and N
              turnover, will be evaluated using laboratory mineralization rates in tandem
              with measurements of plant growth characteristics. In addition to answering
              fundamental questions about restoration ecology and ecosystem change following
              disturbance, the instrumentation will be used as a tool by individual
              researchers to introduce undergraduates in their respective laboratories to
              integrated large-scale projects.  


