Title       : Seismic Response of Rigid-Block Assemblies: Experimental Studies and Validation
               of Discreet Element Numerical Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0116354

Award Number: 0116354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146178             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicos Makris makris@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Recent shake table tests on wine-barrel stacks have revealed several dislocation
              patterns and
various modes of failure including sliding or rocking of the
              entire stack, sliding or rocking of an
upper portion of the stack, lift-off of
              the top barrels and in few occasions appreciable twisting of
the stack around
              its vertical axis. While initial observations suggested a chaotic response,
              further
examination of the experimental results indicate that the dynamic
              response of rigid-block assemblies might be much more ordered than initially
              thought. Order emerges when the response of the block assembly is correlated
              with the appropriate parameters of the excitation (not just the acceleration
              level) and the appropriate parameters of the configuration of the entire
              assembly as well as these of the individual blocks. The need to improve our
              understanding of the dynamic response of rigid-block assemblies motivated the
              study proposed herein. The main objectives of this grant are: (a) to
              experimentally verify theoretical findings on the rocking response of single
              blocks; (b) to validate the performance of existing discrete and finite element
              software to analyze the dynamic response of rigid-block assemblies; and (c)
              establish a dependable procedure that engineers can use with confidence to
              estimate the earthquake response of rigid-block assemblies.
In this project we
              first propose a series of shake table experiments on single free-standing
and
              anchored blocks to validate recent theoretical findings on their rocking
              response under ground shaking.  The study will examine the ability of numerical
              tools to predict the overall dislocation patterns and the appropriate model of
              failure and will document their advantages and limitations. Finally the most
              dependable existing software will be used to construct a set of drift, rotation
              and overturning spectra for a family of rigid-block assemblies of interest. It
              is expected that the study will establish a practical procedure for estimating
              the earthquake response of rigid-block assemblies and provide practical
              retrofit recommendations for enhancing their earthquake resistance.

