Title       : Acquisition of a Video Microscopy System for Laboratory Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0116693

Award Number: 0116693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71721              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Galewsky sgalewsky@mail.millikin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. McQuistion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millikin University
	      1184 West Main Street
	      Decatur, IL  625222039    217/424-6211

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Samuel Galewsky and Dr. Thomas McQuistion at
              Millikin University.  The grant is for the acquisition of a video microscopy
              system: including a research compound microscope equipped with DIC, phase
              contrast and fluorescence optics; a high resolution digital video camera for
              fluorescence imaging; a zoom stereo microscope with an S-video color low
              resolution camera attached to it; a color printer; a dedicated computer
              equipped with a ZIP drive; and software for morphometric and image analysis as
              well as time lapse videography.  
	In Dr. Galewsky's laboratory, which focuses
              on the developmental regulation of genes during Drosophila embryogenesis, the
              system will provide significantly better image quality and resolution, enabling
              student researchers to thoroughly analyze complex staining patterns.   In Dr.
              McQuistion's laboratory, which is devoted to identifying and classifying
              intestinal parasites in South American birds, the system will enable further
              work in determining parasitic prevalence and diversity among different South
              American host populations.   And in Dr. Judith Parrish's laboratory, the system
              will enable researchers to view clear images of pollen grains, making possible
              many additional research projects in the area of pollination ecology.  
              
	Students working in the laboratory will be responsible for independently
              using the system and its many capabilities in the course of their work.  The
              system will also be used in multiple teaching laboratories and will thus be
              introduced to all Millikin biology majors (which number approximately 200 at
              any one time.) It will even be introduced to all Millikin students via their
              required science laboratory course, which features a biology laboratory
              component.   

