Title       : Acquisition of an Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis System and Confocal
               Microscope for an Interdisciplinary Microscopy-Imagery Center in Biology,
               Chemistry & Geology at St. Lawrence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0116408

Award Number: 0116408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Budd tbudd@stlawu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nadia Marano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Bursnall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Mark Erickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph S. Erlichman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Lawrence University
	      
	      Canton, NY  13617    315/229-5571

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Thomas W. Budd at St. Lawrence University in
              Canton, New York to acquire two major instruments that will complement and
              expand opportunities for microscopic studies and enable the creation of an
              Interdisciplinary, Multi-User Microscopy-Imagery Center within the science
              facilities complex.  The instruments to be acquired are:  1. A confocal
              microscope system that will bridge the resolution gap between electron
              microscopy and fluorescence microscopy.  This instrument will allow optical
              sectioning and 3-D reconstructions of fluorescent images with much better
              resolution and a wider selection of dyes than conventional fluorescence
              microscopes.  2. An Energy Dispersive X-Ray Analysis (EDAX) system to be fitted
              onto an existing scanning electron microscope (SEM).  This system allows
              elemental analysis and spatial elemental mapping of a wide variety of research
              specimens applicable to biology, chemistry, environmental studies, and geology
              research.  

Several St. Lawrence science faculty are poised to direct
              student projects with these instruments as part of their research programs. 
              Dr. T. Budd (biology and PI) plans to use confocal microscopy to
              three-dimensionally map proteins on the surface and inside of glial-neural type
              cells in vitro as part of his research to characterize tissue cultured cells
              used to study bone formation.  He will confirm the 3-D confocal results by
              using SEM-EDAX mapping routines.  Dr. Marano (chemistry) will use confocal
              microscopy to detect and map the components of specialized membrane "domains"
              on the surface of T-lymphocytes.  These domains have been implicated in gene
              regulation during immune responses.  Dr. Erlichman (biology) will use confocal
              microscopy to three-dimensionally map sodium/hydrogen exchange transport
              systems in the surface membranes of pH sensitive neurons that regulate
              breathing in mammals.  Dr. Erickson (geology) will use SEM-EDAX elemental
              analysis and mapping to study the sequence and biogeochemistry of fossilization
              of clams.  Several other St. Lawrence faculty are also poised to use the new
              instruments in their research programs, all of which involve active
              participation by students.

This award will greatly enhance faculty and
              student research activity in the science departments at St. Lawrence, as well
              as provide instrumentation support for two new majors in biochemistry and
              neuroscience.  As a small, private liberal arts undergraduate institution,
              access to state-of-the-art instrumentation is often limited.  The instruments
              requested will enable us to better train the next generation of scientists.


