Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation to Measure the Time-Course and Distribution
               of Cortical Activity in Perceptual Cognitive, and Social Psychological
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0116293

Award Number: 0116293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard C. Nusbaum hcn@speech.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Small  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the acquisition of instrumentation to measure Event-Related
              Potentials (ERPs) in cognitive and social neuroscience research. ERPs reflect
              the synaptic activity of the brain that occur during mental activity. The
              requested instrumentation will be used with fMRI brain scanning at the Brain
              Research Imaging Center (BRIC) at the University of Chicago. BRIC has purchased
              a 3T scanner to study psychological processes such as spoken language
              understanding, shifts of attention, perceptuo-motor planning and motor imagery,
              and social categorization. Although behavioral studies have told us much about
              these mental processes, these studies cannot indicate the specific way in which
              the brain implements this processing. fMRI can identify which parts of the
              brain are involved in processing. Although fMRI can localize cortical areas,
              blood-flow responses are too slow to measure the timing of activity in these
              areas. ERPs provide this timing information, but cannot localize brain activity
              as finely as fMRI. fMRI together with ERP combines high spatial resolution and
              temporal resolution to investigate the functional processing in the brain.
              Measuring ERP activity during fMRI will aid in relating temporal and spatial
              information about cortical processing. 

Three broad projects will initially
              use the instrumentation. One project will investigate interactions between
              language-specific mechanisms and more general cognitive processes during
              language comprehension. This research examines how understanding uses attention
              and memory as well as paralinguistic information. ERP measures will investigate
              relative timing of cortical activity in working memory and attention compared
              with specifically linguistic processing. The second project will examine neural
              mechanisms involved in perception and production of action. Comparison of
              perceptual processing of symbolic cues for actions with direct human movement
              cues (to trigger "mirror" cells) will investigate neural mechanisms underlying
              conceptual operations in motor movements and motor "imagery" circuits. The
              third project investigates affective evaluation and social categorization
              addressing the theory that positive and negative attitudes are mediated by
              different mechanisms. fMRI and ERP will identify relevant brain areas and
              examine the time-course of processing in affective, perceptual, and autonomic
              parts of these networks to investigate how affective evaluation systems mediate
              stereotypic responses in social categorization.
