Title       : Mechanisms of Memory Modulation by Vagus Nerve Stimulation and Arousal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0116932

Award Number: 0116932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317647             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Jensen rajensen@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              It is generally accepted that some memories, such as those associated with
              important events, are retained better than others.  One factor that appears to
              be important in the modulation of memory storage processes is the degree of
              arousal associated with the experience.  Memories of events that are associated
              with moderate degrees of behavioral arousal tend to be retained better than
              memories associated with either very low or very high levels of arousal. 
              Research over the past two decades has demonstrated that memory modulation is
              mediated by the presence of hormones from the pituitary and the adrenals that
              are associated with arousal.  For example, injection of epinephrine,
              norepinephrine, ACTH, vasopressin, enkephalins, or the endorphins all modulate
              retention performance.  However, none of these substances freely crosses the
              blood brain barrier to influence activity in the brain that mediates memory
              storage.  In an attempt to resolve this apparent problem, recent research
              suggests that the vagus nerve may be a pathway by which peripheral arousal
              enhances memory.  These studies demonstrated in laboratory rats that
              subdiaphragmic vagotomy attenuates the memory modulatory effects of some of
              these agents and that electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve, at a moderate
              intensity, can enhance memory of an avoidance task.  Further, low-, but not
              high-intensity vagus nerve stimulation can enhance verbal learning in human
              subjects.  Therefore, it appears that arousal results in the release of adrenal
              and pituitary hormones that activate peripheral receptors.  These receptors
              then initiate neural messages, which travel to the brain via the vagus to
              modulate mnemonic processes.  The goal of the current research project is to
              gain a better understanding of the neural events produced by activity in the
              vagus nerve that alters the strength of memory storage.  A series of
              pharmacological, electrophysiological, and behavioral studies will be
              conducted.  The behavioral studies are linked to electrophysiological studies
              that focus on characterizing changes in hippocampal responses produced by vagus
              nerve stimulation and a search for their underlying causes.  The goal of the
              first set of studies is to characterize changes in electrical activity in the
              hippocampus, a brain structure known to be importantly involved in memory,
              produced by vagus nerve stimulation.  Other studies will determine whether
              pharmacological agents that enhance memory produce effects similar to those
              seen following vagus nerve stimulation and whether blockade of vagus nerve
              activity alters these responses.  The results obtained from these studies
              should yield a better understanding of the brain mechanisms that underlie the
              modulation of memory storage processes.   
