Title       : Acquisition of a 600 MHz High-Resolution NMR CryoProbe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0116902

Award Number: 0116902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor L. Hsu hsuv@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Gerwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	A grant has been award to Dr. Victor Hsu at Oregon State University to acquire
              a cryoprobe for their 600 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer.
              NMR spectroscopy is unique in that it is the only technique that yields
              molecular information at the atomic scale in solution. Since the installation
              of the 600 MHz NMR instrument in 1995, researchers from various Departments and
              Colleges on the Oregon State University campus have used NMR spectroscopy to
              study samples ranging from 13C,15N-labeled protein-DNA complexes to
              anticancer/antitumor agents isolated from marine algae and beer hops to
              measuring oil content in grass seeds to studying metabolite levels in rat
              urine. However, one of the limitations to the wider use of this instrument has
              been its inherent sensitivity. Since many of the projects involve biomolecules
              that are either isolated from natural sources or are synthetically obtained,
              collecting useful NMR spectra under sample-limited conditions is often
              difficult, if not impossible. Recently, however, cryogenic probes have been
              developed that improve the sensitivity of the instrumentation by a factor of
              four. The improved signal to noise (S/N) ratio of these probes is obtained by
              reducing the operating temperature of the detection coil and the pre-amplifier
              to cryogenic temperatures. Thus the efficiency of the coil is increased and the
              thermal noise present in the coil and the pre-amplifier is reduced. What this
              means in practical terms is that by using cryoprobes, the same experiments that
              are currently used can be performed with either four times less sample, or a
              16-fold reduction in the amount of time required.
	Among the many research
              projects that would greatly benefit from the increased sensitivity of the NMR
              cryoprobe are the following: Dr. Hsu's (Biochemistry/Biophysics) projects
              involving understanding the effects of environmental and endogenous damage on
              molecular function and interactions, and his studies of DNA-binding by
              antitumor drugs; Dr. William Gerwick's (Pharmacy) structural studies of
              biologically-active natural products from marine cyanobacteria and algae; Dr.
              James White's and Dr. David Horne's (Chemistry) studies of synthetic methods
              and the total synthesis of biologically-active natural products and other
              complex molecules; Dr. Kaichang Li's (Forest Products) investigations into the
              mechanisms of fungal degradation of lignin; and Dr. Max Deinzer's (Chemistry)
              studies into how protein alkylation and/or oxidation affects protein folding
              pathways. With the arrival and installation of the cryoprobe, many sample- and
              sensitivity-limited projects will be initiated, both by the same researchers
              and others. Most of these new projects would be impossible without the
              cryoprobe.
	Research projects utilizing a major involvement of the existing
              600 MHz NMR spectrometer have led to more than forty peer - reviewed journal
              articles, review  articles, and book chapters, and an even greater number of
              presentations at local, national, and international scientific meetings. Of
              equal importance, Dr. Hsu is especially pleased with the impact the NMR
              instrumentation has had on the University's infrastructure. This spectrometer
              has been used by members of over a dozen research groups on the OSU campus and
              additional users from other institutions. These users have included
              undergraduate and graduate students, postdoctoral associates and principal
              investigators. This instrument has also been very successfully utilized for
              teaching in classroom settings and in programs directly targeted to attracting
              women and minority students into the science curriculum. In fact, women and
              minority scientists represent more than half of the researchers trained to use
              the instrument. Other programs identify students at the middle and high school
              level, and several of these students have gained summer research employment
              involving the use of the NMR instrumentation. It is fully anticipated that the
              cryoprobe will enhance and increase these training, research, and outreach
              activities, and that the NMR instrument will continue to be a highly valued and
              utilized research resource on the OSU campus and in the Northwest region. 
