Title       : Acquisition of Cell Imaging and Cell Laser Ablation Systems for Developmental
               Biology Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0116391

Award Number: 0116391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Montgomery montgomery@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Mary K. Montgomery at Macalester College to
              support on-going developmental biology research and undergraduate research
              training.  Funds will be used to acquire a new epifluorescence microscope,
              deconvolution software, and a laser ablation system.  The instrumentation is
              expected to primarily support the research program of the principal
              investigator, which is in the fields of developmental biology and evolution,
              and focuses on a comparative study of embryogenesis between the model organism
              C. elegans and closely related species.  The research programs of other faculty
              in the Biology Department, particularly in the areas of neurobiology and
              immunology, are also expected to benefit by supporting new lines of research
              that require sophisticated cell imaging capabilities.  Common components of all
              of these research programs is the involvement of undergraduate student
              collaborators and the utilization of immunofluorescence as a key technical
              approach. 
The use of antibodies conjugated to fluorophores allows researchers
              to visualize the spatial and temporal localization of specific gene products,
              which helps to illuminate gene function particularly when complemented with
              molecular genetic approaches.  The requested cell imaging equipment will be
              used to capture fluorescence images of enhanced quality through digital
              confocal imaging, which can be achieved using a motorized Z-focus drive and
              deconvolution software.  This instrumentation will support optical sectioning
              of live or fixed thick specimens, such as whole embryos, stained with
              fluorescently labeled antibodies or other cell markers; this feature will allow
              observations of changes in the distribution of the fluorescent label in
              different focal planes of the specimen.  Software will be used for
              three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction from the series of optical sections. 
              Multiple fluorophores will be detected using different filter sets and the
              software used to determine regions of colocalization.  Laser ablation equipment
              attached to a pre-existing light microscope will be used to ablate or isolate
              specific cells in early embryos to determine the contribution of individual
              founder cells to the fully differentiated state.  Three-dimensional
              reconstructions of wildtype, mutant, and laser-ablated embryos stained with
              cell-specific markers will aid these cell lineage analyses, as will 4D time
              lapse imaging.  
Although the field of developmental biology has made enormous
              progress in uncovering a common set of mechanisms used to pattern animal
              embryos, much less is known about how developmental mechanism are altered
              during the generation of species diversity.  The research supported by this
              grant is expected to contribute to an understanding of how the mechanisms
              governing cell fate in the early embryo have evolved in a group of closely
              related species.  Furthermore, the requested equipment will greatly enhance the
              quality of faculty-student collaborative research being conducted in the
              Biology department at Macalester College.  All research programs impacted by
              this proposal have a common objective of providing education and research
              training opportunities for advanced undergraduate students.  Student research
              training will also be enhanced through use of the instrumentation in advanced
              courses, such as Developmental Biology, independent projects, and senior honors
              theses. 

