Title       : Proposal for Supporting Travel Expenses to Attend the 7th IEEE Real-Time
               Technology and Application Symposium (RTAS) in Taipei, Taiwan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a0116796

Award Number: 0116796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Zhao zhao@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Mosse'  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks to sponsor travel expenses for graduate students and junior
              faculty members
to attend the 7th IEEE Real-Time Technology and Application
              Symposium (RTAS) to be held
in Taipei, Taiwan and sponsored by the IEEE
              Computer Society Technical Committee on Real-
Time Systems. RTAS provides a
              forum for presenting the latest advances in real-time systems
research and for
              discussing the practical challenges encountered and the solutions adopted.
              A
special mission of RTAS 2001 is to foster discussion and technology exchange
              in the real-time
computing and communication communities between Asia and
              North America. As such, we have
invited Dr. C. L. Liu (who developed the
              rate-monotonic scheduling theory in the 70's and is
currently the president of
              National Ching-Hua University in Hsin-Chu, Taiwan) to serve as the
Honorary
              Chair, and top-notch researchers in both Asia, Americas, and Europe to serve on
              the
Technical Program Committee. In addition to single-track technical
              sessions, we will also organize
tutorials and workshops that address
              practical, temporal QoS issues in application domains or over
the
              Internet.

The symposium, as many other academic activities, relies on the
              experience of senior members
of the community but requires fresh ideas and new
              people to join the community. As such, and
to encourage graduate students and
              young faculty members to participate in the exciting technical
program, we are
              requesting support to defray the travel expenses for graduate students and
              junior
faculty attendees. The total amount requested is $12,000 on the basis
              of an average travel grant
of $1,200 for each selected junior faculty
              participant and $800 for each selected graduate student.
We believe attendance
              at this Symposium will be very beneficial to young scientists who
              otherwise
would be unable to participlate in the gathering. Contacts for
              future (international) collaborations
will be made and idea exchange will
              certainly occur. Travel support for student and junior faculty
attendance will
              be advertised nationwide and women, minorities and disabled students will
              be
especially encouraged to apply for sponsorship.
