Title       : Collaborative Research: Larsen Ice Shelf: A Model for Antarctic Ice Shelf-Ocean
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a0116972

Award Number: 0116972
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88748              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Prentice mike.prentice@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0107167
Prentice

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and
              Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a collaborative
              research project between the University of Southern Illinois at Carbondale and
              the University of New Hampshire. Foraminiferal and stable isotopic analyses of
              modern sediments and core samples from the Weddell Sea shelf will be used to
              address the mechanisms underlying the recent collapse of the Larsen Ice Shelf,
              Antarctica. The Larsen Ice Shelf, located on the northwestern margin of the
              Weddell Sea along the east side of the Antarctic Peninsula, may be collapsing
              due to a marked increase in mean annual atmospheric temperature (~+2.5 degrees
              C) that has resulted in sea-ice free conditions for at least 4 months per year.
              Alternatively, basal ice shelf melting due to intrusion of relatively warm
              deepwater may be primarily responsible. From May 6 to June 1, 2000, the
              Research Vessel Nathaniel B. Palmer (NBP) was used to collect a series of
              surface sediment grab samples, hydrographic casts, high-resolution seismic
              data, and gravity cores from a large region of the Weddell Sea shelf formerly
              covered by the Larsen Ice Shelf-A (LIS-A).

Samples collected from surface
              sediment grabs and gravity cores will be analyzed for foraminiferal
              distribution (planktonic and benthic; living and dead) data as well as
              planktonic and benthic foraminiferal oxygen and carbon isotopic analyses (d18O
              and d13C). Past work has shown a strong correlation between foraminiferal
              distributions and bottom water masses on the Antarctic continental shelf. Water
              samples collected from the major water masses in the western Weddell Sea will
              be measured for their d18O and d13C compositions. The extent of equilibrium
              d18O and d13C precipitation will be established for selected benthic
              foraminifers, as well as their d18O and d13C values calibrated to the modern
              oceanography.

The modern foraminiferal distribution and geochemical data
              will be applied to kasten core and jumbo piston core samples, in addition to
              other collaborative research, to reconstruct the oceanographic and biotic
              changes associated with the recent collapse of the LIS-A. The following
              hypothesis will be tested: That incursions of relatively warm Weddell Deep
              Water onto the western Weddell Sea shelf has led to the retreat of the LIS-A.
              The results will contribute to understanding oceanic causal mechanisms for ice
              shelf collapse and provide a link between Northern Hemisphere climatic and
              oceanographic change and the Southern Hemisphere. A detailed record of benthic
              foraminiferal distribution and also planktonic and benthic foraminiferal d18O
              and d13C will be reconstructed for much of the Holocene in order to determine
              the natural variability of the LIS and underlying ocean. This work will
              contribute to detection of anthropogenic forcing of Antarctic ice shelf
              collapse. 


