Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Instruments and Technical Support for an Interdepartmental
               Fossil Preparation Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0116517

Award Number: 0116517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227934             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen A. O'Leary moleary@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Krause  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116517
O'Leary

This grant, funded though the Major Research Instrumentation
              Program, provides support to upgrade significantly the current facilities for
              fossil preparation in the Department of Anatomical Sciences at the State
              University of New York at Stony Brook (SUNY-SB)  Vertebrate paleontological
              research at SUNY-SB is conducted in four separate departments (Anatomical
              Sciences, Anthropology, Ecology and Evolution, Geosciences) by nine full-time
              faculty, one postdoctoral associate, and a host of graduate and undergraduate
              students.  Through the establishment of a state-of-the-art vertebrate fossil
              preparation laboratory in the Department of Anatomical Sciences, which
              contains, by far, the highest proportion of paleontologists on campus, this
              facility will be made available to all Stony Brook paleontologists and their
              students. These paleontologists and paleontologists-in-training depend directly
              on mechanical and chemical preparation of vertebrate fossils for their
              research. Fossil preparation is, quite simply, the process by which fossils are
              carefully extracted from their entombing rock matrix. It is a very
              time-intensive process requiring great skill, knowledge, and experience, as
              well as access to state-of-the-art equipment and tools.  At present SBU
              vertebrate paleontologists conduct some 20 field projects, many of them
              currently or recently supported by the National Science Foundation. These
              projects span over 200 million years of Earth history, on four separate
              continents, and are targeted at evolutionary hypotheses that can be tested by
              collecting new fossil data. Fund from this grant will be used to purchase
              sample preparation equipment (i.e. an air compressor and sand blaster, air
              filtration equipment, storage cabinets, hand tools, and chemical supplies) and
              to support a full-time technician trained in fossil preparation and curation
              techniques. The University has committed to providing a separate laboratory
              equipped with sinks, cabinetry, and a fume hood that would be dedicated
              strictly to fossil preparation.  Additional technical support will help to
              eliminate the significant backlog of unprepared fossil specimens that has
              accumulated over the past decade, as well as to mold and cast the most
              scientifically significant specimens prior to their return to institutions in
              their country of origin. Establishment of a state-of-the-art vertebrate fossil
              preparation facility and the hiring of a second skilled technician will
              dramatically increase the research productivity of Stony Brook paleontologists,
              eliminate the need for outside contract work, and assist in the fundamental
              training of students. 
***


