Title       : MRI: Development of Controlled Vacuum Growth of Hybrid Organic/Inorganic
               Structures and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0116451

Award Number: 0116451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286653             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Bulovic bulovic@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1417,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0116451
MRI: Controlled Vacuum Growth of Hybrid Organic/Inorganic
              Structures and Devices
Vladimir Bulovic
Massachusetts Institute of
              Technology
$239,301

ABSTRACT

This award supports development of a
              versatile materials-growth system for controlled deposition of organic,
              inorganic, and hybrid multilayer structures.  It appears that this will be the
              first system ever built capable of solvent-free, vacuum deposition of thin
              films of inorganic nanocrystals (such as CdSe and CdTe nanodots) that will also
              accommodate solvent-free deposition and co-deposition of polymers, colloids,
              and molecular organic materials.  The completed growth system will integrate a
              novel method for physical and vapor phase deposition of hybrid
              organic/inorganic thin-films with a low-pressure RF/DC sputtering chamber and
              an evaporative growth chamber.  The completed vacuum system will be capable of
              depositing molecular organics, polymers, metals, metal oxides, inorganic
              nanodots, and colloids in a controlled layer-by-layer fashion.  An in-situ
              shadow masking system will enable fabrication of complex patterned structures
              inside a vacuum environment, while the integrated N2-filled, dry glove box will
              facilitate handling, measuring, and packaging of organic thin film samples that
              are susceptible to reactions with atmospheric oxygen and water vapor. 
              Completed samples will be tested in-situ in the analysis chamber by contacting
              them with an electrical probe attached to an X-Y-Z manipulator.  Optical ports
              on the chamber allow for a telescopic view of the devices and facilitate
              optical excitation of probed samples.  The integrated AFM/STM chamber will
              facilitate in-situ atomic scale microscopy necessary for evaluating properties
              of hybrid materials.

The research goal in this program is to integrate
              physical and functional properties of inorganic nanodots into active
              optoelectronic devices.  The resulting nano-scale hybrid
              organic/inorganic-materials structures are expected to have unique properties
              and to exceed functional capability of purely organic solids, enabling the
              development of devices such as photodetectors, LEDs, lasers, modulators, and
              waveguides with superior properties compared to the present state of the art. 
              Development of active hybrid organic/inorganic optoelectronics will lead to
              investigations of physical processes in hybrid materials such as exciton energy
              transfer, photogeneration, and charged-carrier transport.  These fundamental
              studies will have a direct impact on practical applications of hybrid solids in
              optoelectronic devices, influencing development of hybrid thin films,
              heterojunctions, multilayers, quantum wells, and nano-patterned
              organic/inorganic materials for a new generation of high-technology devices.

              


