Title       : Ground Failure of Adapzari's Fine Grain Soils and Its Interaction with Building
               Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0116006

Award Number: 0116006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238037             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan D. Bray bray@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Documenting and learning from observations from major earthquakes are invaluable
              to advancing the state-of-practice in earthquake engineering.  Adapazari
              suffered the largest level of gross building damage and life loss of any city
              affected by the Kocaeli, Turkey, Earthquake of August 17, 1999, and subsequent
              major shaking.

The building damage patterns and widespread ground failure in
              Adapazari provide exceptional field performance data on critical seismic
              geotechnical phenomena.  Because the soils and earthquake shaking in Adapazari
              are representative of many cases in the United States, the lessons learned from
              this earthquake are directly applicable to earthquake hazard mitigation in the
              United State.  Adapazari provides an excellent opportunity to evaluate the
              effect of soil liquefaction and ground softening on the built environment.  The
              effects of liquefaction included settlement, tilting, bearing failure, and
              lateral shifting of some buildings.  The seismic interaction between buildings
              and softened foundation soils is an especially important feature in Adapazari,
              as ground failure was more severe adjacent to and under buildings.

The
              primary goals of this research are to analyze the relationship between ground
              failure and building damage and to assess the cyclic response of soils with
              significant fines (both plastic and non-plastic).  Well-documented case
              histories of building performance at sites undergoing severe and minor ground
              failure will be developed through field and laboratory testing.  These case
              histories will then be back analyzed to evaluate the ability to numerically
              simulate the associated physical processes.  Soil-structure interaction
              analyses are required to evaluate the relationship between building response
              and ground response on ground and building performance.  The PI has formed
              collaborative research associations with Dr. Turan Durgunoglu of Bogazici Univ.
              and Dr. Akin Onalp of Sakarya Univ., both of whom will be involved in this
              project.

This research project is a follow-on to a one-year NSF-sponsored
              study that documented key observations of building and ground performance in
              Adapazari.

Interim and final results of this study will be made widely
              available through relevant Internet sites to ensure that all researchers and
              practitioners have access to the collected data.  These site are the
              Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering Server (GEES) of the University of Southern
              California at <http://rccg03.usc.edu>, the Pacific Earthquake Engineering
              Research Center at <http://peer.berkeley.edu/>, and the EERC website at
              <http://www.eerc.berkeley.edu>.  The release of interim data reports will be
              announced using the GEOTECH and USUCGER mailing lists.  The final report will
              be released as a web-based report that will be available as an Adobe Acrobat
              file downloadable from the Internet.

