Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Equipment to Support Lightwave and Microwave Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0116213

Award Number: 0116213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher T. Allen callen@eecs.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rongqing Hui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn E. Prescott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Prasad Gogineni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
We propose an equipment grant to enhance ongoing and future lightwave
              communications and
radar remote sensing research and education at the
              University of Kansas. The instrumentation
we propose to acquire includes
              various lightwave components, a network analyzer, a portable
spectrum
              analyzer, two arbitrary waveform generators, a high-speed data acquisition
              system, and
a high-speed oscilloscope. The lightwave components includes
              lasers with integrated electro-absorption
modulators, high-power erbium-doped
              fiber amplifiers (EDFA), a semiconductor
optical amplifier (SOA), a 35-GHz
              photo receiver with amplifier, fiber-optic delay lines,
              optical
splitters/combiners, an extended DWDM-band tunable laser, and pump
              laser diodes for a Raman
amplifier.
We propose to use the lightwave equipment
              to upgrade our 10 Gb/s test beds to 40 Gb/s to
support ongoing and future
              research activities. We will use the high-speed oscilloscope and
spectrum
              analyzer for testing and calibrating our existing radars as well as the new
              ones being
developed for glacial ice studies and as prototypes for Mars
              observation. We will use the
arbitrary waveform generators as flexible signal
              sources to support activities related to ongoing
efforts on the development of
              a pulse-compression LIDAR and also investigating optimized
waveforms for
              various remote sensing applications. We propose to use the network
              analyzer
primarily as a dedicated source and receiver for our antenna testing
              range, which is needed to
support our radar development activities.
In
              lightwave communications research, the 40 Gb/s per optical channel is the next
              signaling rate
to be deployed to meet society's insatiable communication
              needs. Extensive experimental
testing is required to study and evaluate the
              many questions critical to the implementation of this
signaling rate. The
              proposed upgrades to our testbed will allow us to evaluate the performance
of
              components, subsystems, and systems at this signaling rate. To launch and then
              detect
40 Gb/s signals for system evaluation, short-pulse lasers, power
              dividers and combiners, and
wide-bandwidth photodetectors are needed. In
              addition, to manage fiber nonlinearities for these
increased signaling rates,
              distributed signal amplification with Raman amplifiers will need to
              be
employed.
Three ongoing projects in remote sensing will benefit
              significantly from the proposed test
equipment: (1) measurement of ice
              thickness and accumulation rate over the Greenland ice sheet;
(2) design and
              development of a radar prototype for Mars; and (3) design and development of
              a
pulse compression LIDAR for a future satellite mission. The test equipment
              will allow us to
improve our existing coherent radar depth sounder for
              obtaining ice thickness data over a few
outlet glaciers that are thinning and
              for which no ice thickness data are available. The ice
thickness data are
              essential to the study of the dynamics of these glaciers. The Mars
              radar
development involves design tradeoffs in modulation waveform, frequency,
              sidelobe levels, and
antenna size. The test equipment will contribute to
              testing and evaluating an optimized
prototype radar for a future Mars lander
              or/and orbiter, as well as investigating the use of single-sideband
modulation
              techniques to improve the sensitivity of our pulse compression
              LIDAR.
Currently 17 graduate students, seven undergraduate students, two
              post-doctoral research
engineers, and five faculty are involved in the ongoing
              research projects. We anticipate similar
numbers of students and research
              associates to be involved in future lightwave communications
and remote
              sensing research at this institution. Thus the proposed equipment is a
              significant
contribution to the research and education mission of the
              University of Kansas.
