Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Thin Film Deposition System for Sample Preparation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0116113

Award Number: 0116113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven T. Herbert herbert@xavier.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marco Fatuzzo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen C. Yerian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Xavier University
	      3800 Victory Parkway
	      Cincinnati, OH  452071035    513/745-3000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will support Xavier
              University with the acquisition of a thin film deposition system for growth of
              thin films of materials (primarily metals) that range in thickness from tens of
              nanometers to several micrometers. Three main thrusts of research would benefit
              from this piece of equipment. These are: 1) the study of the electrical
              transport properties of superconductors and Josephson junction arrays; 2) the
              study of the growth and surface morphology of metal films; 3) and the study of
              the electrical properties of carbon nanotubes. Each of these areas requires
              metal films for sample fabrication and/or preparation. The deposition system is
              the next logical step in building existing infrastructure at the institution. 
              In addition, the Xavier University Department of Physics requires all of its
              undergraduate majors to complete a senior research project. These research
              projects are usually consistent with, and often directly linked to faculty
              research program. This deposition system would significantly advance
              undergraduate education and training by offering viable avenues for
              undergraduate students to carry out their research requirement. Its use will
              expose students to an important experimental research tool, as well as to
              important sample fabrication techniques that are not taught in class but are
              learned through experience.

This award from the Major Research
              Instrumentation Program will support Xavier University with the acquisition of
              a thin film deposition system for growth of thin films of materials (primarily
              metals) that range in thickness from tens of nanometers to several micrometers.
              Three main thrusts of research would benefit from this piece of equipment.
              These are: 1) the study of the electrical transport properties of
              superconductors and Josephson junction arrays; 2) the study of the growth and
              surface morphology of metal films; 3) and the study of the electrical
              properties of carbon nanotubes. Each of these areas requires metal films for
              sample fabrication and/or preparation. The deposition system is the next
              logical step in building existing infrastructure at the institution.  In
              addition, the Xavier University Department of Physics requires all of its
              undergraduate majors to complete a senior research project. These research
              projects are usually consistent with, and often directly linked to faculty
              research program. This deposition system would significantly advance
              undergraduate education and training by offering viable avenues for
              undergraduate students to carry out their research requirement. Its use will
              expose students to an important experimental research tool, as well as to
              important sample fabrication techniques that are not taught in class but are
              learned through experience.

