Title       : Nanoscience Studies of Carbon Nanotubes and Bismuth Nanowires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a0116042

Award Number: 0116042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mildred S. Dresselhaus millie@mgm.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses nanoscience studies of carbon nanotubes and bismuth
              nanowires. The research on carbon nanotubes is motivated by the Dresselhaus
              group's recent observation of the Raman spectrum from an isolated single wall
              carbon nanotube. This allows study of the vibrational structure of one nanotube
              and also provides detailed information on the electronic structure through the
              resonance Raman effect. It also provides, through the trigonal warping effect
              on the electronic levels, a unique determination of the structure of a single
              nanotube, including its diameter and chirality, or the orientation of the
              carbon hexagons with respect to the nanotube axis, expressed in terms of two
              integers (n; m). This ability to determine (n; m) for an individual nanotube
              non-destructively opens new research areas in carbon nanotube research, since
              many of the physical properties of a nanotube and the theoretical calculations
              which predict and explain physical phenomena are strongly dependent on these
              (n; m) indices. The proposed carbon nanotube studies are aimed specifically at
              resonance Raman spectroscopy studies of an isolated carbon nanotube. Each of
              the known spectral features of these Raman spectra will be studied in depth,
              including the radial breathing mode, the tangential G-band, the D-band, and
              overtones and combination modes of these features. The dependence of the
              spectra on nanotube diameter, chirality, semiconducting vs. metallic behavior,
              temperature, and laser power level will be investigated at the single nanotube
              level, from which comparisons will be made to observations on single wall
              carbon nanotube bundles and to theoretical predictions.  The bismuth nanowire
              system, because of the small effective masses, small L-point band gap and small
              band overlap of crystalline bismuth, offers opportunities to study novel
              quantum phenomena on nanowires with wire diameters (~ 50 nm) that can presently
              be fabricated by the PI's group. The approach is to focus on the semimetal to
              semiconductor transition induced by decrease in nanowire diameter, and to use
              optical and transport techniques, building on the observations already made
              using temperature dependent resistance measurements. Also, changes in the
              electronic structure as a function of nanowire diameter and antimony
              concentration in the isoelectronic Bi(1-x) Sbx alloy system will be explored.
              Particular attention will be given to wire diameter and Sb concentration where
              10 different carrier pockets (1 T-point, 3 L-point and 6 H-point) are all
              predicted to have a degenerate hole subband edge, thereby giving rise to a very
              large electronic density of states. Physical phenomena associated with this
              unusually high density of states will be explored by temperature dependent
              transport and optical properties and the interpretation of these measurements
              will be made using model calculations.
%%% 
The project addresses basic
              research issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological
              relevance. An important feature of the program is the integration of research
              and education through the training of students and postdoctoral researchers in
              a fundamentally and technologically significant area. The project assists
              development of technical, communication, and organizational/management skills
              in students through unique educational experiences made possible by a highly
              collaborative forefront research environment.
*** 

