Title       : MRI: Acquisition Of A New Stable Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0116334

Award Number: 0116334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Humphrey jhumphre@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin W. Mandernack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116334
Humphrey

Support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) will
              be used to acquire a stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer coupled with a gas
              chromatograph, water equilibration device, automated carbonate extraction
              system, and an auto-sampler.  This modern modular system will replace a
              twenty-year-old mass spectrometer and ancillary vacuum lines as the primary
              research instrument for obtaining stable isotope data at the Colorado School of
              Mines (CSM).  The outdated equipment will be retained as teaching tools for
              graduate education.  A primary advantage of a new system will be its ability to
              routinely handle very small sample sizes, in some cases several orders of
              magnitude smaller than that possible with the existing facilities.  For
              example, carbonate samples in the 5-10 microgram range and water samples in the
              200-300 microliter range can be analyzed with the new system, whereas the
              previous facilities could only accurately measure in the milligram and
              milliliter ranges, respectively.  Further, sample preparation and introduction
              into the mass spectrometer will be fully automated, allowing for greater sample
              through-put and efficient use of researchers' time and resources.  The new
              equipment will be used to study a variety of earth systems for which the
              isotopic analysis of hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur is
              particularly critical.  Twelve faculty members at CSM currently have ongoing
              research programs utilizing stable isotope geochemistry.  The new
              instrumentation will service faculty from the Department of Geology and
              Geological Engineering, the Department of Chemistry and Geochemistry, and the
              Division of Environmental Science and Engineering.  Specific areas of faculty
              research that require stable isotope data encompass both applied and
              fundamental topics, including water/rock interaction and diagenesis of
              carbonate rocks, geomicrobiology, bioremediation, petroleum reservoir
              characterization, hydrothermal alteration, petroleum and natural gas
              characterization, geochemistry of metalliferous ore deposits, continental
              paleoclimatology, and environmental geochemistry.
***

