Title       : NSF-CONACyT: Incorporating Global Manufacturing into Engineering Coursework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0116635

Award Number: 0116635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99812              (Estimated)
Investigator: V. Jorge Leon jleon@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cesar O. Malave  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5922,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this NSF-CONACyT project between Texas A&M University (College
              Station, Texas, USA) and the Universidad de las Americas (Puebla, Mexico) is to
              develop and deploy instructional material that allows the easy incorporation of
              global manufacturing knowledge into the industrial, mechanical, manufacturing
              or similar curricula.  The material developed in this project will be
              implemented in the industrial engineering, mechanical and manufacturing
              curricula affecting more than 1,200 students in these institutions. The
              approach is to develop lecture supplements and case studies based on real
              industrial situations.  Case studies provide the student and instructors with
              realistic industrial context that includes technical data, as well as, a
              description of the cultural and socio-economic environment of the community in
              which the facility is located.  Companies targeted are in industry sectors
              where there is significant trade between Mexico and the USA including the auto,
              electronics and textile industries.  Lecture supplements are focused analytical
              modules, developed within the context provided by a case study, that deal with
              problems specific to topics taught in engineering and science courses.  Lecture
              supplements will be carefully designed for their easy adoption in the curricula
              of the participating organizations.  Detailed guidelines for deployment will de
              developed based on the educational methodologies developed by the Foundation
              Coalition at Texas A&M University.  

Active learning and teaming will
              constitute the essential pedagogical method for the in-class delivery of all
              course material.  Moreover, the use of technology-enabled education such as web
              technologies and instructional software will be incorporated in all CS and LS. 
              The assessment, evaluation, and dissemination techniques developed and
              implemented by the Foundation Coalition will be central to these activities in
              the proposed project.  It is expected that the results of this project will
              help future engineers and scientists understand how to efficiently exchange and
              deploy technology and scientific knowledge, and conduct business across the
              USA-Mexico border.
