Title       : Acquisition and Development of a Synchrotron Compatible Growth and
               Characterization Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0116362

Award Number: 0116362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304534             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yves U. Idzerda Idzerda@physics.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to Montana State
              University is for instrument development of a movable magnetic films-growth
              facility designed to be connected to an X-ray synchrotron beamline for advanced
              in-situ characterization of as grown magnetic multilayers. The growth facility
              will have both chemical vapor deposition capability that will grow superior
              performance magnetic semiconductors and half-metallic ferromagnets (HMF) and a
              thermal deposition capability for growth of single-element magnetic films. It
              will also be available for use by other researchers through research
              collaboration with the PI. This project will provide a powerful means for
              understanding, quantify and control interfacial behavior for the creation and
              study of established and new phenomena that potentially have tremendous impact
              on the explosive growth of spintronics. This instrument development project
              will help train graduate students and postdocs in instrument science and
              forefront research.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation
              program to Montana State University is for instrument development of a movable
              magnetic films-growth facility designed to be connected to an X-ray synchrotron
              beamline for advanced in-situ characterization of as grown magnetic
              multilayers. The growth facility will have both chemical vapor deposition
              capability that will grow superior performance magnetic semiconductors and
              half-metallic ferromagnets (HMF) and a thermal deposition capability for growth
              of single-element magnetic films. It will also be available for use by other
              researchers through research collaboration with the PI. This project will
              provide a powerful means for understanding, quantify and control interfacial
              behavior for the creation and study of established and new phenomena that
              potentially have tremendous impact on the explosive growth of spintronics. This
              instrument development project will help train graduate students and postdocs
              in instrument science and forefront research.

