Title       : MRI/ RUI: Acquisition of Manufacturing Systems for Quality Assurance in
               Precision Machining Processes using Data Mining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0116515

Award Number: 0116515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268426             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yalcin Ertekin yalcin.ertekin@wku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bill Tseng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Kentucky Univ
	      Sponsored Programs, 106FB
	      Bowling Green, KY  421013576    270/745-4652

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9141,9148,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation award will enable the purchase of two
              computer numerical control machine tools specifically a vertical machining
              center and a turning center.  The award will also enable the purchase of a
              cutting force dynamometer, vibration and acoustic emission sensors as well as
              laser and ballbar calibration systems.  This equipment will be used to conduct
              research in measuring and modeling machine tool errors for error compensation
              and collect process data via multiple sensors to identify the correlation
              between cutting conditions, material properties and part quality for
              optimization of manufacturing processes.

This equipment will enable
              development of an intelligent manufacturing system, which will fully integrate
              quality assurance into precision machining processes and result in full
              manufacturing automation, yielding no defects coupled with a significant
              improvement in productivity, part quality and reduced manufacturing costs.  The
              real-time process control will enable reduction in scrap, rework, lead-time,
              and conventional non value-added inspection activities, and thereby will
              increase competitiveness of part manufacturers.  In addition, the equipment
              will provide opportunities for hands-on undergraduate research and education
              for the manufacturing specialist.  Seven courses will be impacted by the
              equipment in the manufacturing curriculum and will benefit over four hundred
              students at Western Kentucky University during the award period.  The precision
              machining laboratory to be developed under this grant will be used during
              technology competition for regional high school and middle school technology
              education students. The scope of the impact is broad in that the proposed
              research encompasses milling, turning, and drilling processes.  The results
              will benefit not only machine tool industry but also automotive and aerospace
              industries and other discrete part manufacturers.


