Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Genomics Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0116789

Award Number: 0116789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79214              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Revie revie@clunet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Marcey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Lutheran Univ
	      60 West Olsen Road
	      Thousand Oaks, CA  913602700    805/492-2411

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
A grant has been awarded to Drs. Revie and Marcey at
              California Lutheran University to purchase equipment to perform structural and
              functional genomics research.  The project will meet four goals.  First, the
              equipment will be used to more quickly sequence the genome of strain 122-1B2 of
              the archaeon Thermoplasma acidophilum.  Archaea are a group of microorganisms
              that comprise a third branch of life, which are distinct from the other two
              branches: (1) bacteria and (2) eukaryotes, a group that includes yeast and
              multicellular organisms.  Determining the sequence of bases in the genome of T.
              acidophilum will allow for the identification of proteins that are involved in
              respiration.  Second, the equipment will be used by Dr. Marcey to study a
              protein involved in cellular signaling in the fruit fly Drosophila
              melanogaster.  Third, the equipment will allow students to perform a wider
              variety of research projects in formal laboratory classes.  For example,
              genomics research will be conducted in Genetics, Molecular Biology,
              Developmental Biology, and Recombinant DNA Techniques.  Fourth, the equipment
              will allow Biology and Biochemistry students to engage in faculty-mentored
              research experiences in structural and functional genomics.
The archaeon T.
              acidophilum can grow either aerobically under normal oxygen concentrations,
              under very low oxygen concentrations, or anaerobically in the presence of
              sulfur.  The organism grows optimally at pH 1.7 and 59 degrees C, but
              interestingly, lacks a cell wall.  Although it can reduce sulfur, little is
              known about this process.  Even less is known about how the organism survives
              under very low oxygen conditions.  Considering the hostile and extreme
              environment where T. acidophilum thrives, this flexibility of respiration is
              quite remarkable, making the study of its respiratory proteins an interesting
              and important part of the overall study of Archaea.  In order to find and study
              the respiratory proteins,  the equipment will more quickly determine the entire
              sequence of bases in the DNA.  This will primarily be done by sequencing T.
              acidophilum DNA that has been cloned into a plasmid, then assembling the
              resulting pieces into one contiguous chromosome.  The DNA will then be analyzed
              to determine the entire complement of genes in the organism.  A gene, Dpez,
              that encodes a member of novel class of proteins involved in cellular
              communication, the FERM domain Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases (PTPs), will be
              studied in the model organism Drosophila melanogaster.  Equipment funded by
              this grant will be used to determine the DNA sequences of genes encoding
              proteins that interact with Dpez. Also, the DNA sequences of genes that produce
              mutant forms of the Dpez protein will be determined. Spatial and temporal
              patterns of DPez expression will be investigated.
Archaea are a distinct group
              of organisms.  Many of them, including T. acidophilum, live in extreme
              environments such as high temperatures and low pH.  This project will aid the
              study of proteins that enable the organism to thrive under the extreme
              conditions in which it grows.  In addition, the ability of T. acidophilum to
              grow under a variety of respiratory conditions makes the study of these
              proteins even more interesting.  Determining the entire sequence of bases in
              the organism will also allow for comparisons between T. acidophilum and other
              microorganisms that will increase knowledge of evolutionary processes.  The
              balance between the opposite actions of protein tyrosine kinases (PTKs) and
              protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) can regulate cell proliferation,
              differentiation, and morphology. PTPs have been cloned in large numbers from a
              variety of organisms and are targeted to subcellular locations and linked to
              specific signaling pathways.  The Dpez protein is the first invertebrate
              FERM-PTP described. Investigations of the functions of DPez will be conducted
              with the goal of using the tractable genetics of Drosophila to discover the
              roles of the protein in the development and cell physiology of a model
              insect.

