Title       : Acquisition Of A Philips Technai 12 TEM, a Philips XL30-TMP ESEM-Oxford E400
               EDS, and a Leica Ultramicrotome To Enhance Research and Training In The Life
               and Physical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0116225

Award Number: 0116225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331057             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Beneski jbeneski@wcupa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia G. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Chester U of Pennsylv
	      College Ave & High Street
	      West Chester, PA  19383    215/436-1000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. John T. Beneski at West Chester University to
              purchase a  Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) and an Ultramicrotome. The
              addition of this equipment to the University's Center for Advanced Scientific
              Imaging (CASI) will (1) significantly increase the research opportunities for
              their faculty and students, particularly in the sciences; (2) enhance their
              ability attract new students from the widest diversity of backgrounds (3)
              enhance their ability to train students in state-of-the-art marketable skills;
              and (4) provide new opportunities for faculty and students to collaborate with
              scientists from the local high-tech corridor of pharmaceutical, biotechnology,
              and environmental industries.
Research opportunities will be enhanced by
              providing faculty and students with new tools that can be used to compliment or
              extend their current research program or to initiate new investigations. The
              new electron microscope will be used extensively by faculty and students in the
              Departments of Biology, Geology & Astronomy, and Chemistry to investigate a
              wide variety of problems including: (1) a taxonomic investigation of
              bryophytes; (2) nuclear localization of the retinol metabolizing enzyme 9-cis
              retinol dehydrogenase within cancerous and normal mammary tissue; and (3)
              visualization of the early events that occur at the gap junctions of insect
              ovarian follicle cells following viral infection.  Each of these projects will
              involve significant participation by both undergraduate and graduate students.
              
Dr. Beneski will provide opportunities for students to work in the CASI by
              actively promoting independent student research projects and establishing a
              credit-bearing internship program. In addition to research and training, the
              new electron microscope will be used as a recruitment tool for attracting new
              science majors from both traditional and non-traditional backgrounds. To
              accomplish this, Dr. Beneski will initiate a series of hands-on demonstrations
              and tours that showcase the advanced imaging technologies of CASI to potential
              students that regularly visit the University as part of existing programs
              targeting area high schools, transfer students, and underserved groups.
West
              Chester University's continued growth in providing state-of-the-art imaging
              technologies and resources not only serves the immediate and future needs of
              our faculty and students in the sciences, it also mirrors a growing emphasis on
              the sciences and technology by the State of Pennsylvania and PA State System of
              Higher Education.   The acquisition of the requested equipment is a critical
              step in the continued development of Center for Advanced Scientific Imaging as
              a key resource for research and research training at West Chester University.
              

