Title       : Building an Agenda for Public Understanding of Science: Support of Planning
               Activities with Science Centers in China and Japan -- A Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0116014

Award Number: 0116014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48677              (Estimated)
Investigator: Freda H. Nicholson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Discovery Place Inc.
	      301 N. Tryon Street
	      Charlotte, NC  282022138    704/372-6261

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Discovery Place in Charlotte, NC is planning and coordinating a visit by Chinese
              delegates to designated United States Science Museums toward identifying
              cooperative endeavors related to public understanding of science.  Planning
              also will be done for a separate delegation of informal educators from Japan. 
              Discovery Place will work with the Association of Science-Technology Centers
              (ASTC) to assist in planning and arranging portions of each delegation's visit
              in order to help science center professionals from all three countries meet and
              learn more about each other's institutions, programs and priorities.  Through
              this networking, U.S. institutions will be encouraged to participate in
              exchanges and cooperative projects.  The meetings also will help all sides
              identify potential partners and develop the relationships necessary to pursue
              joint activities such as staff exchanges, cooperative development of exhibits
              and programs and design of workshops.  

Specific planning activities to be
              undertaken by Discovery Place include:

 Identifying appropriate museum and
              media production sites for the Chinese delegation to visit;
 Coordinating the
              purposes of the visit with these sites;
 Working with The Institute of Pacific
              Asia (IPA is the NSF grantee that is handling the administrative         
              aspects of the Chinese and Japanese visits) to develop a specific agenda for
              each site visit;
 Coordinating with ASTC to arrange such activities as:

              Presentations by members of the Chinese and Japanese delegation in ASTC
              conference sessions,
 Participation by members of the Chinese and Japanese
              delegations in ASTC conference events and sessions,      and Assisting IPA in
              developing an agenda for a one-day US/China delegation meeting immediately
              following     the conference.

This project provides rare opportunities for
              informal science educators and policy makers to explore a wide range of program
              options for the United States, China and Japan to inform the public and build
              support for science.  



