Title       : Acquisition of Inductively Coupled Plasma Etch Tool for New Microsystems
               Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0116682

Award Number: 0116682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory B. Raupp raupp@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Subhash Mahajan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Trevor Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to Arizona State
              University will be used to acquire an inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etcher
              to support a broad spectrum of well-funded interdisciplinary research programs
              with a common focus on new integrated microsystems technologies for novel, high
              payoff applications.  The unique performance of this equipment provides a
              critical tool that will substantially enhance wide bandgap semiconductor and
              silicon fabrication capabilities, and thereby open up new frontiers in
              microsystems concepts and applications for active exploration and discovery. 
              The equipment is configured with two independent etch chambers and ICP sources
              to run a chlorine-based etch process for group III - nitrides, and a "Bosch"
              fluorine-based process for deep etching of silicon.  The dual chamber system
              will avoid process cross-contamination and enhance overall reliability and
              robustness of the etching to be performed. Research supported by this equipment
              falls into one of two technology areas: (i) Wide Bandgap Materials, Devices and
              Microsystems, and (ii) Si-based Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS).  
              Researchers in interdisciplinary teams from Materials Engineering, Chemical
              Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Bioengineering, Mechanical Engineering,
              Physics, Plant Biology, Chemistry and Biochemistry will be the principal
              equipment users. It is anticipate that substantial breakthroughs in each of the
              target applications will be enabled through the new patterning capability of
              the ICP etch tool. The equipment will be run as a multi-user facility housed in
              the class M3.5 cleanroom of the interdisciplinary Center for Solid State
              Electronics Research (CSSER). Day-to-day operation of the equipment will be
              overseen by CSSER's Associate Director.  The majority of the actual users of
              the equipment will be post-doctoral, graduate student and undergraduate student
              researchers.  Students will benefit from hands-on training with
              state-of-the-art fabrication equipment and the exciting, creative environment
              of interdisciplinary microsystems research. 

This award from the Major
              Research Instrumentation program will allow Arizona State University to create
              a state-of-the-art high density plasma processing facility that will provide
              unique micropatterning capabilities that cannot otherwise be realized.  The new
              multi-user facility will bring catalyze research collaboration between
              materials scientists, chemical engineers, electrical engineers, physicists,
              chemists, and biologists, reflecting the highly interdisciplinary nature of the
              activities to be undertaken. Through this new capability and new synergies, ASU
              will contribute to the high technology industrial base by expanding research
              and education capabilities in the design, synthesis, fabrication, and
              application of novel microsystems.  Research supported by this unique high tech
              processing equipment will enable advances in interdisciplinary advanced
              materials research in two high-payoff areas: (1) silicon-based nanostructure
              science and technology, and (2) wide bandgap semiconductor microsystems.
              Students and postdocs will benefit from hands-on training with state-of-the-art
              fabrication equipment and the exciting, creative environment of
              interdisciplinary microsystems research. 




