Title       : Cost-Effective Repairs of Marine Concrete Piles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0116602

Award Number: 0116602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102056             (Estimated)
Investigator: D V. Reddy dvreddy@oe.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Almost everywhere in the world it is possible to find marine structures, even
              some relatively new ones, which contain cracked or spalled concrete usually
              involving corrosion of the reinforcement. Several methods of controlling
              corrosion, have been adopted, but premature corrosion in the splash zones
              continues to be a problem of serious concern.

The basic philosophy of the
              60's "to replace and not to renovate" was consistent with relatively low
              constructional costs and the "throw-away" attitude. However, the current
              concerns regarding economic considerations, energy issues, and environmental
              problems have significantly altered this mode of thinking. New and innovative
              developments in materials technology make repair procedures feasible and very
              cost-effective. This is an identified need for innovative repair concepts for
              marine piles with lower costs than conventional patch repair methods that
              require expensive maintenance techniques. The repair concepts will generally be
              to restore or enhance one or more of the following: durability, structural
              strength, function, and appearance. Cost-effectiveness is an important factor
              for feasibility of application.

The proposed project, a joint experimental
              investigation of Florida Atlantic University and the Universities of Mayab and
              Campeche in Mexico, will lead to the development of appropriate
              structure-specific and environment-specific repair procedures. The developed
              methodology will help the coastal engineer to design durable strengthening
              schemes, ii) select the most appropriate repair procedure from available
              options, and iii) predict the degree of strengthening and performance for
              specific options. The repair procedures will provide valuable input to Coastal
              Repair and Rehabilitation Manuals.

