Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Automated DNA Sequencing Equipment to Enhance Undergraduate
               Research and Teaching at Otterbein College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0116639

Award Number: 0116639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon K. Lawrance SLawrance@otterbein.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Otterbein College
	      
	      Westerville, OH  43081    614/890-3000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Lawrance at Otterbein College to acquire
              automated DNA sequencing equpiment.  Otterbein College is a comprehensive
              liberal arts college of approximately 3,000 students founded in 1847 and
              located in Westerville, Ohio.  The DNA sequencing equipment will be used in a
              variety of contexts (including faculty/undergraduate student research projects,
              course associated laboratory experiences, middle school teacher preparation,
              general undergraduate education and in collaborations with scientists at
              academic research institutions and the private sector) to make the technologies
              associated with the completion of the human genome project available to more
              than 250 undergraduate students annually.

The research applications that
              will be supported by the grant include student/faculty research projects
              focusing on the genes responsible for transplant rejection, autoimmune
              diseases, and sugar transport; the genetic structure of populations of
              endangered species; and in the analysis of antibodies produced against tumors. 
              Teaching applications will include lecture and laboratory experiences
              associated with disciplinary courses including Introductory Biology,
              Immunology, Human Genetics, Molecular Phylogenetics, Microbial Physiology,
              Human Microbiology, Cell Biology, Advanced Biochemistry and Developmental
              Biology. Interdisciplinary teaching applications will include the Integrative
              Studies (general education program) course Biological Sciences:  Being in
              Nature and an education course, Introduction to Life Science, to be team taught
              by members of the Biology and Education Departments.  

The automated DNA
              sequencing equipment will be utilized in activities that are aligned with
              Otterbein's new strategic plan to modernize its science facility, enhance
              interdisciplinarity and research based instruction, attract more science
              students, increase diversity and enhance support for student research.  The
              equipment will also be used in a variety of outreach programs, including
              programs for underrepresented minority youth.  The equipment will serve as a
              catalyst for further infusion of the research oriented biology of the 21st
              century into introductory and advanced level courses in Life Sciences, as well
              as courses in Chemistry, Education, Nursing and Otterbein's general education
              program. Ultimately, the project will contribute to greater scientific literacy
              and encourage more students to pursue careers in science and science
              education.


