Title       : Acquisition of Test Equipment to Advance Research and Education in Distributed
               Energy Systems (DES)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0116205

Award Number: 0116205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prasad N. Enjeti enjeti@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jo W. Howze  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chanan Singh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hamid Toliyat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Don Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116205
Enjeti

A distributed energy system (DES) is one in which electricity
              is generated at the location where it is consumed. Interest in the use of
              distributed generation and storage has increased substantially over the past
              five years because of the potential to provide increased reliability and lower
              cost of power delivery to the customer. The advent of competition in the
              electric power industry and customer choice have, in part, been the stimulus
              for this increased interest. Also contributing to this trend has been the
              development of small modular generation technologies, such as fuel cells,
              microturbines, photovoltaic systems, wind energy systems and diesel engines. In
              addition, flywheel type energy storage/discharge systems hold promise to
              provide ride-through and enhance battery life in existing UPS systems. Industry
              estimates are that distributed resources (DR) will account for up to 30% of new
              power generation by the year 2010. The environmental benefits of DR that
              feature renewable resources, combined heat and power, and hybrid systems are
              substantial. In supporting customer choice, distributed power may be the
              long-term foundation of competition in electric power industry.

Although the
              application of distributed generation and storage can bring many benefits, the
              technologies and operational concepts to properly integrate them into existing
              power systems must be developed to realize these benefits and avoid negative
              impacts on system power quality, reliability and safety. The current power
              distribution system was not designed to accommodate active generation and
              storage at the distribution level particularly to supply energy to other
              distribution customers. The technical issues to allow this type of operation
              are significant.

In view of all of the above, this project proposes to
              purchase advanced equipment, which will be dedicated to supporting and
              enhancing research in the distributed energy systems area. The new DES
              laboratory will have necessary facilities to conduct research, education and
              training in the following areas: Microturbines, Fuel Cells, Wind and Flywheel
              type energy systems. This project will foster the development of innovative
              power converter topologies, advanced electric generators and electronics needed
              for utility interconnection and the control and operation of DES. It will aid
              in the development of new protection systems for the safe and reliable
              operation of DES. It will also aid in investigative methods to improve the
              reliability of DES. The laboratory will also assist in the development of new
              stand alone hybrid DES such as: Fuel Cell & Battery combination for residential
              power systems and Microturbine & Flywheel type continuous power systems for
              critical loads such as buildings. Development of modular power electronic
              converters along with modular electric generators for the next generation of
              DES will be an important activity pursued with the acquired equipment. The
              proposed DES laboratory will also assist in the education of undergraduate,
              graduate students and industry personnel in this important area.

The
              proposed DES laboratory will be developed in cooperation with DES technology
              companies, local utilities, power electronics & electric machine industries.
              The power electronics and electric machines research program at TAMU has
              established long standing cooperative research programs with leading utility
              companies and industries. Working together, the proposed laboratory will pave
              the way for advanced DES development and education.

