Title       : MRI: Development of a Silicon Vertex Detector for the Higgs Search at the
               Tevatron Collider
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0116649

Award Number: 0116649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1683566            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice L. Bean abean@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon T. Watts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Regina Demina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cecilia E. Gerber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Partridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1221,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support for the development of a Silicon Vertex Detector
              to allow discovery of the long-sought Higgs boson using the D0 detector in Run
              II at the Fermilab Tevatron proton-antiproton collider.  The Tevatron collider
              is currently the only facility in the world capable of making a Higgs
              discovery.  Simulation studies have shown that the two Tevatron collider
              experiments, CDF and D0, are sensitive to the Higgs over almost all its
              presently allowed mass range.  Furthermore, there is some evidence from the
              recently decommissioned LEP electron-positron collider at CERN for a light
              Higgs (~115 GeV) in the region where the Fermilab experiments have their
              greatest sensitivity.

A key element in the Higgs search is the ability to
              detect the b-quarks from Higgs decay.  The b-quark lifetime is sufficiently
              long (~1.5 picoseconds) that it can be identified by a Silicon Vertex Detector
              that precisely measures charged particle tracks.  The current D0 silicon
              detector was designed well before the potential for making a Higgs discovery
              was appreciated and is not sufficiently radiation-hard for the Higgs search. 
              Thus, the D0 collaboration has embarked on designing a new Silicon Vertex
              Detector that is specifically optimized for the Higgs search, to be installed
              by 2004 when the performance of the current vertex detector will have been
              diminished by radiation damage.

With this MRI proposal, a consortium of
              eight university groups, five of which are currently supported by the NSF for
              their D0 work, propose to develop, procure, assemble, and test the silicon
              sensor assemblies for five of the six layers that will be built.  These
              assemblies are the active elements that make the charged track measurements and
              constitute a major contribution to the detector.  The development of this new
              silicon vertex detector would be a joint development project between university
              groups and Fermilab.  Much of the intellectual and technical leadership for
              this effort originates in the university groups.  NSF support will bring strong
              intellectual and technical input to the project through the design,
              fabrication, and testing of detector components by university faculty and
              students working closely together at their home institutions.    

