Title       : RUI: Establishment of a high-density event-related potential laboratory at an
               undergraduate college for the study of cognitive neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0116836

Award Number: 0116836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134557             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Lewis rlewis@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Goto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicole Y. Weekes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the establishment of a 128-channel event-related potential
              (ERP) laboratory at an undergraduate institution, Pomona College, in order to
              investigate the spatial and temporal dimensions of brain activity associated
              with cognition. In doing so, this project meets the criteria for the NSF
              Cognitive Neuroscience initiative. Three projects will be conducted during the
              grant period. The first is an exploration of how spatial and temporal patterns
              of brain activity during the initial encoding of information are related to
              subsequent source memory judgments. Specifically, we will investigate the
              relationship between encoding event-related potentials during and subsequent
              source memory judgments, including temporal order, spatial location, and
              recollection versus familiarity judgments.

The second line of research will
              investigate the extent to which stable individual differences in psychological
              and biological measures of stress are predictive of memory functioning and
              concomitant ERP activity. We are specifically interested in assessing whether
              individuals with high chronic stress will have impaired memory functioning and
              whether this will be evidenced in a decreased old/new amplitude difference for
              the explicit but not implicit memory conditions.

The third line of research
              will expose a diverse group of students to the use of electrophysiological
              imaging methods to explore issues from the classic psychological literature. We
              are designing a student research project to investigate an issue of particular
              interest to underrepresented students. Specifically, we will use high-density
              ERP recordings to investigate how brain activity may be associated with
              cognitive processing of information related to the individualism-collectivism
              dimension of culture. The proposed research will serve as a model for how
              psychological issues can be explored using high-density ERP recordings. We
              anticipate that the knowledge gained from applying this technique to
              psychological problems will encourage the use of ERP techniques among other
              psychology and neuroscience faculty in the future.
