Title       : MRI: Development of a Six-Axis, Magnetically Levitated Instrument for Nanoscale
               Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a0116642

Award Number: 0116642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274566             (Estimated)
Investigator: Won-jong Kim wjkim@mengr.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1632,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              OIA-0116642
Institution:          Texas Engineering Experiment Station
PI:    
                                 Won-jong Kim
Title:                    "MRI: Development of
              a Six-Axis, Magnetically Leviatated Instrument for Nanoscale Science           
                                and Engineering

Abstract:


          Nanoscale science
              and engineering is an emerging technological field and has immense economic and
              societal impacts.  This NSF MRI project presents an innovative concept of a
              six-axis magnetically levitated (maglev) instrument.  This novel instrument can
              be a fundamental research tool in many crucial research activities in
              nanotechnology and other precision applications dealing with delicate motions
              and forces.  They include manufacture of nanoscale structures, atomic-level
              manipulation, assembly and packaging of microparts, vibration isolation for
              instrumentation, and seismic motion detection.  A compact, lightweight,
              single-moving part that holds the specimen will eventually be magnetically
              levitated in all six degrees of freedom.  The objective of this MRI project is
              development of a maglev prototype design concept and to demonstrate its
              applicability in nanotechnology.

          Magnetic levitation is an
              enabling technology for high-precision multi-axis motion generation and
              control.  During the first year of this instrument development program, we will
              derive a dynamic model and analyze mechanical and electromagnetic
              characteristics.  After completing detailed design, we will construct a
              single-axis unit lenear actuator, compare its behavior with the theory, and
              calibrate it experimentally.  This unit actuator will be a corner stone for the
              full 6-axis instrument to be constructed by the end of the second year.  During
              the last year of this MRI project, we will design and implement real-time
              digital controllers based on the dynamic model obtained previously, and perform
              various tests and experiments.
