Title       : Distributed Microsensor Packaging Based on Self-Assembly after Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0116687

Award Number: 0116687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Talghader joey@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this proposal, a post-operation packaging process is proposed where
              distributed microsensors that are too small to include data transmission
              electronics can be packaged and read using self-assembly after they have
              performed their sensing operations. There are many systems in use today where
              fluids move through extremely small channels. Examples include flow cytometry,
              fuel injection, and chemical processing. Good information about the physical
              state of the flow in such systems can be difficult to obtain because sensors
              set into the flow can be difficult to position and may interfere with the very
              processes that they are supposed to measure. One possible solution would be to
              collect data using mobile microsensors that actually travel with the flow. This
              is extremely appealing because sensing could be performed continuously and
              in-situ, but it has some basic technical difficulties since power supplies and
              data transmission electronics would be difficult to include due to size and
              cost restrictions. In addition, if an extremely large number of sensors were
              used, coordinating transmission protocols for all of them would be impractical.
              The PI proposes to solve these problems by using fluidic self-assembly (FSA) to
              package and read-out information from the devices after they have sensed. Since
              sensing operations typically consume much less power than data transmission
              operations, ambient energy from the environment such as light or RF could be
              used to drive the sensors and all interfacing for data transfer would be
              provided by the self-assembly process.

The program has both practical
              engineering and fundamental scientific goals. Among the engineering goals is
              the development of a fluid test apparatus to investigate post-operation
              packaging. Power transfer to microsensors will be examined with emphasis given
              to the use of ambient light, laser, and RF power. Since these power sources may
              be intermittent, nonvolatile data storage is extremely important. Nonvolatile
              memory technologies that write with very little power using tunnel processes
              will be examined. Electronic interfacing to the self-assembled microsensors is
              perhaps the most critical engineering issue. Metallic bonding,
              micro-electro-mechanical switching, and capacitive coupling are considered.
              Micro-electro-mechanical switches are singled out as particularly versatile
              because they require no special circuitry on the microsensor and can release
              microsensors back into the flow after their data has been read. Scientific
              goals include studying the self-assembly capture process, that is, how free
              microsensors move into the sphere of influence of the assembly site. A study of
              electrostatic "fine-tuning" of the fluidic self-assembly process will also be
              performed, where micron-scale misalignments might be eliminated using
              capacitive coupling to guide the final stage of assembly. Studies will also be
              performed on device lifetimes in a flow. These will attempt to ascertain if
              flow dynamics can be modified or protective coatings used to minimize
              mechanical damage to devices that have circulated repeatedly through a flow
              system.

The program has been designed with educational objectives in mind.
              Certain projects, such as the lifetime studies and parts of the self-assembly
              capture studies have been identified as shorter-term projects suitable for
              introducing undergraduates to research. Some of this work could be performed as
              part of the University of Minnesota's Undergraduate Research Opportunities
              Program (UROP) or Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program for
              underrepresented students or those from small universities. Both the graduate
              and undergraduate level work is extremely multidisciplinary, allowing students
              to explore experimental as well as theoretical aspects of physics, chemistry
              and engineering. Finally, the technological impact of the project is broad,
              with potential applications in medicine, remote sensing, and industrial process
              control, among others. This project, since its philosophy is to include only
              those functions that are truly necessary on a microdevice and then package the
              rest later, may also be a first step in a long sought goal to create smart
              micro- or nanodevices with only simple initial capabilities, but the potential
              to self-organize new functions in response to their environment.

