Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Ion Channel Research and Research Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2001   
File        : a0116813

Award Number: 0116813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rod M. Feddersen fedde001@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda M. Boland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paulo Kofuji  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott M. O'Grady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Feddersen at the University of
              Minnesota-Twin Cities to acquire
scientific instrumentation that will enhance
              training and research opportunities concerning the influence
of ions
              (potassium, sodium, calcium, chloride, etc.) on cell function. Changes in ionic
              gradients
mediate diverse processes including cellular communication, chemical
              transportation, information
storage/retrieval and energy production/use.
              Regulation of ion concentration is the job of selective
channels traversing
              the membranes of all cells. While ion channel diversity and conservation
              among
species have been revealed through the recent findings of genome
              projects, much remains to be learned
about the basic function of ion channel
              proteins. Seminal advances in ion channel research have been
the focus of both
              the Nobel prize and Lasker Award in the past year serving to draw the attention
              of
young investigators. The goal of this proposal is to improve integration of
              research and research
training in the field of ion channel biology which is
              well-represented at the University of Minnesota.
Cutting-edge instrumentation
              will be utilized in multiple laboratory courses and time-shared with
research
              laboratories where it will enhance 'on-the-job' research training. The award
              will facilitate three
objectives: 1) improving the teaching capabilities of
              several laboratory courses, 2) expanding ion
channel research opportunities
              for undergraduate and graduate students, and 3) providing
              critical
infrastructure for the research training of non-university students.
              To meet these objectives seven state-of-
the-art experimental workstations
              will be assembled and distributed to four courses and at least six
different
              research labs during the year.
A common method to study ion gradients and the
              channels that affect them requires the use of
sensitive physiological
              approaches whereby miniature sensors(electrodes) are delicately placed in
              a
living specimen. Individual ion channels are most conveniently studied in a
              simple system utilizing
frog eggs. This approach involves genetic engineering
              and synthesis of information molecules
(mRNAs) coding for ion channels
              followed by injection of the mRNA into large, viable egg cells. The
cell's
              translation machinery converts the mRNA into ion channel proteins that are
              inserted into the cell
membrane. Electrodes placed in the cell collect minute
              signals that report ion channel function. Using
this approach researchers will
              measure, and instructors will teach students how to measure, the
response of
              channels to various stimuli or blockers in the presence or absence of accessory
              molecules.
The power of genetic engineering allows the introduction of precise
              mutations to pinpoint the functional
importance of each part of a channel.
              Protein expression and functional analysis in frog eggs has
become a standard
              approach of ion channel and cell surface receptor researchers. The
              instrumentation
allowed by this award is well matched to that application. The
              equipment includes microscopes, micro-manipulators, mRNA injectors, computers,
              analog/digital converters, amplifiers and signal conditioning software that
              make ion channel recording efficient and informative. The equipment will also
              be used in basic electrophysiology training and research in more complex
              specimens such as cells in a variety of
tissues, including neurons in brain
              slices isolated from the mature nervous system.
Teaching laboratories expose
              students to the critical observations and techniques that provide
              the
foundation of advanced life sciences research. The instrumentation awarded
              will directly support
objective #1 because it will be used to present ion
              channel training exercises in several undergraduate
and graduate level
              laboratory courses. Fundamentals taught in laboratory courses require an
              appropriate
setting to advance research to the frontier of discovery.
              Therefore, when not needed for course work,
the equipment will become a 'core
              utility' supplied to Principal Investigator labs for undergraduate
              and
graduate student research projects. The contemporary, fully compatible
              equipment will best serve the
diversity of research efforts ongoing at the
              University of Minnesota and satisfy objective #2. As
University courses become
              more available and convenient for a greater diversity of students
              the
equipment will be accessed by non-university researchers and small college
              educators meeting objective
#3. The research instrumentation will become a
              distributed and unifying feature across courses and
contemporary research
              endeavors, as well as, among individual labs within departments and
              research
sectors. Because overall research training and research will be
              integrated through this award, cost-sharing
funds were pledged from three
              separate colleges at the University of Minnesota. The funded proposal will
              enhance the presentation of laboratory-based education, promote student
              participation in the achievement of independent research goals and enrich the
              interaction among non-traditional students and university personnel.
