Title       : Acquisition of an Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope for Undergraduate
               Education in Materials Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0116075

Award Number: 0116075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor S. Harding tharding@kettering.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl Aronson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bahram Roughani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey B. Hargrove  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick Atkinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura L. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Kettering University
	      1700 West Third Avenue
	      Flint, MI  485044832    313/762-9790

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1639,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The research equipment being acquired through this grant is an
              environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) with analytical accessories
              and sub-stages. Modern ESEMs offer more flexibility than conventional scanning
              electron microscopes in obtaining qualitative and analytical results for a
              wider variety of applications.  The system to be acquired will combine high
              vacuum, low vacuum and gaseous environment operation to support a wide array of
              research projects.  The ESEM will permit examination of non-conducting,
              contaminated, hydrated and even living samples, which will in turn promote a
              greater degree of cross-disciplinary research.  Standard secondary and
              back-scatter electron detection can be used in high vacuum mode for
              conventional operation or low vacuum mode for low overview magnifications. 
              These detectors are also compatible with gaseous environments allowing for
              examination of hydrated or solvent-based samples.  They are also tolerant of
              elevated temperatures making examination of samples at temperatures up to 1000
              C possible.  The microscope's capability can be further improved by adding a
              x-ray detector for energy dispersive spectroscopy.  The overall system will be
              integrated with several sub-stages as well.  These sub-stages allow for dynamic
              experiments (mechanical and thermal) under any of the environments compatible
              with the microscope.

The microscope is to be used to support various
              research activities at Kettering University.  While the majority of research at
              Kettering University has focused on more applied industrial projects, an ESEM
              permits more fundamental research of material characterization and behavior. 
              The research conducted using the ESEM will include in-situ characterization of
              the mechanical behavior of metallic samples, phase transformations in polymeric
              systems, biomedical research in musculoskeletal pain and bone/implant
              interfaces and anti-oxidative mechanisms in cancer resistant cells, to name a
              few. 

The ESEM will also be used for undergraduate education and training in
              materials behavior and characterization.  The intuitive, computer-based
              interface permits rapid training and ease of use.  Students at Kettering
              University are required to participate in a co-operative employment program. 
              Giving students the skills needed to operate an ESEM could have direct benefit
              to their co-op employers, possibly resulting in industry-sponsored research for
              faculty and an increase in external users of the equipment.  Further, the
              potential to interface with the ESEM control software over the network will
              make remote control of the microscope from a classroom environment an important
              aspect of the educational benefits of the instrument. 

