Title       : Improving Design Fitness by Applying Tolerance Analysis, Methods Knowledge and
               Set-Based Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0116877

Award Number: 0116877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287117             (Estimated)
Investigator: Iris D. Tommelein tommelein@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Proposal: CMS-0116877
PI: Iris Tommelein
Institution: University
              of California at Berkeley
Date: July 22, 2001

Abstract: Improving Design
              Fitness by Applying Tolerance Analysis, Methods Knowledge, and Set-Based
              Design
AEC practitioners as well as academics lack a vocabulary and
              conceptualization to describe tolerances. Tolerances--used broadly to denote
              any variation from the point solution that was designed and
              planned--significantly affect industry performance. This lack is reflected in
              AEC practices, teachings, and software tools, including those for 4D CAD
              modeling, which are inadequate in terms of reflecting alternative futures. 
To
              alleviate this problem, this research is investigating how performance risk due
              to tolerances can be reduced through the application of new principles combined
              with software solutions. Some of these principles have already been applied in
              manufacturing. They involve the application of distributed set-based design for
              improving design fitness throughout the project life cycle and analysis of the
              allocation of tolerances based on production method capabilities. 
In contrast
              to contractual approaches that are commonly used in the AEC industry to
              allocate risk, this research is investigating means for making designs and
              schedules more robust, so they will withstand impact better. Design in this
              context broadly refers to the development of the product itself (i.e., design
              in the narrow sense) but also to the development of processes for production
              (manufacturing, fabrication, and construction), operations, maintenance, and
              decommissioning. Fitness denotes the ability of a design and a schedule
              (product and process) to withstand the impact of tolerances and the
              corresponding changes while adhering to project goals. 
The research tasks are
              to identify and classify various kinds of tolerances affecting AEC
              product/process development. Case studies will illustrate and help assess how
              they impede system performance. For each tolerance, the key research question
              is "Which project stakeholder(s) is (are) in the best position to manage that
              tolerance?" The objective of the research is to develop a system for tolerance
              allocation. A method is needed to decide where and when in the product/process
              development effort the tolerance has an impact, and correspondingly, to decide
              how this situation is best managed. Research outputs also include: a review of
              existing software tools and their expressiveness with respect to modeling
              tolerances; if appropriate, development of guidelines for new software
              capabilities; a methodology for capturing product and process decisions that
              allow for alternative futures; and a decision support system to trade off
              multiple objectives between project stakeholders in order to gauge design
              fitness.

