Title       : Acquisition of an ABI PRISM(r) 310 Genetic Analyzer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0116640

Award Number: 0116640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Riegel criegel@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce Robart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen T. Kilpatrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr.'s Riegel, Kilpatrick, and Robart at the
              University of Pittsburgh, Johnstown Campus to fund the acquisition and
              operation of a genetic analzer. The genetic analyzer will be used to train
              undergraduate students carrying out molecular biological research in the areas
              of virology, population genetics, and plant systematics.

The genetic
              analyzer will be used to support the undergraduate research initiatives
              conducted by students directed by these three faculty members. Undergraduates
              working with Dr. Riegel (Department of Chemistry) study the virus which affects
              gypsy moths. One study involves the temporal expression of a gene and the other
              study involves a mutant with an aberrant morphology. The analyzer will be used
              to verify the DNA sequence of the mutants constructed in the course of the
              temporal expression study, and to sequence the aberrant morphology mutation
              once it is localized. This virus is important to study as it and related
              viruses are used as biological control agents, and one of the related viruses
              is used in a protein expression system. Proper understanding of the control of
              genetic expression and the mutations that arise are important to the optimal
              use of these viruses as control agents and expression systems. Students of Dr.
              Kilpatrick (Department of Biology) carry out research in the area of population
              genetics. They study fitness components in hybrid fruit flies derived from
              crosses among geographically diverse populations, and the role of mitochondrial
              DNA variation in determining organismal fitness. His students will use the
              analyzer to sequence multilocus genotypes of individual flies and then to
              analyze the patterns found. Because these data are often used to measure
              genetic differences and gene flow among natural populations, this work will aid
              in the interpretation of variations in the genetic patterns in many species.
              Dr. Robart's students (Department of Biology) carry out research in the area of
              plant molecular systematics. They are using molecular sequencing to reconstruct
              the phylogenetic relationship of the lousewort. Dr. Robart's students will use
              the analyzer to sequence particular genetic regions of the plants to construct
              a phylogenetic tree. In addition the analyzer's ability to carry out
              microsatellite and amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) analysis will
              allow students to measure gene flow and trace patterns of evolutionary
              diversification among the different varieties of the plant. This work will
              contribute to the understanding of the rise of new flowering plant species and
              the diversification of their floral characteristics.
The genetic analyzer will
              be part of a major effort on the part of UPJ to enhance undergraduate research
              and training in molecular biology and biochemistry. Within the past 5 years,
              UPJ has added a biochemist to the chemistry department, hired a second
              molecular biologist and constructed and equipped new laboratory facilities for
              molecular/biochemical research. The genetic analyzer will greatly enhance this
              effort. Undergraduate researchers trained on this equipment will be able to
              better carry out research in the field of molecular biology and its
              applications to virology, plant systematics, and population genetics.

