Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation in Support of the Center for Geographic
               Information Science and Applied Geographics (GISAG)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0116876

Award Number: 0116876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166945             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin P. Czajkowski kczajko@pop3.utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda McCarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Lindquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick Lawrence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the acquisition of instrumentation to establish develop a
              state-of-the-art GIS and Remote Sensing Laboratory at the University of
              Toledo.

The University of Toledo Department of Geography and Planning has
              significantly enhanced its Geographic Information Science (GIS) and Remote
              Sensing capabilities in recent years. These geotechnical fields are rapidly
              expanding world-wide and are affecting people's lives on a daily basis with
              applications ranging from the determination of the optimal location of
              emergency services, clinics and hospitals to preserving the quality of water
              resources. There are increasing demands for highly trained GIS and Remote
              Sensing specialists who have a solid background in Geography, Planning, or
              Environmental Studies.

The Department of Geography and Planning has focused
              on the education and training of students in GIS and Remote Sensing
              Applications through research opportunities. In the last three years the
              department has been awarded nearly $1.5 million in federal research grants,
              many of which are applied in nature and focus on serving the public's needs.
              Department faculty have also been actively involved in the development of
              software tools to further advance the application of this technology in the
              solution of research, management and planning problems. In addition, the
              department is part of an extensive network that consists of academic units on
              and off campus as well as regional, state, and national agencies. Consequently,
              the Department is poised to assume a leadership role in GIS, remote sensing,
              and spatial decision support systems. Success in GIS and remote sensing has led
              the College of Arts and Sciences and the Department to invest further in this
              endeavor by hiring new faculty members with research foci on Geographic
              Information Science and Remote Sensing and the application of these tools for
              environmental planning and decision-making by public agencies, community
              groups, and citizens.

The department is in a position to build upon these
              advances by expanding its research activity in Geographic Information Science
              with the goal of becoming a model department within the state of Ohio and the
              nation. Currently, the department has one computer lab to support both teaching
              and research with outdated computers. Students working on their research
              projects often find it difficult to find time to work in the lab around the
              teaching schedule. In addition, these computers are inadequate to effectively
              process the large volumes of data typical of GIS and remote sensing
              applications. The university is investing $50,000 to upgrade the lab for
              teaching purposes. Through this grant, we will establish a research computer
              laboratory facility that concentrates on GIS and remote sensing applications.
