Title       : Acquisition of an X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Spectrometer for Multi-disciplinary
               Research Projects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0116500

Award Number: 0116500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99875              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Ho hotc@hal.lamar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Che-Jen Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel H. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Cocke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hsing Wei Chu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lamar University Beaumont
	      4400 Port Arthur Road
	      Beaumont, TX  777055748    713/838-7011

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Title:		Acquisition of an X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Spectrometer for

              			Multi-disciplinary Research Projects

NSF Proposal
              No.:	0116500

Abstract

The objective of this NSF MRI (Major Research
              Instrumentation) award is to provide an X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Spectrometer
              at Lamar University for research and education.  X-ray fluorescence is an
              instrumental technique for identification and concentration determination of
              elements in solids or liquids.  An XRF spectrometer uses X-rays to excite an
              unknown sample.  The excited elements in the sample decay and re-emit their own
              "characteristic" fluorescent X-rays.  The spectrometer detects the fluorescent
              X-rays and quantitatively determines which elements are present in the sample.
              The XRF being acquired is an Oxford Instruments Model ED2000 equipped with a
              Vacuum System (XA620) and a Sample Spinner Assembly (XA618).  It can analyze
              elements in the mass range from Na(11) to U(92), from low ppm to high
              percentage levels.  Measurements can be made in the standard air path, an
              optional helium path for liquids, or  in vacuum for low atomic number elements.
               Non-homogeneous samples such as particulates on filter papers can be optimally
              measured with the use of the ED2000 sample spinner.
  
The availability of an
              XRF unit at Lamar University will greatly enhance our capabilities in
              particle-related research and education, promote inter-disciplinary
              collaboration among departments, reduce long-term operation costs for elemental
              analyses, and strengthen our efforts in obtaining external research funds at
              Lamar University.  Both currently funded and future proposed projects will be
              directly benefited by this acquisition, including measurement and analysis of
              outdoor/indoor particulate matter, development of sorbent technology for metal
              and mercury emission control, chemical characterization of industrial sludge,
              and development of a super-porous titania-based photoreactor for environmental
              applications. In addition, both undergraduate and graduate students at Lamar
              University will have an opportunity, either through research or classroom
              instruction, to obtain first-hand experience in understanding and operating
              this modern, advanced chemical-analysis technique.  The impact of this
              acquisition on research and instructional infrastructure at Lamar University
              will be considerable.  It will also enhance service to the area K-12 students
              and efforts in recruiting potential students to science and engineering
              programs. 


