Title       : Acquisition of Scanning Laser Confocal Microscopy System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0116032

Award Number: 0116032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marten Edwards mjedward@cc.owu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Stephenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio Wesleyan University
	      
	      Delaware, OH  43015    614/369-4431

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Marten J. Edwards at Ohio Wesleyan University to
              purchase a confocal laser scanning biological microscopy system.  Confocal
              laser scanning microscopy offers significant advantages over conventional
              fluorescent microscopy. It improves the resolution of images by recording
              fluorescence or reflected light generated from a single focal plane within the
              sample, while rejecting all other light coming from above or below the this
              plane. The elimination of this out-of-focus light, which blurs conventional
              images, permits resolution of sub-micron structures within cells and tissue
              sections.  It can produce optical sections through a 3-dimensional specimen -
              e.g., an entire cell or tissue sample.  By moving the focal plane of the
              instrument stepwise through the depth of the specimen, a series of optical
              sections can be recorded.  These sections can be merged to reconstruct a
              3-dimensional image that would be impossible to achieve by conventional light
              microscopy.  The digital images produced by confocal microscopy are amenable to
              image analysis and processing. Confocal microscopy also offers a major increase
              in sensitivity over conventional light microscopy. The light source is a laser,
              and the image is digitized by a highly sensetive photomultiplier tube. 
The
              principal user of the confocal imaging system will be Dr. Marten J. Edwards who
              is exploring the molecular interface between mosquitoes and the pathogens they
              transmit.  His research has focused on the temporal and spatial dynamics of
              gene expression in the mosquito midgut and ovaries. Using confocal microscopy,
              it will be possible to detect the expression of fluorescent marker proteins in
              transgenic mosquitoes.  
The undergraduate research program at Ohio Wesleyan
              University will be significantly enhanced by a scanning laser confocal imaging
              system.  Research in the Edwards lab has direct applications to the study of
              the transmission of LaCrosse viral encephalitis by mosquitoes. The confocal
              system will also serve an important role in the local research community,
              primarily through long-term collaborations with investigators at the USDA
              laboratories in Delaware, OH.  The aim is to provide the highest possible level
              of research training in the intensive learning environment of a small liberal
              arts college. The confocal laser scanning confocal microscopy will provide
              students and faculty with access to technologies that are expanding the
              boundaries of the types of questions that can explored in the biology
              laboratory.  This will provide us with a unique opportunity to expose
              undergraduate students to hands-on experience and discovery at the frontiers of
              biological research. 


