Title       : Acquisition of X-Ray Computed Tomography System for the Modeling and
               Characterization of Materials with Microstructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a0116793

Award Number: 0116793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426397             (Estimated)
Investigator: Balasingam Muhunthan muhuntha@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eyad A. Masad  (Principal Investigator former)
              Hussein M. Zbib  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Antolovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1634,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              OIA-0116793                                                                     
                                                                                             
                   PI                     Eyad Masad                                         
                                                                                             
                            Institution       Washington State University                    
                                                                                             
                     Title                 "Acquisition of x-Ray Computed Tomgraphy System
              for the Modeling and Characterization of Materials with Nanostructure          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        Abstract             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     This MRI
              award is for the acquisition of an X-ray computed tomography (CT) system for
              non-invasive evaluation of the microstructure of engineering materials.  The
              system is unique for the visualization of three-dimensional of microstructural
              features in the interior of opaque solid objects.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         The X-ray CT system will be used to perform detailed
              observations of the microstructural features associated with granular
              deformation.  It will also be used in the development of new generation
              ceramics and metal matrix composites.  The focus of the first research is on
              the development of a microstructure based continuum model to study the
              deformation and locialization in granular materials.  The model is based on
              crystal plasticity but inclused two microstructure length scales;  one
              associated with the plastic curvature (orientation re-distribution) and the
              other one is related to the porosity re-distribution.  This study is unique in
              that the microstructure model parameters are determined directly from
              microscopic measurements.  The study will lead to analytical methods for
              modeling strain localization not only in laboratory specimens, but also
              inpractical boundary value problems in geotechnical engineering.  The outcome
              of this work will also have implications to the modeling of other types of
              materials that exhibit deformation instabilities and shear banding such as
              metals and composites.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          The
              engineering behavior of ceramics and metal matrix composite materials is
              controlled by the microstructure of several levels.  Therefore, the second
              study combines microscopic and macroscopic principles and develops multiscale
              mosels for their description.  The multiscale model parameters are determined
              directly from X-ray CT measurements.  Use of such models will enable the design
              and development of new materials with tailored microstructures.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    In addition to the above major studies, a host of other
              research activities from different disciplines at Washington State University
              will benefit from the proposed system.  The unique capabilities of the system
              will contribute substantially to the extramural funding, and encourage more
              collaboration with other institutions and research centers.                    
                        
