Title       : Acquisition of Deep Reactive Ion Etching Instrument
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0116144

Award Number: 0116144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305844             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vikram L. Dalal vdalal@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc D. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rana Biswas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir V. Tsukruk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Surya K. Mallapragada  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116144
Dalal

Recently, the advent of MEMS and the ability to deposit thin
              film electronic devices on virtually any substrate has made many novel
              electronic, MEMS, microfluidic and biological devices possible. Examples of
              such devices would be in-situ thin-film electronic sensors and thin film
              transistors deposited in etched groves for detecting and controlling fluid flow
              in microfluidic and biological devices; neural reconnection using trenches
              etched in quartz or Si; electrical stimulation of nerve growth in trenches
              using in-situ deposited active devices; MEMS devices for sensing chemical
              pollutants, using ultra-thin piezoelectric membranes and selective receptor
              sites; DNA analysis using microchambers; implantable micropumps for drug
              delivery; Soi1CHIP for in-situ testing of soils; chemical lab on a chip etc.
              Most of these devices need the ability to etch deeply and controllably in a
              variety of substrates, such as Si wafers, polymers and quartz microplates. Some
              of the etching has to go ~100 micrometer deep.

At Iowa State University, and
              also at the PIs sister institution, the University of Iowa, a number of
              innovative projects are underway in this area which integrate electronic
              technology with biological and microfluidic technologies. Some of the
              noteworthy projects involve directed nerve regrowth in severed central nervous
              systems, using trenches in Si ,quartz or polymers to guide the direction of the
              regrowth; microfluidic channels for implantable micropumps; detection of trace
              chemicals for forensic testing using specialized chemical coatings on MEMS type
              structures; analytical laboratory on a chip; development of thin film
              transistors in deep trenches; development of nanocoatings for surfaces in MEMS
              type channels; measurement of structure and stress in cytoskeletons etc. All
              these projects need a deep reactive ion etching system. The one the PIs have
              stops at about 5 micrometer. In this project, they propose to purchase a
              versatile, laboratory-scale, deep uv reactive ion etching system from Oxford
              Instruments, which uses the patented Bosch process to achieve etching as deep
              as 100 micrometer. It is expected that this new system will allow them to
              successfully carry out some of the current and future projects in these very
              new and exciting fields of electro-biology, chemical MEMS, medical MEMS and
              opto-mechanical MEMS.

This instrument is capable of deep etching, using both
              Chlorine and Fluorine-based gases. The Oxford Instruments system is a proven
              lab-scale system, with a high density ICP plasma source, RE biasing of the
              substrate, capabilities for backside cooling of substrates and the provision
              for a load-lock. It is a cluster tool which can be added on to in later stages.
              It comes equipped with the appropriate flow controllers and corrosive service
              pumps. They  propose to add to it, at their cost, an in-line high-resolution,
              computer-controlled optical emission spectroscopy (OES) system from Acton
              Research which will be very useful for understanding and controlling the
              different plasmas that one needs when etching quartz and polymers such as
              polyimide, PET and biological polymers.

This instrument will be housed at
              the Microelectronics Research Center(MRC) at Iowa State University. MRC is an
              interdisciplinary facility set up by Iowa State to provide research
              capabilities in the general area of semiconductors and MEMS for faculty and
              students from all departments. The PIs currently have students and faculty from
              EE, Materials Science and Engineering, ChemE, Physics, Chemistry, Mechanical
              Engineering, Industrial Engineering and Biology using MRC facilities
              extensively. They have many federally and industrially supported projects, and
              this new instrument will be useful to a wide group of faculty. Nearly 30
              graduate students would benefit from having this instrument at MRC.

MRC has
              qualified, experienced, technicians available for installing and running this
              instrument. They have the necessary environmental monitoring and gas-disposal
              facilities required for such an instrument. And they have over 20 years of
              experience in running plasma reactors, including a PIE system, which
              unfortunately does not do deep etching.

The instrument will also help the
              PIs develop new courses in this area. They already have an extensive offering
              in the general semiconductor field, including several lab-based courses. They
              expect to add two inter-disciplinary course on plasma based manufacturing of
              electronic, MEMS and biological devices, and on measurement techniques if we
              get this instrument. Note that these courses will be open to both senior--level
              and graduate-level students. Thus, the educational impact will be felt both at
              undergraduate and graduate levels. The semiconductor and MEMS industries are
              very interested in having trained engineers in this field. So is the biomedical
              industry.

The PIs have planned an extensive outreach

