Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Integrated Mouse Test System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0116089

Award Number: 0116089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113312             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Locurto clocurto@holycross.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Holy Cross College
	      1 College Street
	      Worcester, MA  01610    508/793-2011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the purchase of an Integrated Mouse Test System (IMTS),
              designed in conjunction with two leading manufacturers of this type of
              instrumentation. IMTS will enable students and faculty at Holy Cross College to
              conduct automated state-of-the-art experiments in comparative intelligence and
              in interdisciplinary research that brings together the comparative intelligence
              and neuroscience laboratories. This instrumentation will result in two
              significant enhancements in our research and research training activities.
              First, the system will expand the number and range of experiments that can be
              initiated in our labs. As a consequence, this instrumentation will permit the
              conduct of experiments not heretofore possible at Holy Cross and will
              facilitate increased collaborative work between the two laboratories. Second,
              this instrumentation will lead to significant improvements in the precision and
              reliability of our research, particularly in the automated running of
              experiments and recording of behavioral measures. Finally, IMTS represents a
              significant expansion in the available equipment in our labs. As a consequence,
              this system will directly result in a significant increase in the number of
              students who can participate in our ongoing research programs.

This
              acquisition comes at a time when there is intense interest within the
              scientific community in developing behavioral mouse models. As detailed in a
              lead article in a recent issue of the American Psychological Association's
              Monitor on Psychology, there are now a number of highly sophisticated genetic
              techniques available for use with mice to link genes with behavior (Azar,
              2000). Unfortunately, the powerful techniques of molecular biologists have not
              been matched by a parallel sophistication in the development of complex
              behavioral techniques using mice. There is a pressing need for new and
              innovative priorities in the training of scientists in this area. The research
              supported by this instrumentation grant will provide Holy Cross students and
              faculty with the means to participate significantly in this broadly-supported
              scientific initiative at the undergraduate level.
