Title       : Acquisition of a Micro-Respirometry System for Measuring Development of
               Oviparous Vertebrates and for Faculty-Mentored Undergraduate Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0116442

Award Number: 0116442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77108              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Sotherland paulsoth@kzoo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kalamazoo College
	      1200 Academy Street
	      Kalamazoo, MI  490063291    269/337-7162

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Paul Sotherland at Kalamazoo College to purchase
              a Columbus Instruments Micro-Oxymax Multiple Sensor O2/CO2 20 Chamber System
              and three Precision Low-temperature Incubators.  The Columbus Micro-Oxymax
              system is the best multiple-chamber system available for sequentially measuring
              metabolic rates (i.e. rates of oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide
              production) of a wide variety of small organisms, maintained at various gas
              concentrations , via closed-system respirometry.  The Precision incubators are
              dependable, standard-refrigerator sized, incubators that typically are used to
              maintain small organisms at a constant temperature (set point + 0.5 degree C). 
              The equipment will be used to attain the following two goals: (1) to
              investigate the metabolic responses of turtle embryos to hypoxia at different
              stages of development and, thereby, (a) elucidate general patterns of
              physiological response to hypoxia by three turtle species that typically
              experience different degrees of hypoxia in the nest during incubation, and (b)
              determine whether hatchery nests of leatherback turtles, one of the three
              species studied, would produce relatively more hatchlings if they were
              ventilated with humidified air toward the end of incubation; and (2) to train
              undergraduate students in the use of the purchased equipment while carrying out
              the proposed research and other research projects that involve the measurement
              of metabolism.
The PI and undergraduate student collaborators will incubate
              eggs of snapping turtles (Chelydra serpentina), olive ridley turtles
              (Lepidochelys olivacea), and leatherback turtles (Dermochelys coriacea)
              (half-buried in sand in plastic boxes ventilated with air or gas maintained at
              levels of nest normoxia and held in two of the incubators) and assess their
              responses to different levels of acute hypoxia by measuring their metabolic
              rates (while holding them in small chambers at the incubation temperature in
              the third incubator).  Egg and hatchling size, along with blood parameters
              (hematocrit and hemoglobin concentration) of hatchlings, will also be
              measured.
This research will expand our understanding of the developmental
              physiology of oviparous amniotes while enriching the education of many
              undergraduate students.  Because an embyro's environment and its genome both
              affect developmental trajectories followed by the embryo and phenotype of the
              hatchling, research on the effects of hypoxia on embryonic development will
              provide new insights into the ecological and evolutionary consequences of
              hatchling phenotypes.  Experiments required to complete this research will be
              performed through a collaboration between the PI and Kalamazoo College
              undergraduate students working in the lab to measure metabolism and in the
              field to collect eggs at Playa Grande, Costa Rica, and at Kalamazoo College's
              Lillian Anderson Arboretum.  These projects, and others using the equipment,
              will therefore have positive impacts on the life-long learning of many
              students.

