Title       : The Acquisition of Laboratory Equipment to Facilitate Micro and Nano Engineering
               at Michigan State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0116252

Award Number: 0116252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jes Asmussen asmussen@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean M. Aslam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fathi M. Salem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia M. Ayres  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy A. Grotjohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recently within the College of Engineering at Michigan State University (MSU)
              faculty
with research interests at the micro and nano dimensions have
              coalesced about a new College of
Engineering Center research activity entitled
              the Micro and Nano Engineering Center (MNEC).
MNEC builds upon the past strong
              research capabilities of faculty within the College of
Engineering, such as
              carbon-based materials and plasma technologies and combines them with
newly
              hired research faculty and their associated research initiatives in nano-device
              technologies,
miniaturized millimeter wave and optical systems and micro/nano
              machine instrumentation.
MNEC's mission is concerned with the application of
              frontier knowledge and techniques that
synthesize, characterize, manipulate
              and modify materials in order to create integrated structures,
electronic, and
              photonic devices and machines in the micro and nano environment. The
              emphasis
of the Center's research activities is the development of novel
              devices, machines and systems in
the micro and nano world. Faculty form
              synergistic interdisciplinary research teams which
include cross-campus and
              multi-university collaborations. Notable among these are the NSF
MRSEC Center
              for Sensor Materials and the NSF Wireless Integrated Microsystems (WIMS)
ERC
              collaborations. Additionally, MNEC's research activities provide the university
              setting in
which to train and educate both graduate and undergraduate
              students. Presently, the Center
includes ten faculty and 40 graduate students
              of which over half are Ph.D. students. Of the ten
faculty, five have been
              newly hired during the past five years and it is anticipated to expand to
              a
total of 15-20 faculty over the next five years via additional faculty
              interest reorientation and new
hires. MNEC's research activities have been and
              continue to be transferred to industry and
commercialized into applications
              relevant to manufacturing, health care, the environment and
national
              security.
The rapid advance of micro/nano-fabrication technology requires
              continual reassessment of
our facilities and capabilities. Micro-scale
              technology has been an important economic driver for
the United States as well
              as the entire world. MSU's MNEC faculty have pioneered several
important
              micro-fabrication technologies, including microwave plasma processing machines
              for
etching and diamond deposition, IC-compatible diamond processing and
              fabrication techniques,
and diamond micro electro-mechanical systems (MEMS).
              Now, as we enter a new millennium,
nano-scale technology is becoming
              increasingly important to the center, the college, the
university, and the
              nation. The instrumentation requested in this proposal will improve
              the
Center's faculty ability to perform research activities and student
              training in nano-scale and
micro-scale technologies.
Specific, new long-term
              goals of the Center have been established over the past year through
many
              strategic planning discussions amongst the Center faculty. Current and
              developing micro
and nano-engineering research activities in MNEC can be
              described and organized into five areas
including: (1) carbon-based
              technology, (2) microwave plasma technology, (3) nanodevice
technology, (4)
              manipulation and probe technology for micro and nano applications, and
              (5)
miniaturized millimeter wave and optical systems. The proposed equipment
              acquisition described
below is part of the MNEC's multiyear strategy to
              improve its laboratory facilities, which will
facilitate research activities
              and student training in these five areas. In developing our request, we
have
              considered the availability of similar instrumentation on campus and the
              capabilities of such
instrumentation. The equipment requested in this proposal
              will be housed in common facilities in
the Micro and Nano Engineering Center
              (MNEC) cleanroom located on the MSU campus. The
instrumentation requested in
              this proposal includes the following systems:
 Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor
              Deposition (PECVD) System
 Multisource Physical Vapor Deposition (PVD)
              System
 Scanning Probe Microscope
 Wet Chemical Processing Station

              Electrochemical Plating Station
