Title       : Acquisition of Surface Analysis Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0116757

Award Number: 0116757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Efstathios I. Meletis meletis@me.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Kurtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laurence Henry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robin L. McCarley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip T. Sprunger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to Louisiana State University and Agricultural & Mechanical College
              (LSU) is from the Major Research Instrumentation program and the NSF/EPSCoR
              program. The award supports the acquisition of a combination Auger (AES)
              scanning Auger microscopy (SAM) and high resolution X-ray photoelectron
              spectroscopy (ESCA) surface analysis system. This state of the art system will
              enable high-resolution energy, depth and spatial characterization of a variety
              of novel thin-film/surface materials at levels that are currently unavailable
              at the institution. The instrument will be combined with exiting
              instrumentation and will constitute the nucleus of a centralized campus-wide
              Materials Characterization Facility. The facility will be accessible to
              scientists and students from Southern University, and will support several
              federally funded projects. It will enhance substantially the infrastructure in
              and impact the visibility and competitiveness of LSU and Southern University.  
              

This award to Louisiana State University and Agricultural & Mechanical
              College (LSU)is from the Major Research Instrumentation program and the
              NSF/EPSCoR program. The award supports the acquisition of a combination Auger
              (AES) scanning Auger microscopy (SAM) and high resolution X-ray photoelectron
              spectroscopy (ESCA) surface analysis system. This state of the art system will
              enable high-resolution energy, depth and spatial characterization of a variety
              of novel thin-film/surface materials at levels that are currently unavailable
              at the institution. The instrument will be combined with exiting
              instrumentation and will constitute the nucleus of a centralized campus-wide
              Materials Characterization Facility. The facility will be accessible to
              scientists and students from Southern University, and will support several
              federally funded projects. It will enhance substantially the infrastructure in
              and impact the visibility and competitiveness of LSU and Southern University.

