Title       : Acquitision of Multiphoton Microscopy for the Study of Cellular Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a0116016

Award Number: 0116016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $636536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ehud Y. Isacoff eisacoff@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Zucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               A major research instrumentation grant has been awarded to Dr. Ehud Isacoff at
              the University of California at Berkeley for the purchase of a 2-photon
              scanning microscope. The research goal is to probe, non-invasively, by
              microscopic photometry and imaging, the distribution and structure of
              macromolecules (RNA, DNA and proteins), and their activity and interactions in
              living cells.  The 2-photon microscope  makes it possible to image cells and
              tissues with high spatial and reasonable temporal resolution, with penetrating
              excitation, but also with optically confined irradiation, thus limiting
              photo-damage to cells and photo-destruction of fluorescent tags.  The
              instrument will form a centerpiece of a recently built Berkeley Imaging Center.
               The Imaging Center will provide access, training and technical support for use
              of the 2-photon microscope for students, postdocs and faculty in the biological
              sciences on campus and in the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, and will
              make the instrument available to academic researchers at other Bay Area
              campuses.

The research projects conducted with the 2-photon microscope will
              include; 1) studies on synaptic proteins that have been engineered to be
              fluorescent and to change their fluorescence upon either activation or
              interaction with other proteins, 2) optical probes of neural activity to
              measure the function of neural circuits involved in visual information
              processing, 3) organic and protein-based indicator dyes to study the roles of
              calcium ions in synaptic transmission, short- and long-term plasticity, 4) the
              regulation of other second messenger systems and, 5) fluorescently labeled
              proteins to study the localization of postsynaptic receptors, and the changes
              in proteins involved in exocytosis during synaptic transmission.

The aim of
              the research using the 2-photon microscope is to employ innovative forms of
              microscopy that can characterize the dynamics of molecular machines in their
              physiological environments: inside intact cells and tissues.  


