Title       : MRI: Acquisition of an Ion Chromatograph and X-ray Diffractometer to Support
               Watershed Modeling, Seneca Lake, New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0116078

Award Number: 0116078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99771              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Halfman halfman@hws.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D. Brooks McKinney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hobart & William Smith Col
	      
	      Geneva, NY  14456    315/781-3000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116078
Halfman

This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation
              (MRI) Program, provides full support to acquire an automated, dual column ion
              chromatograph (IC), and an X-ray diffractometer (XRD) to investigate the
              geochemistry of the waters and sediments of Seneca Lake, the largest of upstate
              New York's Finger Lakes.  These new instruments will complement existing
              instrumentation and Hobart and William Smith's 65-foot research vessel, the HWS
              EXPLORER, to establish at the Colleges the scientific resources needed for
              studying the interactions between the lake and its watershed.  Specifically,
              the ion chromatograph will increase the accuracy, precision, and number of
              chemical analyses of both lake and tributary stream waters.  The X-ray
              diffractometer will identify and characterize the mineralogy of fine-grained
              sediments, both in the lake and in tributary streams.  Both instruments will
              support a continuing project to develop quantitative models of the movement of
              water, dissolved materials and sediment into and out of Seneca Lake.  Such
              models have immediate applications to several current environmental concerns
              including the impact of exotic zebra mussels on the lake, rising concentrations
              of the herbicide atrazine and nitrates in the lake and its tributaries, and
              high concentrations of chloride in the lake.  These models may also help to
              understand changes in climate that followed glaciation and that are recorded
              within the lake's sediments.  Seneca Lake watershed models and the data upon
              which they rest will also serve as an important base line for detecting and
              evaluating future water quality changes in the lake. The impact of these
              instruments will extend beyond the data they produce and the geochemical models
              they will support.  Much of the investigation of Seneca Lake's waters and
              sediments will be done by undergraduate students working collaboratively with
              geoscience faculty.  The opportunity for these students to engage in hands-on
              scientific research with modern instrumentation is critical to their
              development as the next generation of geoscience researchers, environmental
              managers and environmental policy makers.
***

