Title       : Acquisition of a Variable-Pressure SEM: New Avenues in Collaborative Biologic,
               Paleontologic, and Museum Collection Research and Conservation for New York's
               Capital Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0116551

Award Number: 0116551
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $451046             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel S. Bowser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443455    518/431-1200

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A consortium of seven principal researchers and nine auxiliary users from
              the
New York Capital Region are funded for a variable-pressure, field emission
              scanning electron microscope (VP-FESEM) equipped with an Energy Dispersive
              X-ray Analysis System. Support includes several ancillary instruments including
              a critical point drier, a freeze drier, and a high-resolution chrome sputtering
              device. Major research areas to be addressed include: (i)cell biological and
              molecular approaches addressing the origins of the skeleton; (ii) microfossil
              taxonomy of the oldest skeletalized animals and the Cambrian evolutionary
              radiation; (iii) nanotechnology in the neurosciences, (iv) the role of
              mitochondria in cell death, (v) the evolution of prehistoric agriculture in the
              northeastern United States; and (vi) post-glacial fish dispersal and
              assemblage/community structure.
This instrument will create new ties between
              paleontologists, biologists,
and museum curators in a research web ranging
              back through 500 million years of
biologic evolution up to the Native American
              development of agriculture. A novel aspect of the proposed instrument is the
              merging of research disciplines in two large but distinct New York State
              government agencies: The Wadsworth Center, the flagship research institution of
              the New York State Department of Health, and the New York State Museum, a major
              branch of the New York State Education Department. As such, the instrument will
              serve to link basic researchers in the biosciences and paleontology with those
              engaged in museum collection research, conservation, and dissemination of
              collection data. Both agencies have major education mandates to the citizenry
              of New York State, and all of the investigators in this proposal have
              time-tested local, regional, and national outreach commitments.

