Title       : MRI: Acquisition of an Automated DNA Analysis System for Biology Teaching and
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0116347

Award Number: 0116347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99677              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip D. Sudman sudman@tarleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bert Little  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allan D. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell S. Pfau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold Rathburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tarleton State Univ
	      PO Box T-1179
	      Stephenville, TX  764011179    817/968-9000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Sudman at Tarleton State University to
purchase
              an automated DNA analysis system. This instrument package will be
used to
              enhance the teaching and research activities within the Department
of
              Biological Sciences, specifically those related to molecular biology
              and
genetics.  The use of this DNA analysis system, combined with
              the
introduction of DNA and protein analysis components into the
              laboratory
portions of many of their classes, will greatly enhance the
              educational
experiences of all of the students associated with the Biology
              Department.
This modern, technological approach to biology will give Tarleton
              students
advantages on three different levels. Exposure to modern research
              techniques
and instrumentation will 1) better prepare the students to enter
              post-baccalaureate educational settings - either traditional academic settings
              or medical related fields; 2) prepare future K-12 teachers with a basis for
              explaining and perhaps demonstrating the uses of modern molecular
techniques;
              and 3) prepare students for entrance into the rapidly changing,
high-tech
              workplace.

From an educational standpoint, individuals that will benefit
              from the
acquisition of a DNA analysis system will include undergraduate
              students,
Masters level graduate students, area high school teachers, and
              researchers
both at Tarleton State University and the Stephenville branch of
              the Texas
A&M Agricultural Research and Extension Center.  Undergraduate
              students
enrolled in courses in the Department of Biological Sciences such
              as
Heredity, Molecular Biology, and Laboratory Techniques in Biochemistry
              will
utilize the automated DNA analysis system in a variety of
              laboratory
situations.  Students in the graduate course Laboratory Practicum
              in
Molecular Biology will also benefit from the apparatus.  From a
              research
standpoint, undergraduate and graduate students involved with
              several
ongoing projects will directly utilize the automated DNA analysis
              system.
These research projects include generating data for investigating the
              past
history  of various mammal species, DNA variation in an endangered
              bird
(Attwater's prairie chickens), determination of the origin of
              introduced
crabs in freshwater Texas lakes, introducing foreign genes
              into
baculoviruses to enhance insect resistance in plants, examining the
              origin
of specific "hybrid" plant species (such as peanuts), searching for
              genes
related to drought tolerance in plants, and investigations into the
              genetic
diversity of immune response genes in various species of
              mammals.

The acquisition of this DNA analysis system will have a tremendous
              impact on
the academic and research community associated with the Department
              of
Biological Sciences at Tarleton State University.  From students
              seeking
teacher certification to those conducting Masters level research, an
              onsite
instrument for determining DNA sequences or other genetic
              differences
between or within organisms will provide a vital boost to the
              biological
teaching and research fields. The automated DNA analysis system
              will allow
more than 100 students per year the opportunity to obtain essential
              training
with a state-of-the-art biochemical analysis instrument.  Finally,
              the
system will provide local access for the research community at
              the
Stephenville branch of the Texas A&M Agricultural Research and
              Extension
Center, fostering additional collaborative research activities
              between the
two institutions.


