Title       : Vibrations and Nonlinear Dynamics of Microcantilevers Interacting with Nanoscale
               Structures: Applications to Atomic Force Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0116414

Award Number: 0116414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214045             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arvind Raman raman@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Franchek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Modeling and Development of Gradient Based Smart Polymer Sensors and
              Actuators
Gregory Washington, PI 
Ohio State University
Proposal #
              0102310


Abstract
The goal of this study is to develop a novel
              gradient-based sensor for spatial measurement of distributed systems.  The
              sensors and actuators in this study are developed from polyvinylidene fluoride
              (PVDF).  Previous studies have used spatial aperture shading techniques
              (spatially varying electrodes to achieve a particular performance function) to
              measure a myriad of distributed systems.  A major limitation of the spatial
              aperture shading techniques was that the apertures have a heavy dependence on
              1-dimensional variation for most cases.  In this study spatial gradient
              polarization and aperture shading techniques are used to develop the next
              generation of sensors.  In spatial polarization the material is polarized in a
              manner such that its piezoelectric constant is allowed to vary in controlled
              manner. Specifically, the objectives of this research are to: (1) Develop the
              analytical basis for spatial gradient polarization.  Inherent in this part of
              the study is the development of techniques for analytically calculating
              weighting functions for various structural configurations. (2) Develop the
              experimental hardware and facilities necessary for making spatially polarized
              sensors and actuators.  (3) Develop control techniques necessary for the
              production of user defined film actuators and sensors. (4) Develop a
              non-contact measurement technique for deflection verification. 

The research
              goals are accomplished by applying differential calculus, the principles of
              mechanics, and piezoelectric polymer modeling to a given sensor system.  The
              experimental hardware that will be developed for polarizing the films consist
              of a corona charging system with an appropriate stretch and drive mechanism for
              correct placement and rastering of the film.  A wide-angle
              stereo-photogrammetry system similar to those used in particle tracking
              applications will be modified to accurately measure the location of the
              distributed system when actuated.  The sensors market is an $18 billion market
              and growing. These new sensors can be utilized in a host of applications
              including Automotive, Biomedical sensors, Aerospace Structural, and Impact
              sensors in Military applications, like sonar sensing equipment and so on.  In
              addition, there is a possibility that this novel technology can be applied
              directly to piezoceramic actuators as well.


