Title       : Bioenergetics of Mitochondria Isolated from Fast and Slow Skeletal Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a0116997

Award Number: 0116997
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne T. Willis Waynewillis@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1155,1168,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Fast twitch white (type IIb) muscle fibers and slow twitch red (type I) fibers
              represent the structural and functional extremes of locomotory skeletal muscle
              cells in vertebrates. A distinguishing characteristic of type IIb fibers is the
              capacity to generate high power, burst contractile activity. In contrast, type
              I fibers provide postural support and are capable of sustaining long duration,
              but low intensity, locomotor activity. Type IIb fibers nevertheless contribute
              to endurance activity if exercise duration is sufficient to deplete
              carbohydrate fuel.  Type I cells possess threefold greater content of
              mitochondria, the cellular organelles responsible for aerobic energy
              production, and this difference is generally considered to account for much of
              the superior endurance of type I fibers. Surprisingly, at rest type IIb cells
              respire at O2 consumption rates similar to type I fibers, while maintaining a
              substantially higher cellular energy status. This apparent ability of type IIb
              mitochondria to energetically outperform their type I counterparts at rest
              gives rise to interesting and illuminating examples of biological cost-benefit
              tradeoffs. Mitochondrial structure and function are therefore very different in
              the two fiber types, and these studies will contribute not only to our
              understanding of metabolic regulation in fast and slow vertebrate skeletal
              muscle, but also more generally to our appreciation of mitochondrial
              structure-function relationships.
	The central hypothesis of the proposed
              research is that the structure and function of type I and type IIb mitochondria
              reflect the physiological missions of the cells in which they reside. Type IIb
              mitochondria are thus able to generate higher energetic forces and flows than
              type I, but at the expense of efficiency. These energetic differences are
              predicted to be especially evident under low pH conditions, which exist in the
              type IIb cell during burst activity and in the recovery period that follows. It
              is also hypothesized that mitochondria use the cytosol-mitochondrial electron
              shuttles to suppress fat oxidation and, again, this regulation is predicted to
              be especially pronounced in type IIb mitochondria, in order to promote the
              oxidative disposal of glycolytic products. The proposed studies will generally
              evaluate thermodynamic flow:force relationships with various oxidative fuels
              across the physiological range of concentrations. The concepts of metabolic
              control analysis will be utilized in the interpretation of these
              studies.
	Mitochondria will be isolated from mammalian skeletal muscles known
              to be homogeneous in type I or type IIb fibers.  The mitochondria will be
              placed in physiological buffer solutions, provided various oxidative fuels, and
              subjected to varying energy demand, much as they would encounter within the
              cell at rest and during graded, steady state contractile activity.  Energetic
              parameters will be measured such as the rates of O2 consumption, fuel
              utilization, ATP production, and the energy levels of intermediates in the
              pathway of energy transduction.  These measurements will provide the data
              necessary to determine 1) thermodynamic flow:force relationships, 2) fuel
              requirements, preferences, and interactions, and 3) the economy of O2
              utilization, as they carry out oxidative energy transduction.
	The proposed
              research addresses energetic and metabolic issues that have general application
              to all vertebrate skeletal muscle cells. Examining these questions in types I
              and IIb mitochondria, extreme examples of mitochondrial structure-function
              relationships, may provide insight into biological design strategies. 

