Title       : Development of a Low-Temp Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Facility with
               High-Resolution Electronic, Vibrational and Magnetic Spectroscopy Capabilities
               for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a0116339

Award Number: 0116339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ludwig Bartels ludwig.bartels@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program supports the
              development of a high-resolution low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope
              (STM) for research and education in surface processing at the University of
              California-Riverside (UCR). The research apparatus is based on an STM with a
              temperature range between 10K and 350K. It will be set up to allows for in-situ
              sample excitation with laser pulses and electrons of several tens of
              electronvolts to 1kilo electronvolts energy. It will be used for the structural
              and spectroscopic analysis of adsorbates and films before and after their
              excitation similar to presently used or in the near future relevant surface
              process: direct optical excitation as it is used in optical lithography;
              optical excitation of the surface electronic temperatures to several hundred K
              for a time span of a few ps as induced by (ultra-)short laser pulses;
              excitation by impinging electrons of various energies as it is used in
              electron-beam lithography; excitation by low energy electrons from the
              tunneling current. The low-temperature capability of the instrument will permit
              to freeze out the reaction intermediates created by the various excitation
              modes. They are thus available for structural and spectroscopic analysis by
              STM. A comparison between the resultant products offers important insight into
              the elementary steps of the used reactions. The proposed instrument will be
              incorporated into the educational program of UCR in the context of an
              introductory course to semiconductor processing offered by the PI for senior
              undergraduate and graduate students of chemistry, physics and engineering.
              Additionally, it will be available to graduate students for their research
              projects. 

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program
              supports the development of a high-resolution low-temperature scanning
              tunneling microscope (STM) for research and education in surface processing at
              the University of California-Riverside (UCR). The research apparatus is based
              on an STM with a temperature range between 10K and 350K. It will be set up to
              allows for in-situ sample excitation with laser pulses and electrons of several
              tens of electronvolts to 1kilo electronvolts energy. It will be used for the
              structural and spectroscopic analysis of adsorbates and films before and after
              their excitation similar to presently used or in the near future relevant
              surface process: direct optical excitation as it is used in optical
              lithography; optical excitation of the surface electronic temperatures to
              several hundred K for a time span of a few ps as induced by (ultra-)short laser
              pulses; excitation by impinging electrons of various energies as it is used in
              electron-beam lithography; excitation by low energy electrons from the
              tunneling current. The low-temperature capability of the instrument will permit
              to freeze out the reaction intermediates created by the various excitation
              modes. They are thus available for structural and spectroscopic analysis by
              STM. A comparison between the resultant products offers important insight into
              the elementary steps of the used reactions. The proposed instrument will be
              incorporated into the educational program of UCR in the context of an
              introductory course to semiconductor processing offered by the PI for senior
              undergraduate and graduate students of chemistry, physics and engineering.
              Additionally, it will be available to graduate students for their research
              projects.

