Title       : Physics of Dislocation Patterning and Size Effects in Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0116090

Award Number: 0116090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192372             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin L. Selinger selinger@cua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports theoretical research on the elastic-plastic response of
              crystalline solids.  The objectives of the project include: (1) characterizing
              and understanding the thermodynamics driving coalescence of dislocations into
              ordered structures in two dimensions, and (2) investigating the origins of size
              effects in plasticity.

Dislocation patterning has been extensively modeled
              as a non-equilibrium process governed by competing kinetics, but the
              thermodynamics driving the coalescence of dislocations into ordered structures
              is not well understood.  This project considers the simple case of screw
              dislocations under shear in two dimensions, and models their coalescence into
              slip bands using both simulation and theory.  Simulation studies are carried
              out using an idealized model of a crystal under anti-plane shear with constant
              strain rate, a system that is a close analog of the two-dimensional XY rotor
              model under driving boundary conditions.  It is conjectured that slip-band
              formation in 2D represents a non-equilibrium quench into two-phase coexistence
              between defect-rich and defect-poor phases.  Characterization of the underlying
              equilibrium phase diagram, scaling behavior, and flow properties of the
              defect-rich phase will be used to derive constitutive laws for plasticity in
              two dimensions.  Dislocation patterning in three-dimensional crystalline solids
              is far more complex, involving dislocation entanglement and a host of
              inherently 3D mechanisms.  While no 2D model can accurately describe a real 3D
              material, this work will provide at least qualitative insight into the
              competition between energy and entropy in evolution of dislocation
              microstructures.

 The project's second goal is to gain insight into the
              origin of size effects in plasticity.  Recent experiments show that some
              mechanical properties of crystalline solids vary with sample size in the range
              below ~ 100 microns.  Size effects are observed in torsion and bending but not
              in simple tension, suggesting that strain gradients play an important role. 
              Efforts to build strain gradient effects in continuum plasticity theory point
              to the importance of a characteristic length scale whose origin is not fully
              understood.  To find out what mechanisms are involved, simulation studies of
              dislocation patterning will be carried out using both the idelaized
              two-dimensional model and more realistic molecular dynamics in two and three
              dimensions.  Geometries will include (1) a ductile slit crack loaded in shear,
              (2) torsion/bending of a beam, and (3) pullout of a thin fiber from a soft
              metal matrix.  In each case multiple simulations will be preformed for samples
              of different sizes and the results will be compared to the predictions of
              continuum strain gradient theories.
%%%
This grant supports theoretical
              research on the elastic-plastic response of crystalline solids.  The objectives
              of the project include: (1) characterizing and understanding the thermodynamics
              driving coalescence of dislocations into ordered structures in two dimensions,
              and (2) investigating the origins of size effects in plasticity.  Successful
              completion of this project will increase our knowledge of the mechanical
              propoerties of materials, including their failure.
***


