Title       : Exploitation of Tomato as a Model for Comparative and Functional Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0116076

Award Number: 0116076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6499895            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Tanksley sdt4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rod A. Wing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory B. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Giovannoni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Solanaceae, which includes tomato, potato, eggplant and pepper, comprises
              the third most valuable crop family in the U.S. Tomato is the centerpiece for
              genetic and molecular research for the Solanaceae, due in part to features that
              make it an attractive research system.   These features include 2N chromosome
              number, a modest-sized genome (about 950 Mb), tolerance of inbreeding,
              amenability to genetic transformation, and an existing collection of
              well-characterized genetic resources.  During the course of the project, a
              physical map will be constructed for the nuclear genome of tomato.  This
              physical map will comprise overlapping, ordered Bacterial Artificial
              Chromosomes (BACs).   The physical map will be superimposed onto the tomato
              genetic map using a common set of genes.  Together, the physical and genetic
              maps will provide a detailed road map of tomato chromosomes and allow
              scientists to more easily identify new gene functions.  They will also allow
              comparison of the organization of the tomato genome with that of other related
              species (e.g. petunia, pepper, potato and eggplant) and the well-studied model
              plant Arabidopsis.    Gene silencing approaches will be employed to study
              disease resistance and fruit development, two aspects of plant biology for
              which tomato is a model system.   Finally, a series of genetic and genomic
              resources will be developed and disseminated to other researchers.  These will
              include: 1) a non-redundant tomato unigene set; 2) tomato cDNA microarrays; 3)
              DNA, associated data sets from mapping populations, and seeds; 4) a set of
              ordered tomato BAC clones; and 5) new solanaceous BAC libraries.  To facilitate
              distribution of genomic information for tomato and related species in a
              comparative genomic context, we will continue development of the Solanaceae
              Genome Network database.   This is a genomics database that ties together
              information about sequence, genetic and physical maps among solanaceous
              species, and anchors this information against the Arabidopsis genome sequence. 
              
