Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Near-Field and UV Raman Instruments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2002  
File        : a0116645

Award Number: 0116645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yury Gogotsi gogotsi@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yen Wei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michel W. Barsoum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mun Young Choi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kambiz Pourrezaei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Drexel
              University will be able to acquire new kinds of Raman instrumentation, for
              ultraviolet (UV) radiation sources and scanning near-field optical microscopes
              (SNOM). These systems dramatically expand capabilities of Raman spectroscopy
              and allow addressing new problems, that cannot be resolved using conventional
              instruments, and to discover fundamental nanoscale phenomena in materials. An
              example of use of UV Raman is analysis of carbon bonding in diamond, amorphous
              carbon, graphite, nanotubes and fullerenes. Very thin surface layers of
              semiconductors or monolayers of organic molecules can be studied using UV Raman
              spectroscopy. Near-field Raman spectroscopy is of principal importance for
              electronic devices, interfaces, carbon nanotubes and other submicrometer
              objects, where a better spatial resolution compared to other Raman instruments
              can make a great difference.  Raman SNOM may allow a breakthrough of Raman
              spectroscopy into nanotechnology.
The new instruments will be an integral
              component of a new Raman facility at Drexel University.  This will create a
              unique combination of Raman instruments, which will support materials research
              and nanotechnology programs in such diverse areas as novel carbon
              nanostructures, semiconductor films and devices, nanolaminate ceramics,
              composites and biomaterials. Graduate and undergraduate students from Drexel
              University and University of Pennsylvania will use the spectrometers,
              researchers from local companies and high school students.
%%%
With this
              award from the Major Research Instrumentation program Drexel University will be
              able to acquire microspectrometers using ultraviolet (UV) radiation sources and
              scanning near-field optical microscopes. These systems dramatically expand
              capabilities of Raman spectroscopy and allow addressing new problems, that
              cannot be resolved using conventional instruments, and to discover fundamental
              phenomena in materials. An example of use of UV Raman is analysis of carbon
              bonding in diamond, diamond-like carbon films and other novel carbon materials.
              Another advantages of UV over visible Raman are a lower background increase
              with temperature, which allows for high temperature measurements on a variety
              of materials, lower fluorescence and resonance enhancement. Very thin surface
              layers of semiconductors or monolayers of organic molecules can be studied
              using UV Raman spectroscopy. Near-field Raman spectroscopy is of principal
              importance for electronic devices, interfaces, carbon nanotubes and other
              submicrometer objects, where a better spatial resolution compared to other
              Raman instruments can make a great difference.
New instruments will be an
              integral component of a new Raman facility at Drexel University.  This will
              create a unique combination of Raman instruments, which will support materials
              research and training and nanotechnology programs in such diverse areas as
              novel carbon nanostructures, semiconductor films and devices, nanolaminate
              ceramics, composites and biomaterials. 

