Title       : Acquisition of an Automated Genetic Analyzer For Research and Training in
               Systematics and Ecology.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0116176

Award Number: 0116176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76901              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger J. McPherson mcpherson@clarion.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven C. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarion U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Clarion, PA  16214    814/226-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Roger McPherson at Clarion University of
              Pennsylvania to purchase genetic technology crucial to several important
              research projects and the training of undergraduate and Master's degree
              students in ecology and systematics.  The equipment purchased is a Genetic
              Analyzer with gene sequencing, Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) product sizing
              software, and quantitation software. This system allows faculty and student
              researchers at Clarion University to carry out gene sequencing activities and
              to use genetic markers that can determine the genetic profile, or "genetic
              fingerprint," of individuals and populations on a small geographic scale with a
              high degree of resolution.
	The instrumentation will support the efforts of
              four-research groups led by ecology faculty at Clarion University.  One
              project, led by the Project Director, R. McPherson, will use genetic markers to
              indirectly measure the dispersal of coldwater fishes in watersheds having
              various degrees of fragmentation.  These indirect measures of movement and more
              traditional direct measures will be used to test hypotheses of among stream
              movement of coldwater fishes.  A second research group led by Dr. Andrew Turner
              (Co-PD) will use genetic analyses to examine the relationship of gene flow and
              behavioral variation among freshwater snail populations.  Snail populations
              vary in the extent to which they shift habitat use in the presence of
              predators.  Studies of gene flow will lead to a better understanding of local
              adaptation in freshwater snails.  A third group directed by Dr. Charles
              Williams (Co-PD) would use the instrumentation to investigate population
              structure, gene flow, and dynamics of woody plants in a chronically browsed
              landscape.  Many plant species have diminished greatly in abundance due to
              heavy browsing.   However, little is known about how the loss of key understory
              plants has influenced forest function and structure.  This research-group will
              be using genetic analyses to gain an understanding of this relationship.  A
              fourth research-group under the guidance of Dr. Steven Harris (Co-PD) will use
              DNA sequence variation to resolve genetic relationships in Neotropical
              caddisflies, a highly diverse invertebrate group.  Their larval stages are
              aquatic and along with the mayflies and stoneflies are often utilized by
              ecologists as indicators of streams possessing good water quality.  In North
              America, the biodiversity of this group is fairly well known, but in the
              neotropics, such is not the case.  Dr. Harris and his students have reached
              somewhat of an impasse using morphological characters, but have not yet looked
              at genetic analyses as a means of resolving taxonomic relationships.  They will
              compare genetic sequences to study the biological diversity of these important
              stream organisms.  Each of these projects will use state-of- the-art genetic
              technology to address fundamental questions in ecology and systematics. 
	The
              broad implications of the award include the strengthening of the research
              infrastructure at Clarion University.  Additionally, the presence of this
              instrumentation will expand the scope of the research training for
              undergraduate and Master of Science students in systematics and ecology.  It
              will allow the students, collaborating with faculty, hands-on experience with
              the latest genetic techniques as these techniques apply to important issues in
              environmental biology and systematics.  With the expansion of the capabilities
              in the use of these techniques a greater number of students (including female
              and minority undergraduates) will be afforded the opportunity to gain valuable
              research training.  


