Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Core Automated DNA Sequencing Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0116165

Award Number: 0116165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102182             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter F. Straub   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen P. York  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. Rogerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R Stockton Coll of NJ
	      PO Box 195
	      Pomona, NJ  08240    609/652-1776

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract.  NSF 0116165

Acquisition of a Core Automated DNA Sequencing
              Facility

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Peter F. Straub, Dr. Brian J.
              Rogerson and Dr. Karen P. York of the Richard Stockton College of New Jersey to
              setup a DNA Sequencing Facility.  The new Core Genetic Analysis Facility, once
              established, will enable automated DNA sequencing, DNA fragment analysis and
              integrated computer analysis of genetic data.  This facility will be used to
              support student undergraduate research, faculty research and to enhance
              teaching in the Molecular and Genetic Biosciences at Stockton College.
The
              main instrument acquired by the grant is an automated DNA Sequencer.  Other
              instruments useful in running the sequencing reactions, specialized software
              packages, and supplies have been funded to add more research capabilities to
              the facility.  To involve large numbers of students and faculty, two
              collaborative demonstration projects will be supported during the first three
              years of the grant.  The first project will use sequencing and DNA fragment
              analysis to fingerprint and identify bacteria in subsurface aquifers.  The
              results will provide information helpful to the study of large-scale geothermal
              energy use (such as at Stockton College).  The second project will generate
              short DNA sequences from libraries of winter flounder genes in support of
              fisheries research.  Both of these projects invite multi-user large-scale
              collaboration among students and faculty and will produce knowledge that is
              immediately useful to the scientific community.   
This project has the
              potential to transform the way that teaching and research are performed at a
              primarily undergraduate college like Richard Stockton College of NJ.  The grant
              supports a facility that focuses on collaborative student-faculty research in
              Genetics.  These opportunities are important for training undergraduate
              research students since Medicine, Pharmaceuticals and Biotechnology have been
              among the most important sectors of the economy whose growth has been directly
              influence by the revolutionary advancement in biological technologies (like DNA
              sequencing) over the past twenty years. 


