Title       : Collaborative Research: A Multilayer Capital Budgeting Model for Comparative
               Analyses of Infrastructure Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0116342

Award Number: 0116342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srinivas Peeta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Proposal: CMS-0116342
PI: Srinivas Peeta
Institution: Purdue
              Research Foundation
Date: July 25, 2001

Abstract: A Multilayer Capital
              Budgeting Model for Comparative analyses of Infrastructure Networks

This
              project addresses the dynamic capital budgeting problem for large scale,
              multi-layer infrastructure networks, comprised of transportation networks,
              water networks, energy networks, telecommunications networks, financial
              networks, and genera data flow networks.

Specifically, the objective of this
              project is to develop a multi-layer dynamic network capital budgeting model
              that can be used to quantify the cost savings and efficiency enhancements that
              might accrue from the coordinated planning and design of infrastructure
              networks. In the past, infrastructure networks have only been considered in
              isolation. As such this project is the first step toward developing both a
              comprehensive theory of infrastructure network design and a new generation of
              infrastructure decision support systems capable of identifying and promoting
              synergies among individual network layers.

Constraints reflecting physical,
              financial, economic, and information interdependencies are used to couple
              network layers. Network activities are further constrained by flow
              conservation, resource and non-negativity constraints. The state dynamics
              recognize the alternative gaming behaviors of individual agents active on the
              various network layers, so that different assumptions regarding the nature of
              perfect and imperfect economic competition over networks can be considered. The
              objective is to maximize the present value of net economic benefits. This
              objective is combined with the aforementioned constraints and state dynamics to
              create a family of differential games that are formulated as optimal control
              models. These models can be used to determine the most efficient allocation of
              infrastructure capital investments over both time and space.

The research
              approach used in this project combines qualitative analysis and nontranditional
              solution techniques. That is, both classical numerical methods and combined
              optimization/agent-based simulation (ABS) models are considered. In particular,
              the differential game model is used to validate the ABS model. A key task in
              this regard is the investigation of the sensitivity of the model dynamics to
              parameter values. Although a case study of an actual metropolitan
              infrastructure system is beyond the scope of this initial research, we will
              also develop an experimental design for validation of the optimization/ABS
              model. We will also describe how the model may be used to develop an optimal
              capacity expansion plan for the infrastructure systems of a medium size city.
              

