Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Linux Cluster and Workstation Network for Biophysics,
               Mathematics, and Computer Science Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0116202

Award Number: 0116202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71293              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph D. Meeker rmeeker@ben.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa Townsley Kulich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Benedictine University
	      5700 College Road
	      Lisle, IL  605320900    630/829-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Ralph Meeker at Benedictine University to
              acquire a multi-processor Linux computer system and a network of computer
              workstations with stereo viewing capability for research in biophysics,
              mathematics, and computer science. Faculty and undergraduate students
              conducting biophysics research will perform molecular modeling simulations of
              protein binding and use the stereo workstations to analyze and visualize the
              results. Faculty and undergraduate students conducting mathematics research
              will use computer algebra software to study group cohomology and to make
              extensions to modular representation theory. The research in biophyiscs and
              algebra will provide data for Dr. Meeker and his students to measure the
              performance of the multi-processor computer system for both molecular modeling
              and computer-based algebra software as a function of the configuration of the
              computer system.
Large-scale scientific computations, traditionally performed
              at reasonable speeds on specialized, expensive supercomputers or very slowly on
              engineering workstations, are being performed more and more on inexpensive
              Linux-based clusters of computers using a Linux variant to provide the cluster
              support. Rapid improvement in the performance of Pentium central processors,
              coupled with the stability and performance of the Linux operating system, has
              made it possible to assemble a networked cluster of personal computers at a
              fraction of the cost of a supercomputer. The equipment to be acquired with this
              grant includes a Linux multiprocessor computer system configured as an
              interconnected cluster with 16 separate computers. When assembling a
              Linux-based computer cluster for use in high-performance computing, one must
              take into account not only the raw computing power of the individual central
              processing units, but also system requirements in terms of memory and the
              network interconnection between the computers. This research project will
              measure the performance of the Linux-based cluster for both molecular modeling
              and computer-based algebra software as a function of the individual computers'
              memory configuration, the total number of clustered computers available for
              processing, the number of processors per computer in single-processor and
              dual-processor configurations, the number of simultaneous users, and what
              price/performance improvements are obtained from using dual-processor
              motherboards instead of single-processor motherboards. A network of computer
              workstations will provide researchers access to the cluster computer system.
              Three of the workstations will incorporate stereo viewing screens for
              visualization of three-dimensional molecular models of biological interest.
              Here is a brief description of the typical steps involved in this kind of
              modeling project.  Identify a pair of molecules that are known to interact as a
              key step in a physiological process. If the molecules are large, and typically
              they are, the three-dimensional structure must be known or have a reasonable
              homology model from which to generate spatial coordinates and sequence regions
              of the molecules that interact. Results of x-ray studies conducted by other
              researchers can be used to determine this information. The molecules are then
              modeled by bringing them together, calculating the minimum of their molecular
              energy, and running through molecular dynamic calculations to identify possible
              binding orientations and their associated energies. For the mathematics
              research, the first stage of this research program will be analysis of data
              collected on the cohomology rings of the groups of order 64. The data analysis
              will yield insight on which groups of order 128 should provide "interesting"
              cohomology rings to compute. 
Results of this research will contribute to
              three areas of science: biophysics, mathematics, and computer science. The
              biophysics research is particularly useful in determining the binding of a
              fibrinogen chain to the integrin receptor of platelet cells, an essential step
              in blood clotting. The mathematics computational work should help distinguish
              irreducible abstract algebraic modules from other more complex modules by
              compiling a library of these basic algebraic building blocks. The computer
              science research will characterize the performance of a low-cost,
              high-performance computer system in computationally intensive applications to
              biophysics and mathematics. The involvement of the undergraduate students in
              these projects over the years have resulted in a number of undergraduate
              research papers and several who are now pursuing advanced degrees in science.

