Title       : Acquisition of a Real-Time Quantitative PCR System for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0116722

Award Number: 0116722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100446             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip B. Danielson pdaniels@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Dores  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Fogleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract
	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Phillip Danielson at the
              University of
Denver to fund the purchase of a real-time quantitative PCR
              System. Based on well-established laser fluorescence and DNA amplification
              technology, this system will significantly increase the productivity and cost
              effectiveness of undergraduate/graduate research and education in molecular
              biology. Specific research programs that will benefit immediately include
              National Science Foundation-funded studies on: (1) endocrine hormones in the
              brain that are responsible for pain and stress responses in living organisms;
              (2) cytochrome P450 toxin-metabolizing enzymes - an understanding of which is
              critical to the control of agricultural pests and many disease-carrying
              organisms and; (3) the genetic diversity of endangered and threatened species
              which the University of Denver conducts in collaboration with the Denver
              Zoological Gardens and  the Denver Museum of Science and Nature. 
Until
              recently, the measurement of gene expression using traditional assays has meant
              numerous rounds of laborious optimization, test template dilutions and post
              assay manipulations. Even then, the estimated concentration of a genetic
              message was often inaccurate owing to the unpredictable variability of
              traditional endpoint-based measurements. This is because small biases in
              amplification efficiency over the course of an assay would produce large
              differences in the amount of final product being measured. A solution to these
              problems was found in the new generation of real-time quantitative PCR Systems.
              The system monitors reaction kinetics in real-time making it possible to
              quantitate DNA and RNA concentrations in the smallest of tissue samples with
              unparalleled accuracy, precision and speed. An added benefit is that the PCR
              instrument can also be used for high-speed genotyping. The automated liquid
              handling capabilities already in place at the University of Denver will handle
              sample preparation to ensure run-to-run consistency by minimizing pipetting
              errors and crossover contamination.	
	Beyond the benefit to the research
              activities of faculty at the University of Denver, a broad range of laboratory
              and classroom-oriented educational goals will be advanced at both the
              undergraduate and graduate levels. Benefits will be particularly evident in the
              molecular-oriented laboratory courses that are at the heart of the new Bachelor
              of Science and Bachelor of Arts degrees in Molecular Biology offered by the
              Department of Biological Sciences. On a broader level, department-sponsored
              biotechnology classes offered to high school students and teacher-training
              workshops that promote hands-on science education at the secondary school level
              will also be greatly enhanced. The benefit to high school outreach efforts is
              immeasurable given that these programs target students in urban and low-income
              school districts who have traditionally been underrepresented in the natural
              sciences. In short, acquisition of the PCR System will provide significant and
              immediate benefits to education at the secondary, undergraduate and graduate
              levels, while providing a cost-efficient means of satisfying the growing DNA
              analysis needs of life-science researchers funded by the National Science
              Foundation. 

