Title       : Empirical Evaluation of Foreign Outsourcing Decisions and Trends in Vertical
               Specialization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0116829

Award Number: 0116829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75072              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah L. Swenson dswenson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the most notable trends in international trade is the growth of vertical
              specialization.  Thanks to reduced costs of international communications and
              transportation, firms have increasingly fragmented their production into
              multiple stages.  Such production means that a single final good may be worked
              on in many countries, as each sequential production stage is performed in the
              location that is most advantageous for the process. By studying two U.S.
              programs that facilitate foreign outsourcing operations- the 9802 tariff
              provisions in the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States and the U.S.
              Foreign Trade Zones Program- this research project deepens our understanding of
              trends in vertical specialization and the responses of foreign outsourcing to
              changes in country and industry conditions.   

To evaluate the effects of
              country costs on outsourcing decisions, this project studies three questions. 
              The first component of the project studies how outsourcing is allocated across
              countries.  In examining this topic, it is important to identify which
              countries are regarded as competitors. In contrast with previous work that has
              assumed that all countries are in competition with all others, this analysis
              will examine whether factors such as geography, education, income, or other
              national characteristics place countries in competition with each other.  The
              second part of this project examines whether foreign investment plays a special
              role in mediating firm production sharing decisions.  Such a role may be
              expected, as foreign investment provides a physical infrastructure of
              manufacturing sites that are tailored to foreign assembly.  In addition,
              foreign investments may influence sourcing decisions, as foreign investment
              provides a conduit for information about country characteristics.  The third
              component of the project studies how firms decide whether to deploy resources,
              either keeping production at home or moving it abroad.  




