Title       : Acquisition Proposal: Laboratory for Large Scale Integration of Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0116776

Award Number: 0116776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Roukes roukes@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Axel Scherer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116776
Roukes

Major advances have recently been made at California
              Institute of Technology (Caltech) in developing and employing what are,
              largely, individual nanometer-scale structures for applications ranging from
              fundamental science to technological applications. Within the research groups
              of the co--P1's, Professor Scherer and Professor Roukes, who have worked
              together on nanofabrication for the past fifteen years, electron beam
              lithography techniques have been developed and used for the construction of a
              wide range of functional nanometer-scale devices. Lateral dimensions below 10
              nm are routinely obtained, and students in these groups have developed both
              expertise in the requisite electron-beam-control code and an in-depth
              understanding of the specialized resist processing and pattern transfer
              techniques enabling ultrahigh resolution. The time is now ripe to exploit these
              advances by creating nanosystems - i.e. advanced structures that comprise
              coherently coupled arrays of the individual nanoscale elements the authors are
              perfecting. This equipment acquisition proposal, if funded, would enable such
              research.

Nanodevice arrays are emerging as a priority in nanoscale science
              and technology. As detailed in this proposal (and its accompanying letters of
              support), nanoscale arrays will find immediate applications within the
              proposers' research programs. These currently involve 13 Caltech professors, in
              disciplines spanning fundamental physics, chemistry, biology, and engineering
              and materials science. Among the specific topics currently being pursued are:
              quantum optics, quantum computation, nanophotonics, spin electronics,
              nanomechanics, neurophysiology, biotechnology, electrochemistry and molecular
              electronics. These applications require fabrication of structures spanning a
              hierarchy of size scales -from the smallest dimensions accessible via
              state-of-the-art nanofabrication techniques, to the millimeter to centimeter
              domain of integrated, chip-based systems. Fabrication of these complex
              nanoscale arrays requires multiple, successively-aligned steps of large-field
              electron beam lithography over the wafer scale.

A second important research
              thrust would be enabled by the proposed instrumentation. This focuses upon
              future technological applications requiring nanometer-scale features produced
              lithographically en masse. This scale is far below the dimensions currently
              accessible via deep ultraviolet lithography, the current industry standard for
              state-of-the-art commercial production lines. To address this technological
              need, much recent effort world-wide has focused upon development of new,
              high-resolution, high-throughput lithographic methods. Projection x-ray
              lithography, shaped electron beam lithography, and mechanical transfer methods
              (embossing, molding, or stamping) all have evolved as principle contenders for
              the definition of sub-I 100nm structures over large areas. All of these
              techniques, however, have in common the need for wafer-scale high-resolution
              masks. These are normally generated by vector-scanned electron beam
              lithography. There are currently no alternative lithographic tools which offer
              comparable flexibility, resolution and placement accuracy for this purpose as
              state-of-the-au commercial electron beam writers. Student access to such an
              instrument would greatly enhance research and training in the proposers'
              university setting.

An entirely new level of instrumentation is required to
              successfully initiate these proposed endeavors. Specifically, the capability of
              writing large (wafer scale) fields of features at the sub-5Onm scale is
              absolutely crucial. This can only be done with a state-of-the-art electron beam
              writer; however the acquisition of such an instrument is significantly beyond
              the scope of most funding programs. Here the PIs propose to purchase an
              electron-beam lithography system for this laboratory. The cost for this
              instrument will be shared by Caltech ($l.5M), the NSF ($1.OM), and DARPA/DURINT
              ($l.OM). The laboratory established with these funds will constitute an
              interactive, "expert"  facility within the larger efforts of the PI's. This
              select, focused group of researchers will include undergraduate and graduate
              students, staff and faculty members. This group will be collectively dedicated
              to establishing routes to next-generation structures involving large arrays of
              nanoscale elements.



