Title       : MRI: X-Ray Diffraction at the University of Southern Maine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0116481

Award Number: 0116481
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Pollock pollock@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan D. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samantha J. Langley-Turnbaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116481
Pollock

This Major Research Instrumentation grant provides funding
              for the acquisition of a high-performance X-ray diffraction (XRD) system and
              supporting computer and software.  The XRD will support research projects in
              geology, soil science and archaeology.  Primary use of the XRD will be to
              determine qualitative, semi-quantitative and quantitative mineralogical
              compositions of very fine-grained rocks, glacio - marine and glacio -
              lacustrine clay, mangrove swamp clay, urban soils, and pottery.  Individual
              research and research collaborations (between the departments of Geosciences,
              Environmental Science & Policy and Geography & Anthropology) range from
              advanced research in fine-grained rocks, urban soils and archaeological
              artifacts to research training issues for individuals working with disabled
              students.  Archaeological geology research characterizes archaeological stone
              artifacts, pottery and ceramics.  Additionally this instrument will support
              research on very fine-grained consolidated and unconsolidated archaeological
              source materials.  The multidisciplinary research efforts that this instrument
              supports are fully in line with long-term infrastructure objectives at the
              University of Southern Maine. MRI funding greatly enhances the research and
              education environment in that it broadens and deepens the research and teaching
              potential of three undergraduate departments.  The total incorporation of the
              proposed scientific research with undergraduate education will greatly increase
              the scientific literacy of our students.  University of Southern Maine
              undergraduates will be active participants in research that is conducted with
              this equipment. Students involved with this instrument will actively
              collaborate with faculty through in-depth involvement in data collection and
              interpretation. Women and other underrepresented groups choosing to take
              courses offered by these departments will have the opportunity to gain
              experience and competence in working with advanced technological equipment as a
              normal part of their education. Instructuction will emphasize direct,
              'hands-on' experience in field and laboratory research. 
***



