Title       : Introducing Research-Based Curricula to Rochester Institute of Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a0116795

Award Number: 0116795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Ortega                            
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47229              (Estimated)
Investigator: SCOTT V. FRANKLIN svfsps@rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 7174      POSTDOC FELLOW IN SCI, MATH EN
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Explorations in Science is an activity-based physics course for non-science
              majors. Developed during my
tenure as an NSF Postdoctoral Fellow in Science,
              Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology Education	(PFSMETE), Explorations in
              Science uses the study of common, natural phenomena and student-directed
group
              projects to stimulate interest in a population traditionally quite apathetic
              towards physics. Activities
use sophisticated computer tools to take, display,
              and interpret data. I would like to bring this curriculum to
my new,
              permanent, institution, the Rochester Institute of Technology. While RIT is an
              institution of
technology, it has a significant population of students who
              will benefit from Explorations in Science
including students of imaging
              science, business, and the social sciences. Faculty from the College
              of
Imaging Arts & Sciences have already expressed interest in Explorations in
              Science, particularly the
projects dealing with human body motions as these
              are relevant to students studying computer animation.
To successfully offer
              Explorations in Science at RIT, computer sensors (e.g. force sensors,
              temperature
probes, and light sensors) must be purchased. Roughly half of this
              proposal is for equipment that are not
currently available in our existing
              labs.
A necessary condition for the successful implementation of new materials
              is faculty support. To facilitate
the implementation of a research-based
              curricula, I would like to begin a new project on faculty objectives
for
              introductory physics courses. RIT has a national reputation of excellence in
              engineering and the
imaging arts. Therefore, an overwhelming majority of
              students taking introductory physics at RIT are not
physics majors. It is
              important to understand why other departments require these students to take
              physics
and what they want their students to take from the class. The
              traditional answers, including "how to think"
and "problem-solving ability,"
              are too vague to be useful. Recent work in physics education has attempted
to
              uncover exactly what is meant by "how to think," i.e. what we the physics
              community see as the
fundamental diamond in the physics rough. By using the
              ideas and vocabulary from this research, 1 hope to
be able to better
              characterize how other departments see physics. This will allow physics
              departments to
better suit the needs of the majority of their students and
              make it easier to introduce new curricula such as
Explorations in Physics.


              
