Title       : Social Behavior, Immunity and Disease Resistance in Termites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0116857

Award Number: 0116857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290730             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. A. Traniello jft@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca B. Rosengaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

ABSTRACT
Social Behavior, Immunity and Disease Resistance in
              Termites
James Traniello and Rebeca Rosengaus


        Termites live in
              soil and decayed wood and are continuously exposed to fungal, bacterial and
              other diseases.  Their nesting and feeding habits have thus influenced their
              social behavior because individuals may contact infectious agents and transmit
              them to nestmates.  We conduct research on termite disease resistance that
              bridges sociobiology, immunology and chemical ecology; the dampwood termite
              Zootermopsis angusticollis has been our model termite species.  We have found
              that termites can resist infection through mutual grooming, immune response and
              chemical secretions and have begun to understand: 1) the benefits and costs of
              social living in termites, in terms of disease; 2) how colony composition can
              reduce infection; 3) the immune response of termites; 4) how social behavior
              and immunity interact to increase resistance; 5) the communication of
              information about pathogens within colonies; and 6) the antimicrobial
              properties of termite secretions.
        Our research proposal Social
              Behavior, Immunity and Disease Resistance in Termites will allow us to: 1)
              determine if social exchanges between immune and naive termites enhance the
              immune response of colony members, and the mechanisms involved; 2) understand
              how termites recognize infection in nestmates; 3) determine if the social
              control of infection is based on caste- and/or individual behavioral
              specialization; and 4) examine the disease-resistance mechanisms of the
              woodroach Cryptocercus punctulatus, which is a termite ancestor that lived in
              families, and the drywood termite Incisitermes minor, a species which differs
              from Z. angusticollis in the extent to which it must cope with microbes in the
              nest.  These studies will advance our understanding of how evolutionary history
              and nesting ecology, which is a central feature of termite social life, have
              influenced the evolution of disease resistance.
        This project will
              further our knowledge of the ways in which individuals and colonies of termites
              resist disease and will thus contribute to the overall understanding of how
              disease may influence social behavior.  The proposed research, which spans
              several disciplines of biology, will train and educate undergraduate and
              graduate students.  Our research also concerns a group of wood-destroying
              insects which have great economic importance.  Through basic research on the
              ways termites resist disease, new and effective technologies for termite
              control that do not involve the use of toxic chemicals which adversely impact
              the environment may be identified.

