Title       : Acquistion of Digital Imaging Instrumentation for Light Microscopy and Scanning
               Electron Microscopy  
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a0116544

Award Number: 0116544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65883              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dominique A. Didier didier@say.acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon K. Gelhaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    215/299-1036

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT: Didier
A grant has been awarded to Drs. Dominique A. Didier and Jon
              K. Gelhaus at The Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia to obtain a
              digital imaging system for the scanning electron microscope (SEM) and a 3-D
              imaging system for light microscopy.  This new equipment will become part the
              Academy's Albert M. Greenfield Digital Imaging Center, a multi-user facility
              that is shared by all units of the Academy's Biodiversity Research Group,
              including the Library and the Molecular Systematics and Evolution Group.  These
              new acquisitions will enhance ongoing collections-based research and facilitate
              the collection and distribution of data from our natural history
              collections.
Together the digital imaging system and the 3-D imaging system
              will enable the study of samples and specimens ranging in size from several
              microns in diameter to at least 30 cm in diameter.  This technology is
              especially important for ongoing collaborative research in four of our most
              important collections: rotifers, insects, mollusks, and diatoms. Many of these
              invertebrate taxa have never been studied and may be globally rare or
              endangered, and may also be bio-indicators of environmental health, thus
              important to both taxonomists and environmental biologists.  Using the combined
              imaging capabilities of the new systems both internal and external morphology
              of microscopic specimens can be visualized in perfect focus in a single image
              and will facilitate taxonomic research on the revision and identification of
              these important biological specimens. Digital images will be used in the
              production of publications, field guides, taxonomic keys, and Internet
              products.  Additionally, digital images are easily shared among colleagues
              worldwide and will greatly facilitate international collaborations, and will be
              especially useful in enhancing ongoing research with colleagues in developing
              countries such as Mongolia.
The enhanced digital imaging facilities at the
              Academy of Natural Sciences will significantly improve current educational
              opportunities at the Academy.  In particular, undergraduate interns funded
              through an NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site Grant will be
              intimately involved in independent research that utilizes this new digital
              imaging technology.  The Academy also offers several Fellowships including the
              Gallagher Postdoctoral Fellowship for research on the Academy's world-ranked
              collection of rotifers as well as Jessup and Mchenry Fellowships for graduate
              students to conduct research in our collections.  These prestigious Fellowships
              support use of all Academy facilities, including the Digital Imaging Center. 
              In addition, through collaborations with local colleges and Universities
              researchers at the Academy have colleagues as well as undergraduate, masters'
              and doctoral students working in their laboratories, most of whom utilize
              digital imaging technology in their research.  Most importantly, this new
              digital imaging technology will make it possible to bring specimen images and
              data to a global audience of scientists, students, hobbyists and the general
              public. 

