Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Multiple Instruments for the College of Natural Resources,
               Humboldt State University, California for the Investigation of Fluvial Sediment
               Transport ....
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0116726

Award Number: 0116726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eileen M. Cashman emc7001@humboldt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andre K. Lehre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Lisle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Perry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Lang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Humboldt State Univ Fnd
	      P.O. Box 1185
	      Arcata, CA  95518    707/826-4189

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116726
Cashman

This grant, funded by the Major Research Instrumentation
              (MRI) Program, provides support for multiple research instruments for
              laboratory and field investigations of fluvial sediment transport.  The
              instrumentation requested is an interrelated group of equipment necessary for
              the investigation of sediment transport processes within a watershed.   The
              proposed research instrumentation includes instrumentation for fine-scaled
              field data collection of suspended sediment concentration, turbidity and
              topography within a watershed and data collection instrumentation that allows
              for the quantification of flow velocity and discharge, bed load material
              transport, suspended load material transport and turbidity levels in the fluid
              flow. Examples of the instrumentation purchased with the support of this grant
              include a real-time kinematic (RTK) GPS mapping system, a field two-dimensional
              acoustic doppler velocimeter (ADV), an automated field turbidity sampling
              station and photographic equipment and software to analyze changes in
              topography due to sediment movement.  The principal users of the sediment
              transport research instrumentation are faculty in the College of Natural
              Resources and Science departments at Humboldt State University (HSU).  The
              primary research areas include: (1) identifying the effects of watershed
              characteristics such as channel slope, stream velocity and particle size
              distribution on sediment transport, (2) quantification and verification of the
              relationship between turbidity and suspended sediment concentration, (3)
              quantification of sediment transport under varying flow regimes and sediment
              supply conditions, and (4) laboratory calibration of mathematical modeling of
              transport.  The acquisition of this equipment enhances the opportunity for
              research training of HSU students in the College of Natural Resources.  This
              group of instrumentation facilitates research that encompasses
              multi-disciplines and explores the connection between field data collection,
              laboratory physical modeling and computer mathematical modeling.  This research
              instrumentation has the potential to result in significant improvements to the
              field estimation of suspended sediment concentrations and bed load transport in
              rivers. 
***


