Title       : MRI/RUI(Chemistry): Development of High Speed Gas Chromatography - Multiplex
               Coherent Raman Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0116384

Award Number: 0116384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Chen pchen@spelman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Spelman College
	      350 Spelman Lane S W
	      Atlanta, GA  303144346    404/681-3643

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9141,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Prof. Peter
              C. of Spelman College will develop a state-of-the-art high speed (100 Hz)
              Raman-based spectroscopic detector to identify eluents from a high speed gas
              chromatograph (GC).  The resulting instrument will be capable of rapid and
              accurate identification of GC eluents, able to distinguish among isomers and
              provide functional group information.  Potential applications include a)
              analysis of air, water or sediment for pollutants; analysis of unknown reation
              products or compounds found in natural products; c) study of the degradation
              products of pesticides and herbicides; d) analysis of petroleum products, for
              example, the presence or fate of additives such as MTBE in groundwater; e)
              study of the presence or fate of additives or allergens in foods, flavors,
              feedstock and fragrances; and f) study of polymer decomposition and degassing
              upon heating.  These studies will also provide intensive research training for
              undergraduate students who are members of underrepresented groups.  

Tandem
              techniques that interface chromatography with spectroscopic detectors are among
              the most powerful tools available for analyzing mixtues.  By combining two
              techniques, tandem instruments can overcome the limitations of a single
              technique, for example spectral congestion due to mixtures, or difficulty
              identifying unknown species using only chromatographic retention times.  This
              high speed GC/Raman instrument will advance the knowledge in high speed
              separation science, and find applications in many areas of science, including
              materials chemistry and environmental sciences.
