Title       : MRI: Instrumentation for the Chemical and Biological Characterization of Factors
               Affecting the Distribution and Phytoremediation of Seagrasses in Coastal Bays
               and Estuaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0116711

Award Number: 0116711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick D. Larkin plarkin@falcon.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene J. Billiot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk V. Cammarata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fereshteh Billiot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick Louchouarn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TX A&M U Corpus Christi
	      6300 Ocean Drive
	      Corpus Christi, TX  784125503    361/825-2497

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Patrick Larkin, Dr. Kirk Cammarata, Dr. Eugene
              Billiot, Dr. Feri Billiot, Dr. Patrick Louchouarn and Dr. Mark Morvant at Texas
              A&M University-Corpus Christi to 
Acquire instrumentation to study the
              environmental factors affecting the distribution of seagrasses along the south
              Texas Gulf coast. The instruments to be acquired include (1) a genetic analyzer
              for DNA sequencing and molecular marker analysis, (2) an ultracentrifuge for
              the preparation of subcellular fractions, organelle DNA, proteins and peptides
              (3) a capillary electrophoresis system for the analysis of environmental
              pollutants such as herbicides, organometallic compounds and inorganic ions and
              (4) a freeze dryer for the preparation of sediment and plant tissues for
              analysis. 

The goals and scope of this research will be to 1) assess the
              distribution, heterogeneity and flow of genes among seagrass meadows along the
              south Texas gulf coast; 2) advance our understanding of the significance of
              organic and metal pollutants in our unique environment; and 3) develop
              plant-based systems (or microcosms) which can specifically detoxify
              contaminants in soil or water. Studies will include the analysis of seagrass
              species (Halodule beaudetteii, Halophila engelmannii, Cymodocea filiformis,
              Thalassia testudinum, and Ruppia maritima) for genetic diversity and gene flow
              among populations highly impacted by agricultural, recreational and industrial
              activity.  Analysis of genetic diversity will be undertaken by the development
              of molecular markers, direct DNA sequencing and statistical analysis. 
              Seagrasses and associated aquatic plants will be studied to assess their
              ability for the bioaccumulation and/or detoxification of environmental
              contaminants.  In particular, mechanistic studies will utilize capillary
              electrophoresis technology to characterize the occurrence of relevant chelators
              in study plants.  Parameters to be identified and quantified include metal
              concentrations, organic acids, amino acids, phytochelatins, and transport
              proteins.  We also wish to study how plants and seagrasses in particular,
              respond to/remove organic pollutants, since a number of such contaminants exist
              along the Texas gulf coast's unique environment.  We would like to: 1) quantify
              hydrophobic organic carbons (HOC's) in aquatic/wetland plant tissues to
              determine partitioning and biological fate, and 2) compare HOCs in rhizosphere
              vs. non-rhizosphere sediments for various plants.

 Our research proposes to
              answer many questions concerning habitat requirements, potential mechanisms of
              pollutant phytoremediation and the importance of genetics for conservation,
              propagation and establishment of seagrass and associated aquatic plant beds.

