Title       : MRI: A Networked Scanning Probe Microscope for Research Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2002      
File        : a0116398

Award Number: 0116398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140600             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Vesenka jvesenka@une.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clinton Nash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New England
	      11 Hills Beach Road
	      Biddeford, ME  040059526    207/283-0171

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is award from the Major Instrumentation program and the NSF/EPSCOR program
              to the University of New England is for the acquisition of a networked scanning
              probe microscope (SPM). The instrument will support undergraduate research and
              training in the fields of biophysics, biochemistry and microbiology. The SPM
              will provide the university with a multi-disciplinary research facility that
              will help to bridge the artificial divide between life sciences and the
              physical sciences. The SPM will support several research topics such as the
              study of the growth process of biofilms, the study of the structure and
              property relationship of metallocarbhedrenes, growth, kinetics and structure of
              novel four stranded G -wires, and modeling and self-assembly. Students will
              have networked access to the SPM. The award will provide research and training
              opportunity making students from this EPSCoR state more competitive in the
              flourishing area of biotechnology and semiconductor industry.

This is award
              from the Major Instrumentation program and the NSF/EPSCOR program to the
              University of New England is for the acquisition of a networked scanning probe
              microscope (SPM). The instrument will support undergraduate research and
              training in the fields of biophysics, biochemistry and microbiology. The SPM
              will provide the university with a multi-disciplinary research facility that
              will help to bridge the artificial divide between life sciences and the
              physical sciences. Students will have networked access to the SPM. The award
              will provide research and training opportunity making students from this EPSCoR
              state more competitive in the flourishing area of biotechnology and
              semiconductor industry.


