Title       : Failure Detection in Actively Controlled Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0116193

Award Number: 0116193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233575             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Zimmerman dzimmerman@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract

The overall objective of this research program is the
              development of analytical and numerical techniques to autonomously monitor the
              integrity of actively controlled structures.  For the control system, the
              failure may be the loss of a sensor or actuator, or a more compensatible loss
              such as a change in the gain of a sensor.  For the structural system, failure
              may be the partial or total loss of structural stiffness or mass in a region of
              the structure.  The basis for all proposed methodologies is to utilize changes
              in the measured dynamics before and after a failure has occurred to determine
              the current "state" of the actively controlled structure.

Specifically, we
              will develop methodologies to determine a statistically meaningful methodology
              to establish the existence of a failure using system realization theory,
              time-domain signal processing and outlier analysis.  The proposed methodology
              will be able to distinguish between changes in operational environment and
              actual failures.  With existence established, system realization redundancy
              will be used to isolate the failure to either the control system or the
              structure and once isolated to determine the individual component that has
              failed.  Once the failure extent has been estimated, the final step is to
              compensate for the failure to maximize the performance of the "new" system
              using a Genetic Algorithm learning control concept and a Neural Network
              adaptive controller.  All methods developed will be evaluating using both
              numerical and actual experimental tests.

There are several systems which
              will benefit from this research, including actively controlled civil structures
              (buildings/bridges), aircraft, offshore platforms and deep-water risers,
              re-useable launch vehicles, the International Space Station, and long term
              exploratory space probes.





