Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation Used for the Non-Contact Measurement of Strains
               and Displacements on the Surface of Composite Materials with High Strain
               Gradients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0116494

Award Number: 0116494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209847             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald B. Bucinell bucinelr@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Keat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1630,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              OIA-0116494
PI:  Ronald Bucinell
Institution:    Union College
Title: 
              "Instrumentation Used for the Non-Contact Measurement of Strains and
              
Displacements on the Surface of Composite Materials with High Strain
              Gradients"

Abstract:

The research equipment being acquired through this
              grant includes non-contact strain measuring apparatus that will provide all
              components of strain on complex geometric surfaces in the presence of high
              strain gradients. A Moire interferometer and video image correlation strain and
              displacement measuring systems will be acquired.  The Moire interferometer
              provides high-resolution strain and displacements over a relatively small area
              and the video image correlation system provides medium-resolution strains and
              displacements over a relatively large area.  These features make the two
              systems complementary.  Also included in this grant is the renovation of a
              20kip screw-driven electro-mechanical load frame.  The renovation will include
              a rehabilitation of the load frame, upgrading of the electronics, integration
              of MTS TestStar control software, and a dedicated computer to run the load
              frame and collect data.  The load frame will be fitted with custom fixtures for
              mounting the non-contact strain apparatus and it will be dedicated to projects
              that utilize this apparatus.

Undergraduate research is one of the pillars of
              Union College's undergraduate
engineering programs.  Many of Union College's
              engineering students graduate and enter graduate programs in engineering. 
              Union's laboratory based curriculum prepares students well for careers in
              engineering and continued studies in graduate programs.  This program relies on
              maintaining laboratory facilities that expose students to the current state of
              the art laboratory equipment.  The equipment being purchased will go to support
              the PI and co-PI's research programs that make extensive use of undergraduate
              students. The equipment will be used to investigate the optimization,
              characterization, and evaluation of composite structures and test specimens. 
              This equipment will allow for strains and displacements on these structures to
              be evaluated and used to optimize the configurations.  Programs that will be
              able to take advantage of this effort include the study of composite grid
              structures for infrastructure applications, evaluation of material performance
              for reusable launch vehicle applications, and for the development of composite
              material test methods.  Additionally the equipment will be used to investigate
              the fracture behavior of monolithic materials.

The new equipment provide
              undergraduate engineering students in the mechanical and civil engineering
              programs at Union College the opportunity to visualize surface strains on
              complex structures in regions of high strain gradients as part of their
              research projects.  This will give them a unique opportunity to visualize these
              fields and be able to compare them to finite element and other results. This
              opportunity will help students to understand the complexity of strain in
              structures and encourage them to continue their education exploring
              opportunities in the field of engineering mechanics.

