Title       : Design of a MEMS Gyroscope for Absolute Angle Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0116433

Award Number: 0116433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287904             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajesh Rajamani rajamani@me.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley J. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              MEMS gyroscopes are typically designed to measure angular rate of rotation.   A
              measurement of the angle itself is useful in many applications but cannot be
              obtained by integrating the angular rate due to the presence of bias errors
              which cause a drift.   This project develops an innovative design for a
              vibrating gyroscope that can directly measure both angle and angular rate.  
              

The proposed design is based on the principle of measuring the angle of
              free vibration of a suspended mass with respect to the casing of the gyroscope.
               The design incorporates a nonlinear feedback control system in order to
              address two critical challenges.  First, the control system compensates for
              dissipative forces and keeps the mass vibrating at a constant level of energy. 
               Second, the control system compensates for the rotary cross-coupling that
              occurs due to the non-ideal nature of the suspending springs.  The control
              system is carefully designed so that it does not affect the free vibration
              nature of the mass and does not alter the Coriolis forces which play an
              important role in the measurement of angular rate.

The project includes a
              three-phase work plan for design and in-house fabrication of the vibratory
              gyroscope in the University of Minnesota's Microtechnology Laboratory (MTL).
              

The significance of the project is that it breaks new ground by introducing
              sophisticated control systems into the MEMS domain.  The use of advanced
              control techniques leads to a new sensor making the measurement of a new
              variable (absolute angle) possible.  On a lesser note, several techniques
              developed in the project have wide applicability to vibratory sensor design in
              general and would lead to technical improvements in accelerometers, rate
              gyroscopes and microbalances.

The educational objectives of the project
              include curriculum development, promotion of cross-disciplinary skills, and
              development of benchmark models for web-based education.

