Title       : X-ray Instrumentation for the Physics Research and Teaching Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0116966

Award Number: 0116966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Tabor-Morris tabormorris@georgian.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgian Court College
	      900 Lakewood Avenue
	      Lakewood, NJ  08701    732/364-2200

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy and X-ray Diffraction are two scientific
              techniques that assist scientists in understanding the atomic structure of
              crystals and hence better understand the macroscopic properties of these
              crystals, such as growth size, strength and color.  Both techniques are needed
              to verify the accuracy of the data.  X-ray absorption data is taken at
              Brookhaven National Laboratory at the National Synchrotron Light Source.  This
              award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will allow Georgian Court
              College to purchase an X-ray Diffractometer and an X-ray Fluorescence
              Spectrometry instrument to be used at the home institution. This will support
              an ongoing research project currently funded by Research Corporation. The
              project specifically seeks to understand the important role that small amounts
              of elements have on the crystal hydroxyapaptite.  This crystal is important
              because it is the key mineral in human bone.  Success in understanding the role
              of these elements may lead to the better ability to grow new bones for people,
              as well as other uses.  Undergraduates involved in this research who have had
              the opportunity to travel to Brookhaven National Laboratory will have the
              opportunity to finish the analysis of the samples at their home
              institution.

X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy and X-ray Diffraction are two
              scientific techniques that assist scientists in understanding the atomic
              structure of crystals and hence better understand the macroscopic properties of
              these crystals, such as growth size, strength and color.  Both techniques are
              needed to verify the accuracy of the data.  X-ray absorption data is taken at
              Brookhaven National Laboratory at the National Synchrotron Light Source.  This
              award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will allow Georgian Court
              College to purchase an X-ray Diffractometer and an X-ray Fluorescence
              Spectrometry instrument to be used at the home institution. This will support
              an ongoing research project currently funded by Research Corporation. The
              project specifically seeks to understand the important role that small amounts
              of elements have on the crystal hydroxyapaptite.  This crystal is important
              because it is the key mineral in human bone.  Success in understanding the role
              of these elements may lead to the better ability to grow new bones for people,
              as well as other uses.  Undergraduates involved in this research who have had
              the opportunity to travel to Brookhaven National Laboratory will have the
              opportunity to finish the analysis of the samples at their home institution.

