Title       : Acquistion of an Image Analysis Work Station at Wesleyan College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0116189

Award Number: 0116189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113180             (Estimated)
Investigator: Holly Boettger-Tong hboettger-tong@wesleyancollege.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wanda T. Schroeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan College
	      4760 Forsyth Road
	      Macon, GA  312974299    912/477-1110

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Holly Boettger-Tong at Wesleyan College, an
              undergraduate liberal arts college for women, to acquire an imaging
              workstation. The specific components of this imaging workstation include an
              imaging research microscope with digital camera, combined with imaging software
              capable of high resolution image acquisition and morphologic analysis
              capabilities. A scanning laser densitometer, with software capable of
              quantifying stained electrophoresis gels, blotting membranes and
              autoradiographs is also an integral component of this workstation.  Acquisition
              of this equipment is vital to the research activities of the Biology faculty,
              and represents a significant improvement in our ongoing efforts to integrate
              education and research by introducing students to modern technologies which
              they will use to develop independent research projects. In collaboration with
              faculty, students will explore the role of cytoskeletal signaling in
              spermatogenesis, fertilization and early development. In addition, students
              will examine the  regulation of gene expression in epithelial tissues during
              differentiation. This instrumentation will greatly enhance the research
              training opportunities available at Wesleyan College and will directly
              translate into more opportunities for scientific discovery by both faculty and
              undergraduate researchers. 
	At Wesleyan College, the Biology department
              curriculum is student-centered, with specific emphasis on student-directed
              research experiences. Students gain these experiences working as research
              assistants with department faculty, and through independent research projects
              in upper division Biology courses. Basic research applications of the equipment
              will include use of the Axioplan II and imaging software for molecular and
              immunohistochemical studies to analyze the expression pattern of select
              cytoskeletal proteins in the reproductive tract and during early development.
              In addition, the scanning densitometry equipment and software will be used for
              quantitation of mRNA expression by Northern blotting, as well as the comparison
              of  levels of mRNA expression with protein expression by densitometry of
              Western blots. This equipment will also serve to modernize courses in
              Histology, Developmental Biology, Genetics, Cell and Molecular Biology and DNA
              Technology. 
	Acquisition of this image analysis workstation will assist the
              Biology faculty at Wesleyan College in their goal of successfully providing
              women with excellent research opportunities using modern scientific methods. As
              a culturally diverse (35% minority) College, Wesleyan recognizes that it has a
              unique opportunity to favorably impact the recruitment of minority women into
              the sciences. This equipment will make a direct impact on the preparation of
              young women for careers in the sciences and will greatly enhance their
              competitiveness for admission at quality postgraduate institutions.

