Title       : Acquisition of an Integrated FT-Raman/Microscope for Advanced Battery Materials
               Research and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0116673

Award Number: 0116673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128728             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger E. Frech rfrech@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Furneaux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph A. Wheeler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel T. Glatzhofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to the
              University of Oklahoma Norman campus. The University of Oklahoma Norman campus
              will acquire the Equinox 55 (Buncker Optics INC) Fourier-Transform Raman
              (FT-Raman) system and a far-infrared spectral range expansion package. The
              instrument will have impact on an existing interdisciplinary research program
              of faculty in the Physics and Astronomy, and the Department of Chemistry and
              Biochemistry.  The researchers seek a fundamental understanding of polymer
              electrolyte and intercalation materials for next generation  lithium
              rechargeable batteries. The new instrument will enhance an existing
              interdisciplinary research and will benefit graduate and undergraduate
              students. It will be integrated into an active education and research program
              which includes junior and senior undergraduates as well as in an existing
              summer REU program. 

This is an award from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program to the University of Oklahoma Norman campus. The
              University of Oklahoma Norman campus will acquire the Equinox 55 (Buncker
              Optics INC) Fourier-Transform Raman system and a far-infrared spectral range
              expansion package. The instrument will have impact on an existing
              interdisciplinary research program of faculty in the Physics and Astronomy, and
              the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry.  The researchers seek a
              fundamental understanding of polymer electrolyte and intercalation materials
              for next generation  lithium rechargeable batteries. The new instrument will
              enhance an existing interdisciplinary research and will benefit graduate and
              undergraduate students. It will be integrated into an active education and
              research program which includes junior and senior undergraduates as well as in
              an existing summer REU program.

