Title       : Development of a Regional Materials Research Facility at Towson University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0116619

Award Number: 0116619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236718             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moolathody R. Rajeswari rajeswari@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Lev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alex Storrs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Schaefer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program Towson
              University will be able to acquire equipment for a pulsed laser deposition
              system. The pulsed laser deposition system will be primarily used to fabricate
              thin films of several technologically useful and novel multi-component
              perovskite metal oxides and related materials. These materials include
              superconductors, colossal magnetoresistive manganites and other magnetic
              oxides, as well as other perovskite oxides suitable for sensor applications. 
              The thin film research program will address materials physics issues that are
              pertinent to sensor applications as well as those of fundamental interest.  The
              initial stage of the program will focus on the development colossal
              magnetoresistive manganite thin films for uncooled infrared imaging and
              magnetic sensor applications.  The proposed research will provide a strong and
              versatile synthetic materials base for the development of a Regional Materials
              Research Laboratory at Towson University. The pulsed laser deposition system,
              in conjunction with the existing surface characterization facility will play a
              vital role in this effort. The facility will have positive impact on the
              education and training of undergraduates and students from underrepresented
              groups at Towson University.

With this award from the Instrumentation for
              Materials Research Program Towson University will be able to acquire equipment
              for a pulsed laser deposition system. Towson University has initiated the
              development of a Materials Research Laboratory, which will act as a regional
              facility for research and education. A Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) system
              will be the cornerstone of this multidisciplinary facility and will service
              researchers at Towson University, local colleges and universities, government
              laboratories, and industry.  The materials research facility will support
              investigations by the faculty and their students that seek to characterize the
              physical and chemical properties of both natural and synthetic materials. 
              Initial PLD projects will focus on thin films of colossal magnetoresistive
              materials, High Temperature Superconductors, Ferroelectrics and other
              perovskite oxides of interest for various sensor applications or as metallic
              electrodes. The analytical methods and techniques developed during these
              investigations will be shared and integrated into other projects and will serve
              to foster the collaborative atmosphere that already exists between the
              geoscience, physics, and astronomy programs. The facility will have positive
              impact on the education and training of undergraduates and students from
              underrepresented groups at Towson University.



