Title       : Hybrid On-Line Experiments and Monitoring of Structural Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0116005

Award Number: 0116005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306517             (Estimated)
Investigator: Khalid M. Mosalam mosalam@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The project aims towards developing a unified on-line experimental methodology
              combined with simulation to determine the dynamic performance of complex
              structural systems, such as reinforced concrete building with masonry infill
              walls.  The methodology will be developed in the framework of mixed-variable
              (diakoptics) pseudodynamic (PSD) approach combined with substructuring. 
              Moreover, advanced sensors (e.g. fiber optic strain gages and grid-based
              pressure sensors) for distributed measurements to monitor complex structural
              systems is an integral part of the proposed research and education project. 
              The detailed monitoring of the structural response is essential for feedback
              control during the developed diakoptic PSD testing methodology.  Ultimately,
              this methodology will be verified using benchmark data from dynamic experiments
              of a generic hybrid system consisting of bare frames and an infilled frame
              connected by a reinforced concrete slab.  The PSD testing methodology will be
              simultaneously applied to the main substructures of this generic hybrid system,
              namely the flexible bare frame as one physical substructure and the stiff
              infilled frame as another physical substructure with the connecting slab as a
              simulated substructure.  The success of the project will lead to advances in
              experimental research on large-scale structures and recommendations on use and
              distribution of advanced sensors to monitor the dynamic response of complex
              structural systems.
