Title       : Development of High Intensity Cold Neutron Spectrometer with Multichannel
               Analyzer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0116585

Award Number: 0116585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600171            (Estimated)
Investigator: Collin L. Broholm broholm@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey W. Lynn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to Johns Hopkins
              University supports the development of a Multi Analyzer Crystal Spectrometer
              (MACS) for cold neutron spectroscopy. MACS will have two orders of magnitude
              greater sensitivity than current instrumentation.  Located at the NIST cold
              neutron source, the instrument uses focusing Bragg optics to produce the most
              intense cold neutron beam worldwide (f>108 n/cm2/s for DEi=0.2 meV). The
              detection system will energy-analyze neutrons scattered into a solid angle more
              than an order of magnitude greater than conventional instrumentation.  The goal
              of the MACS project is greater insight into nano-scale dynamic phenomena in
              materials science. It will expand the scope for inelastic neutron scattering
              from a powerful specialized technique to a versatile probe of dynamic
              correlations in a wide range of condensed matter.  Research enabled by MACS
              includes direct measurements of interactions in magnetic thin films,
              determination of spin density wave structure in organic metals, elucidation of
              spin and charge polarons in oxides, studies of dynamic correlations at pressure
              and field driven quantum phase transitions, determination of order parameters
              in weak broken symmetry phases, and studies of impurity generated composite
              spin. With a different "foot print" in Q-E phase space, MACS will complement
              the advanced pulsed neutron instrumentation now being developed for the
              Spallation Neutron Source. The project will provide undergraduate, graduate,
              and postdoctoral education to produce scientists that are knowledgeable about
              cutting-edge neutron scattering instrumentation and its use in materials
              research. 

Inelastic neutron scattering is a unique probe of nano-scale
              dynamic phenomena in solids. The experiments are crucial for determining the
              interactions and understanding the cooperative phenomena that govern the solid
              state. Unfortunately, current instrumentation limits applicability to cases
              where large crystalline samples are available.  This award from the Major
              Research Instrumentation program to Johns Hopkins University supports the
              development of a Multi Analyzer Crystal Spectrometer (MACS) for neutron
              scattering at the NIST Center for Neutron Research. Through its intense
              incident beam and its multiplexing detection system, MACS will transform
              inelastic neutron scattering from a powerful, specialized technique, to a
              versatile probe of nano-scale dynamics in solids. Research enabled by MACS,
              includes direct measurements of interactions in magnetic thin films,
              determination of spin density wave structure in organic metals, elucidation of
              spin and charge polarons in oxides, and analysis of impurity generated
              composite spin. Graduate and undergraduate students will be involved, and a
              post-doc will join for commissioning. The project thus educates scientists who
              are knowledgeable about cutting-edge neutron scattering instrumentation and its
              use in materials science.   With a different data acquisition protocol, MACS
              will be complementary to instrumentation now being developed for the Spallation
              Neutron Source. The capability to probe excitations over a wide range of
              energies at the SNS and then zoom in using MACS will help scientists develop
              new materials for the twenty first century. 

