Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Vision Based Control of Welding and
               Droplet Manufacturing Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a0116753

Award Number: 0116753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149711             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tyrone L. Vincent tvincent@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Munoz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. H. Steele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian H. Debrunner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Pierre R. Delplanque  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides funds for the purchase
              of high speed digital imaging systems and fast processing hardware along with a
              droplet deposition platform, and a robotic Gas Metal Arc welder.  This
              equipment will be used to build advanced vision based sensing capabilities that
              can be applied to arc welding and droplet-based manufacturing processes. These
              processes are intimately related, as they both involve the transfer of droplets
              of molten material to a work piece, although the particular method of delivery
              is different.

This equipment will allow high-speed imaging of droplets and
              weld pools, with the goal of tight control of the solidification process.
              Because droplet processing can play a key role in advanced manufacturing
              processes, including net-shape manufacturing and rapid prototyping, the sensing
              and control of these processes will be critical. Several aspects of vision
              based control will be explored.  For example, by extracting the dynamic
              behavior of the droplet deposition process and utilizing models of droplet
              transfer and solidification, control of the material micro-structure is
              possible.  Similarly, dynamic imaging of the weld pool will enable the
              determination, and thus control, of weld quality in real time.  Vision-based
              control of welding and droplet manufacturing processes encompasses several
              different theoretical areas, including  fluid dynamics, heat transfer, computer
              vision, control systems, and robotics. This instrumentation will thus
              strengthen the interdisciplinary connections within the Engineering Division at
              the Colorado School of Mines, as well as across campus.


