Title       : Acquisition of a MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a0116413

Award Number: 0116413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228355             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua W. Hamilton Joshua.W.Hamilton@Dartmouth.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Bobin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Joshua W.
              Hamilton and Stephen A. Bobin of Dartmouth College will acquire a
              Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption Ionization - Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF) Mass
              Spectrometer.  This instrument, which will be used to obtain very accurate
              molecular weights of biological molecules, will be integrated into the existing
              Dartmough College Molecular Biology (MB) Core facility.  The MALDI-TOF will be
              particularly important in a new initiative at Dartmough, the Structural Biology
              Genetics, which is an interdisciplinary, collaborative efforts among the basic
              science departments of the College of Arts & Sciences, the Dartmough Medical
              School, and the Thayer School of Engineering.  The main functions of the
              instrument in the facility will be protein identification, peptide synthesis
              verification and oligonucleotide verification.  Five independent investigators
              also cite projects ranging from the study of bipolar array of microtubules to
              mRNA export in yeast.  The use of the instrument by underrepresented groups is
              also addressed.  

Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI)
              time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometry is the technique of choice for obtaining
              accurate molecular weights on molecules up to and over 300,000 daltons, with
              extremely high sensitivity.  Use of a MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer has therefore
              become a standard technique in most DNA/protein core facilities.  The ability
              to obtain very accurate molecular weights of biological molecules is
              fundamental to all biological and biomedical research and essential in a modern
              research and training environment.  

