Title       : C-RUI:Behavior and the Major Histocompatibility Complex in Savannah Sparrows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2002     
File        : a0116139

Award Number: 0116139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $646469             (Estimated)
Investigator: Corey R. Freeman-Gallant cfreeman@skidmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nathaniel T. Wheelwright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidmore College
	      815 North Broadway
	      Saratoga Springs, NY  12866    518/580-5000

NSF Program : 1091      COLLAB RSCH AT UNDERGRAD INSTI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1091,9178,9198,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116139-Freeman-Gallant
1. A lay abstract, with the title of the proposal and
              your full name at the top.
Corey R. Freeman-Gallant and Nathaniel T.
              Wheelwright. "Inbreeding, Female Mating Fidelity, and the
Major
              Histocompatibility Complex in Savannah Sparrows"
Female birds often copulate
              outside of the pair-bond to produce broods of mixed paternity, and in
              some
species, as many as 60% of young derive from extra-pair fertilizations.
              The ubiquity of this infidelity has
important implications for our
              understanding of avian biology. Recent work has linked female mating
fidelity
              to the ecology and evolution of male parental care, social mating systems,
              breeding dispersion and
synchrony, and the form and function of elaborate
              sexual displays. Despite its importance, the adaptive
significance of multiple
              mating remains controversial. While several recent studies support the idea
              that
extra-pair copulations (EPCs) allow females to obtain good genes for
              their offspring (by trading-up) on
the genetic quality of sires), many others
              have found no relationship between female mating fidelity and
traits likely to
              reflect male quality. Indeed, much variation in female mating fidelity remains
              unexplained,
and few feasible alternatives to the good genes hypothesis have
              been pursued in the field.
A corollary to the good genes hypothesis proposes
              that females do use EPCs to increase the quality of
young, but it is the
              interaction between maternal and paternal genomes"and not male quality per
              se"that
is the target of female choice. This individual optimization or
              genetic compatibility hypothesis has
now been explored in snakes, lizards, and
              pseudoscorpions, but few studies in birds have considered the
importance of
              genotype-dependent mating preferences and optima. Preliminary work with
              Savannah
sparrows (Passerculus sandwichensis), however, strongly suggests that
              females pair nonrandomly (and
disassortatively) with respect to the major
              histocompatibility complex (Mhc), a group of genes responsible
for eliciting
              the adaptive immune response of vertebrates. Moreover, a female's genetic
              similarity to her
social mate predicts her fidelity: females paired to similar
              males are more likely to produce extra-pair
young than females paired to
              dissimilar males. These results parallel similar studies in mice and
              humans,
and suggest either that the benefits of genetic diversity (at the Mhc)
              drive female mating patterns or that the
avoidance of inbreeding is an
              ultimate cause of social and genetic mate choice in Savannah sparrows.
With
              NSF funding, new molecular and analytical techniques will applied to samples
              obtained during
previous field work. Preliminary results with Savannah
              sparrows are based on 38 pairs nesting on Kent
Island, New Brunswick, Canada
              in 1995. To determine whether females choose within- and extra-pair
sires
              according to their Mhc genotype, and to incorporate other potential
              determinants of female mating
fidelity (such as adult age, timing of breeding
              and phenotypic quality), the analysis will be extended to
pairs nesting in
              1994. In addition, the importance of overall levels of genetic relatedness to
              female mating
fidelity, the occurrence of egg (embryo) mortality, and the
              survivorship of nestlings and fledglings will be
assessed by surveying
              sparrows during the 2002 and 2003 breeding seasons. Both the costs of
              inbreeding
and the benefits of Mhc heterozygosity predict that females should
              avoid fertilizations from genetically
similar males.
This research benefits
              from the prior development of a species-specific Mhc probe and nearly 15
              years
of field and molecular work on the Kent Island population of Savannah
              sparrows. This study will provide
one of the first tests of the importance of
              the Mhc to social and genetic mating patterns in a free-living
population of
              songbirds.
