Title       : Development of Advanced Time-of-flight (TOF)-Mass Spectrometer(MS) for
               Proteomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0116685

Award Number: 0116685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $738810             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Russell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. David H. Russell at Texas A&M University (TAMU)
              to develop matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) high resolution
              time-of-flight (TOF) mass specroscopy for rapid, high-sensitivity analysis of
              peptides and proteins.  The instrument development project is a collaboration
              involving scientist at TAMU and three of the leading manufacturers of mass
              spectrometry instruments.  Successful completion of the project objectives will
              provide immediate improvements for macromolecule mass spectrometry.  A
              secondary objective of the proposed research involves the development of a
              high-sensitivity, periodic focusing ion mobility (IM) drift tube, which will be
              used for rapid separation of peptides and/or proteins present in complex
              biological mixtures.  Following successful development of the IM drift tube it
              will be adapted to the high resolution TOF instrument.  The combination of IM
              and high resolution TOF mass spectrometry will provide enhanced capabilities
              for protein identification, especially studies of protein expression,
              post-translational modifications and peptide/protein sequencing.  
The actual
              construction of the high resolution TOF mass spectrometer involves extensive
              modifications to an existing instrument initially designed and constructed by
              ABI-PerSeptive, Inc. and installed at TAMU in 1994.  The instrument is highly
              unique, only 3 such instruments were ever built, and the basic instrument
              platform still represents cutting-edge capabilities in TOF mass resolution
              (mass resolving powers of 15,000-25,000 are routine) and mass measurement
              accuracy (mass errors of <10 ppm).  The instrument performance will be enhanced
              by addition of new electronics and specially designed multi-anode ion
              detectors, and the geometry of the reflectron will be changed from the original
              co-linear configuration to a 1.5 degree reflecting angle to improve ion
              transmission and temporal focusing.   Mass resolving power of 75,000-100,000
              and mass measurement accuracy of 0.5-3 ppm is projected for the up-graded
              instrument.   The periodic focusing ion mobility drift tube (patented by TAMU)
              will be designed and constructed at TAMU, and adapted to the high resolution
              TOF instrument by the industrial collaborators.   
In the last decade mass
              spectrometry has evolved as one of the most widely used analytical methods in
              biology and chemical-biology.  Of the modern mass spectrometers, TOF
              instruments are the most user-friendly and versatile, and TOF instruments are
              the most widely used by biologist and chemical-biologist.  Consequently,
              development of new, high performance TOF instruments will broadly impact
              biological research.  The PI has developed a large number of biology and
              chemical-biology collaborators, which insures that the proposed instrument will
              be effectively used by collaborators at TAMU and across the nation.  A major
              challenge facing biologist and chemical-biologist involves characterization and
              identification of small amounts of biological materials present is highly
              complex mixtures, and the development of IM and high-resolution TOF instruments
              have great potential to raise the performance bar for macromolecule mass
              spectrometry.  The development of the instrumentation and the concomitant
              methods development will have significant impact in the future training of
              bio-analytical chemists and chemical-biologists.  Lastly, the proposed research
              meets goals of the MRI program aimed at promoting partnerships between academic
              researchers and private sector instrument developers.  

