Title       : Acquisition Of A High Pressure Freezer And EFTEM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0116650

Award Number: 0116650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500626             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Howard Berg rhberg@danforthcenter.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erik Nielsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger N. Beachy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karel R. Schubert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph S. Quatrano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Danforth Plant Sci Center
	      975 N. Warson Rd.
	      St. Louis, MO  63132    314/587-1048

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. R. Howard Berg at the Donald Danforth Plant
              Science Center, St. Louis, Missouri, to acquire a high pressure freezer, a
              freeze substitution unit, and an energy filter transmission electron microscope
              (EFTEM).   These instruments will be essential for the state of the art
              electron microscopy that will be done at the Danforth Center.  The Balzers High
              Pressure Freezer permits preservation of plant cells for electron microscopy by
              a physical process: ultra-rapid freezing of plant tissues.   Compared to
              chemical fixation, cells fixed by high pressure freezing show excellent
              preservation of cytoplasm, organelles, and delicate structures such as
              secretory structures and microtubules, and with minimum shrinkage and swelling
              artifacts.  These cells also have heightened antigenicity when used for
              immunolabeling purposes.  This physical fixation process (cryofixation) is
              currently the most practical method for uniform immobilization of cell
              components from small solutes to large macromolecular complexes. These
              qualities improve analysis of the in situ molecular environment of cells and
              are essential for meeting our goals in cell biology studies at the Danforth
              Center.  Thin sections of cryofixed and freeze-substituted specimens will be
              imaged in an EFTEM, equipped with an energy filter and CCD camera.  The energy
              filter is an in-column electron spectrometer that is used to select electrons
              of the appropriate energies (from those scattered by the specimen) to generate
              specimen contrast.  Compared to a conventional TEM, this  gives much more
              flexibility in generating specimen contrast.  Conventional thin sections can be
              imaged in high contrast, even with no or poor section staining, and
              immunogold-labeled sections prepared to optimize antigenicity (but normally
              poor in contrast) can be adjusted to optimal contrast without staining in heavy
              metals.  The energy filter can be used to minimize chromatic aberration, making
              it possible to image thick sections with clarity.  Coupled with the EFTEM's
              stage-tilting goniometer, this permits depth analysis in cells via electron
              tomography.  The EFTEM can be used to map elemental distribution in thin
              sections and, coupled with cryofixation and freeze substitution, this gives the
              potential to analyze the distribution of soluble elements in plant tissues.  
              
     The current projects from Danforth personnel that will use this
              equipment include:  investigation of the cell and molecular biology of plant
              pathogenic viruses (tobamoviruses and geminiviruses) by thick section electron
              tomography,  thin section TEM, and immunogold localization of viral proteins,
              during infection of plant cells.  All samples will be high pressure-frozen and
              freeze substituted, to optimally preserve infection events.   Other projects
              include investigation of Rab protein-mediated membrane trafficking in plant
              cells;  immunogold localization of enzyme complexes involved in inosine
              monophosphate metabolism, and of enzymes of lignin biosynthesis;
              immunolocalization of antigens produced by plant vaccines to investigate their
              targeting in mammalian tissue; and use of the deep etch rotary shadowing method
              to investigate plasmodesma structure in plant tissues.  We are also encouraging
              scientists from regional institutes to make use of these instruments.  
    
              This instrumentation will be a key element in furthering the mission of the
              Danforth Center.   The Danforth Center is dedicated to applying new knowledge
              in basic plant biology to help sustain productivity in agriculture, and to
              contribute to the education and training of graduate and postdoctoral students,
              scientists and technicians from around the world. 

