Title       : Workshop on Research with NEES Tsunami Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a0116898

Award Number: 0116898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34141              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry H. Yeh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A tsunami laboratory facility -- a component of the George E. Brown, Jr. Network
              for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES) -- was funded recently at Oregon
              State University.  This action is to support a workshop to review the present
              plan for this facility, to learn its physical constraints and limitations, to
              discuss potential research to be conducted at this facility, and to make
              recommendations for instrumentation needed to undertake this research.

This
              tsunami facility will be utilized for a wide variety of research topics in
              tsunami hazard mitigation, as well as other research fields such as coastal
              engineering, nearshore oceanography, and geotechnical engineering.  This
              facility -- a large-scale, three-dimensional, long-wave tank - will have
              essentially unique capabilities.  This workshop will be an important step in
              providing input from the potential users.  Also, the NEES program announcement
              contained the following statement, "The NEES collaboratory will form an
              integrated network that facilitates interdisciplinary collaboration among
              scientists and engineers, both within the U.S. and abroad."  In this regard,
              the advanced network technologies will permit enhanced international
              collaborations through this tsunami facility.  Therefore the workshop
              participants will include both national and international key scientists and
              engineers, not only tsunami researchers, but also researchers from other
              relevant research communities.

Prior to the workshop, the PI will set up an
              electronic mailing list to start the discussion and to provide relevant
              workshop information.  Following the workshop, the organizing committee will
              distribute the workshop report, including posting it on the workshop web site,
              the Tsunami Bulletin Board (TBB) and the Coastal_List (CL).  (TBB and CL are
              e-mail bulletin boards for the tsunami and coastal-engineering research
              communities, respectively.)

