Title       : Development of a Multi-Purpose Laser Deposition Facility for Research and
               Education in Nanostructured Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0116098

Award Number: 0116098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146642             (Estimated)
Investigator: Renato P. Camata camata@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sergey B. Mirov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. R. Lacefield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yogesh K. Vohra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher M. Lawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to the University of
              Alabama Birmingham (UAB) is for the development of a multipurpose laser
              deposition facility for research and education in nanostructured materials. The
              first phase of the project consists in the development of a novel nanoparticles
              pulsed beam laser deposition technique that delivers size-selected
              nanoparticles to deposit arbitrarily shaped patterns on a substrate.  The
              second phase of the project consists in the integration of the new technique
              with conventional Pulsed Laser Deposition technique into a single deposition
              facility.  The new facility will provide a new method for creation of nano
              composite materials. The facility will be a multi-user tool for research and
              training in nanostructured material at the UAB. The instrument will help
              establish five new research initiatives at UAB.  This instrument development
              project will complement an existing NSF-Supported REU -site.

This award from
              the Major Research Instrumentation program to the University of Alabama
              Birmingham (UAB) is for the development of a multipurpose laser deposition
              facility for research and education in nanostructured materials. The first
              phase of the project consists in the development of a novel nanoparticles
              pulsed beam laser deposition technique that delivers size-selected
              nanoparticles to deposit arbitrarily shaped patterns on a substrate.  The
              second phase of the project consists in the integration of the new technique
              with conventional Pulsed Laser Deposition technique into a single deposition
              facility.  The new facility will provide a new method for creation of nano
              composite materials. The facility will be a multi-user tool for research and
              training in nanostructured material at the UAB. The instrument will help
              establish five new research initiatives at UAB.  This instrument development
              project will complement an existing NSF-Supported REU -site.  



