Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computer for Hybrid Materials Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0116315

Award Number: 0116315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176143             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Roger Cowley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Huaxiang Fu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jing Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luke A. Burke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Maslen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the instrumentation for Materials Research program, Rutgers
              University at Camden will acquire a fast, parallel computer SPCES/667312-MYR
              with 3 nodes, each with four processors and 4GB shared-memory, for hybrid
              materials research. Chalcogenide hybrid materials, synthesized recently by
              experimentalists at Rutgers Camden, were found to be unexpectedly stable and
              have a novel structure that cannot be understood within the thermodynamic
              theory. These materials exhibit surprisingly large blue shifts in absorption
              edges compared to their parent bulk semiconductors. The proposed computer will
              be used to calculate the structural, electronic, and optical properties of
              these complex materials using density-functional theory. The new computer will
              also immediately enable the following exciting projects: (i) quantum dots, (ii)
              conducting polymers, (iii) ferroelectric materials, (iv) local correlation. The
              acquisition will greatly strengthen the research capability of Camden campus in
              materials science, and will also be employed in the undergraduate curriculum to
              perform large-scale electronic-structure calculations.

With this award from
              the Major Research Instrumentation program Rutgers University at Camden will be
              able to acquire a fast, parallel, shared-memory computer for hybrid materials
              research, a major research initiative at Rutgers Camden. Semiconductor hybrid
              materials, formed by coherently bonding inorganic semiconductors to organic
              species, are a new type of material that combines all the advantages of
              semiconductors and polymers, both of great interest to industry. The new
              computer will be used to simulate the electronic, optical, and structural
              properties of II-VI hybrid materials. The computer will also be heavily used in
              the following exciting new research projects: (i) nanomaterials, (ii)
              conducting polymers, (iii) ferroelectric materials, (iv) novel computational
              techniques. The acquisition will greatly strengthen the research capability of
              the Camden campus in materials science, and it will significantly enhance
              inter-departmental collaborations between Chemistry and Physics. The computer
              will also be used by undergraduates participating in these projects, and will
              be employed in the undergraduate curriculum to perform electronic-structure
              calculations.


