Title       : Acquisition of a Digital Image Documentation Station and a High Speed
               Refrigerated Centrifuge for Core Molecular Biology Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a0116080

Award Number: 0116080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85290              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa Petrino plin@mail.barry.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerhild Packert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yu-Wai Peter Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barry University
	      11300 N E 2nd Avenue
	      Miami Shores, FL  331616695    305/899-3072

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
NSF Proposal # 0116080

     A grant has been awarded to Dr. Petrino
              at Barry University to acquire a Digital Image Documentation Station and a
              High-Speed Refrigerated Centrifuge for the Core Molecular Biology Laboratory.

                  The scientific objective of this proposal is to comprehend the basic
              molecular mechanisms underlying oocyte differentiation and embryonic
              development using two well-established neuroendocrine model systems: the
              killifish (Fundulus heteroclitus) and the zebrafish (Danio rerio).  The project
              using the killifish focuses on understanding the relationship between the
              pituitary gland and the ovary in controlling cyclic reproduction.  The
              long-term goal of the zebrafish project is to evaluate the role of genes
              involved in embryonic development. 
     The first part of the project will
              involve gene cloning techniques for which the High-Speed Refrigerated
              Centrifuge is crucial.  Once the genes of interest are cloned, they will be
              used in a variety of molecular procedures in order to determine the spatial and
              temporal expression of these genes during egg and early embryo development, for
              which the Digital Image Documentation System will be used to analyze the
              results. Results from this study may provide new insights for understanding not
              only the basic reproductive process but are also expected to further clarify
              the regulation of gene expression in early embryonic development.  Furthermore,
              since the loss of some of these genes has been linked to various cancers, the
              results are expected to lead to further studies that may help in understanding
              mechanisms involved in the development of cancer.  
     In addition to the
              proposed research, the instruments requested will be used for summer research
              training activities through workshops providing "hands-on" experience to
              minority undergraduates, high school science students and high school science
              teachers from Miami Dade and Broward counties.  Some of the techniques learned
              by high school teachers are then incorporated into the curriculum thus exposing
              more high school students to modern biotechnology techniques.  These equipments
              will also be available to new faculty members, including underrepresented
              female faculty, who are currently establishing their own research.  Therefore,
              these two pieces of equipment will very much enhance the ability of this
              minority institution to provide an up to date research/learning environment for
              both, faculty and its diverse student body. 


