Title       : Acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer and a Variable Angle
               Spectroscopic Ellipsometer for an Open Surface Analysis Facility at the
               University of Massachusetts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0116552

Award Number: 0116552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Watkins watkins@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wei Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Seshu B. Desu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. McCarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will allow the
              University of Massachusetts to purchase a x-ray photoelectron spectrometer
              (XPS) with integrated Auger analysis.  The instrument will significantly
              enhance the capabilities of Interface Analysis Laboratory at UMass by providing
              high-resolution surface analysis and depth profiling capabilities that are
              currently lacking.  The facility is accessible to the UMass community as well
              as research personnel from the surrounding Five College Community that includes
              Smith, Mt. Holyoke, Amherst and Hampshire Colleges and local industry.  The
              Interface Analysis Laboratory and its director play an instrumental role in the
              support of broadly funded research programs in the chemical biological and
              materials sciences and for training of graduate and undergraduate students at
              these and other institutions.  Specific programs include assessment of
              composition, contamination, interfacial properties and growth mechanisms for
              metal and semiconductor multi-layer films deposited from supercritical fluids,
              characterizing the chemical composition of polymer surfaces and interfaces
              modified to control interfacial interactions, surface wetting and
              biocompatability and the rational design of constrained-geometry catalysts for
              olefin polymerization.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation
              Program will allow the University of Massachusetts to purchase a x-ray
              photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) with integrated Auger analysis.  In tandem,
              XPS and Auger spectroscopy provide precise information regarding the atomic and
              molecular composition of surfaces that is crucial for the development and
              application of the advanced materials that are fueling today's economy.  These
              include the assessment of metal and semiconductor films for microelectronic and
              photonic devices, the characterization of modified surfaces for consumer and
              medical applications, and the characterization of catalysts for more efficient
              fuel and chemical production.  The instrument will be housed in an open Surface
              Analysis Facility that is easily accessible to the UMass Campus as well as
              research personnel from the surrounding Five College Community that includes
              Smith, Mt. Holyoke, Amherst and Hampshire Colleges and local industry.  The
              facility plays an instrumental role in the training of graduate and
              undergraduate students at these and other institutions. 


