Title       : MRI: Development of a Femtosecond Time-Resolved Electron Diffraction System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0116015

Award Number: 0116015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191752             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hani E. Elsayed-Ali   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program supports the
              development of a femtosecond electron diffraction system development at Old
              Dominion Research Foundation. Time domain dynamical examination requires a
              probe with comparable or shorter temporal resolution than the relaxation
              process of the perturbed system, which for many solid-state and molecular
              reactions is in the few picosecond or femtosecond range. There is a significant
              interest in developing ultrafast time-resolved structural probes based on
              electron and x-ray diffraction. Time-resolved electron diffraction has been
              used to study phase transitions at surfaces and in thin films, and to probe the
              nuclear dynamics of laser excited molecules. Because of the need for
              instrumentation development, its use has been limited to few groups. An
              optimized time-resolved electron diffraction system operating at 20-50 keV with
              100 fs temporal resolution and 103-104 electrons per pulse will be developed.
              This will provide at least several times higher temporal resolution and
              electron density than present time-resolved electron diffraction systems. The
              design will minimize electron trajectory differences due to photoelectron
              energy spread and space charge effects. The introduction of a special electron
              dispersion compensation element is also proposed. 
Graduate students will be
              involved in design, construction, and use of the femtosecond electron
              diffraction system to probe surface and thin film reactions. These students
              will gain experience in ultrafast lasers, electron optics, pump-probe
              techniques, and material characterization. Undergraduate students will
              participate as technical assistants and as part of their senior design
              projects.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program
              supports the development a high-speed electron diffraction system at Old
              Dominion Research Foundation. Many important reactions in solids and molecules
              occur in a time scale of a picosecond or shorter, therefore, there is a need to
              develop instrumentation capable of high-speed probing. When electrons are
              diffracted from a solid or a molecular jet, the produced diffraction pattern
              provides information on the solid or molecular structure. Using an ultrashort
              laser pulse to initiate a reaction and an equally ultrashort electron pulse,
              delayed from the laser pulse, as a probe, it is possible to time resolve the
              reaction. Because of the need for complex instrumentation development, the use
              of high-speed electron diffraction has been limited to few groups. An optimized
              high-speed electron diffraction system will be developed. This will provide at
              least several times higher temporal resolution than present time-resolved
              systems, enabling the observation of many phenomena not presently well
              understood. A new design minimizing electron pulse spread and introducing
              special electron dispersion compensation element for electron pulse compression
              will be developed. 
Graduate students will be involved in design,
              construction, and use of the femtosecond electron diffraction system to probe
              surface and thin film reactions of scientific and technological interest. These
              students will gain experience in lasers, electron optics, and material
              characterization. Undergraduate students will participate as technical
              assistants and as part of their senior design projects. This experience will
              prepare them for a career in high technology within an industrial, governmental
              and academic setting.


