Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Laboratory Instrumentation for Department of Natural
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0116393

Award Number: 0116393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135525             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry F. Russell hrussell@jcsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Godwin Mbamalu  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Johnson C Smith University
	      100 Beatties Ford Rd
	      Charlotte, NC  28216    704/378-1000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
              Department of Chemistry at Johnson C. Smith University  will acquire a 90 MHz
              nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer and an atomic absorption
              spectrometer. This equipment will enable researchers to carry out studies on
              the fate and transport of metals in the environment.   Students at this
              primarily undergraduate institution will be active participants in the research
              projects and will also use these instruments in their advanced laboratory
              courses.  

Atomic absorption (AA) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
              spectroscopy are very powerful tools and are the mainstay of most modern
              analytical chemistry laboratories.  NMR is used to identify unknown substances,
              to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study
              the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution.  Access to
              state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying
              out frontier research.  AA spectroscopy allows for the unequivocal
              identification of atomic species.  The results from these studies will have an
              impact in environmental chemistry.
