Title       : MRI: The Molecular Physiology of Stress in the Bioindicator Species Daphnia
               magna: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0116466

Award Number: 0116466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148486             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Whittemore suwhitte@keene.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott Strong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keene State College
	      229 Main
	      Keene, NH  034350001    603/352-1909

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:  A grant has been awarded to Dr. Whittemore at Keene State College to
              improve the ability to detect the presence, as well as to predict the effects,
              of pollutants on aquatic environments for the effective management of our
              valuable water resources.  Daphnia magna, a freshwater crustacean species, has
              long been used an indicator of freshwater quality.  It has been
              well-demonstrated that these invertebrates are highly sensitive to a wide
              variety of aquatic contaminants.  The bulk of the toxicological studies using
              bioassays based on Daphnia rely on measurements of the effects of contaminant
              exposure on survival, growth, and reproduction. The results of such studies are
              often difficult to detect and quantify and are not reliably reproduceable. 
              There is a need for bioindicators of water quality that can be easily and
              rapidly measured and that demonstrate sensitivity to sublethal toxicant
              exposures. The long-term objective of our research is to further the
              effectiveness of this valuable bioindicator species through the identification
              and quantification of genes that are expressed upon exposure to specific
              contaminants.  
 The grant will be used to acquire a real-time PCR system and
              a differential display system to further our investigations concerning the
              molecular physiology of stress in Daphnia magna.  The differential display
              system will greatly enhance the efficiency with which we are able to identify
              genes that are expressed in Daphnia following sublethal exposure to specific
              aquatic contaminants. The expression of these genes will then be quantified
              using real-time PCR methodology with the objective of developing these genes as
              sensitive molecular markers of contaminant exposure. 
The PI, Susan
              Whittemore, a physiologist, and the co-PI, Scott Strong, a molecular biologist,
              are faculty members at a small public liberal arts college, Keene State
              College.  The requested equipment will greatly enhance the collaborative
              integrated research/education efforts of these two faculty members. The project
              provides KSC undergraduates state-of-the-art training opportunities in the
              field of molecular biology. Engaging in faculty-mentored research enhances the
              desire and ability of our undergraduates, many of whom are from underprivileged
              backgrounds and/or are women, to pursue post-graduate training in biology.

