Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Network Cluster of Advanced Workstations for First
               Principles Electronic Structure Calculations of Complex Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0116068

Award Number: 0116068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224058             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabriel Kotliar kotliar@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karin M. Rabe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian Uebing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Vanderbilt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program, Rugters
              University will acquire instrumentation for the setup of a network of clusters
              of advanced workstations. This system will be used  for first-principles
              investigations of physical properties of complex materials of technological and
              scientific importance. The ultimate goal is to be able to predict the physical
              properties of solids with the same accuracy and reliability that one can
              achieve for small molecules using quantum-chemistry methods. These computations
              will implement novel, state-of-the-art algorithms for electronic-structure
              calculations in a massively parallel setting. The techniques span three general
              areas: (i) Kohn-Sham density-functional theory in a plane-wave pseudopotential
              formulation, for static calculations of systems for which electronic
              correlations are weak or of intermediate strength; (ii) Standard extensions of
              density functional theory and dynamical mean-field theory for
              strongly-correlated electron systems; and (iii) effective-Hamiltonian
              statistical methods for bridging from these microscopic methods to
              finite-temperature simulations.

The materials systems to be investigated
              span a wide range, including high-K dielectrics (mostly Zr, Hf, Ta, Nb, Si, and
              Y oxides and oxynitrides), systems exhibiting complex martensitic transitions,
              ferroelectrics, oxides and selenides, Yb- and Ce-based heavy-fermion compounds,
              actinides, high temperature superconductors, and oxygen and hydrogen absorbed
              on W and other transition-metal surfaces. The research will involve the
              training of students and postdoctoral researches in computational materials
              science.


With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program,
              Rutgers University will acquire instrumentation to build an appropriate system
              on the basis of low cost high performance Linux PC's. These will be used in
              research on complex materials and carry calculations requiring high-speed
              parallel computer platforms. Complex materials, with tunable properties that
              can be controlled and optimized for a given application, will continue to play
              a role of ever-increasing importance in the new century. As our understanding
              of the laws that govern complex materials improves, and as computer technology
              and computational methods advance together, our ability to design and modify
              such materials will have an ever-expanding impact on science and technology.
              Computational condensed-matter science plays a very important role in this
              quest by providing new approaches to the modeling of material properties and by
              shedding light on the unusual properties of materials via simulations at the
              atomistic scale. 

In addition to this scientific objectives, the project
              will have a significant impact on the education and training of graduate and
              undergraduate students and postdoctoral researchers in computational materials
              science at Rutgers University.

