Title       : RUI: Opioid Modulation of Circadian Rhythms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a0116849

Award Number: 0116849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Gannon gannonr@dowling.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dowling College
	      Idle Hour Boulevard
	      Oakdale, NY  11769    516/589-6100

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The organization of animal behavior into twenty-four hour, or circadian,
              rhythmic cycles is a fundamental feature of the mammalian nervous system. There
              appear to be many physiological systems within mammals that are capable of
              generating their own twenty-four rhythms, although each is probably
              synchronized by one master time-keeping pacemaker within the brain. This master
              pacemaker is located in a group of cells organized into the suprachiasmatic
              nucleus, found just above the optic chiasm at the base of the mammalian brain.
              The suprachiasmatic nucleus receives input from multiple brain regions, but the
              major inputs come from the retina, intergeniculate nuclei of the thalamus, and
              the raphe nuclei in the brainstem. The timing of the circadian clock can be
              adjusted by input from each of these areas, analogous to moving the hands of
              the clock forward or backward in time.  In this study, we will be focusing on
              input from the intergeniculate leaflet, input that adjusts the clock in
              response to behavioral stimuli independent of photic information arriving from
              the retina. In hamsters, intergeniculate input to the suprachiasmatic nucleus
              is mediated in part by endogenous enkephalin opioid systems and can be mimicked
              by administration of delta opioid drugs that activate the receptors for
              enkephalins (delta opioid receptors).

	Circadian rhythms in hamsters are
              modified by running in novel wheels, and also by the administration of
              benzodiazepines and serotonin-like drugs. Each of these stimuli involves the
              intergeniculate nuclei and thus may be mediated by delta opioid receptors.
              Therefore, this project will examine the connection between delta opioid
              receptors and the modification of circadian rhythms by running behavior and
              benzodiazepines. The results of this project will enhance our understanding of
              how the suprachiasmatic nuclei integrates information from various brain
              regions in determining how the time of the clock will be adjusted. This project
              will also significantly enhance the training of undergraduate students in the
              sciences, many of whom are planning a career as science teachers. 

	

