Title       : RUI: Acquisition of DNA Sequencer, Synthesizer and Spectrophotometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0116617

Award Number: 0116617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115948             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Lawlor dalsbi@rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Craig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Savka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence J. Buckley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Lawlor at Rochester Institute of
              Technology to purchase three pieces of research equipment: a Genetic Analyzer,
              a DNA synthesizer and a diode array spectrophotometer.  These complementary
              pieces would form an equipment suite that would facilitate the research
              programs of four investigators in the departments of biological sciences and
              chemistry.  The research areas are diverse; they range from molecular
              characterization of immune response molecules in the great apes to creation of
              bacterial-resistant transgenic plants.  They also include the functional
              characterization of bacterial enzyme systems, as well as the definition of
              closely related Central-American iguana species.  The immune response molecules
              regulate the activity of natural killer cells, a lymphoid cell population
              instrumental in detecting virus-infected cells.  The transgenic plant project
              explores the possibility of creating plants with increased production of a
              naturally occurring molecule that protects against bacterial parasites.  The
              function of threonine dehydrogenase, an essential enzyme in a key metabolic
              pathway for many bacterial species, will be better understood after molecular
              characterization of its variant forms.  The iguana project is intent on
              enumerating the species central Mexico and determining how similar they are to
              one another.  The projects, although disparate, share the feature that they are
              basic biological research projects that would benefit by being able to
              characterize and sequence the relevant genes.
	The suite of equipment will
              permit the requisite DNA sequencing experiments so that the apes can be tested
              for the presence of the natural killer genes.  If present, precise comparisons
              can be made against those found in human.  The plant transgene, created using
              recombinant DNA techniques, needs to be sequenced to insure proper construction
              of the gene.  Without this quality control assessment, subsequent experiments
              cannot be undertaken.  Preliminary sequence information obtained for
              gram-negative bacteria, other than E. coli, reveals major differences in the
              nucleotide sequence for threonine dehydrogenase.  These differences will be
              completely defined by sequencing the gene from the various bacterial species. 
              Earlier field trips to Mexico provided the samples required for DNA sequence
              analysis of genes, mitochondrial and nuclear, that will form the database for
              estimating relatedness amongst the species.  Although the DNA sequencer is the
              central equipment item, the DNA synthesizer will allow oligonucleotide
              production for the sequencing experiments and the spectrophotometer is
              necessary for accurate estimations of reagent amounts.
	The scientific
              contributions from the four projects will be enhanced due to the expanded
              capability provided by the equipment.  Experiments that couldn't be undertaken
              previously can now be performed in the respective laboratories.  It is expected
              that a better definition of the evolution of the natural killer genes in humans
              and apes will be one result.  Also, testing the hypothesis that transgenic
              plants are superior to non-transgenic plants in regards to bacterial invasion
              will be possible.  The characterization of the threonine dehydrogenase gene
              will provide insights as to the regions of the molecule critical for its
              function.  Finally, an understanding of the biogeography of mesoamerica will be
              increased from the description of the iguana species that are indigenous to
              that area.   
 

