Title       : MRI: Acquisition of RF/Mixed Signal Test Equipment for Ultra-High Frequency
               System-on-Chip Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a0116281

Award Number: 0116281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Allstot allstot@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mani Soma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary driver of the information revolution is advanced silicon processing.
              Consequently, system design is undergoing a fundamental change, moving from
              multiple chip solutions to system-on-a-chip (SOC) solutions. However, as was
              noted in the National Science Foundation's recent planning workshops on
              advanced VLSI systems, the testing and measurement thoery and practice related
              to these heterogeneous resources integrated into a SoC solution is a major
              unsolved problem that could greatly limit future advances.
The advancements in
              process technologies provide for radically new types of devices, with
              commensurate design challenges and test and measurement needs. An example of
              such a system currently under development at the UW is a human/machine
              transducer chip-Universal Transducer Chip, a single integrated system capable
              of providing a speech recognition interface to a ubiquitous wireless network.
              Such a system is likely to become the standard interface modality for a wide
              range of new applications, from smart homes and smart test benches to
              ubiquitous high-performance computing fabrics. However, to achieve this
              potential, there are multiple test and measurement issues that must be
              addressed:
o	Radio frequency transceivers must be tested and characterized in
              the ISM (2.4GHz) and UNfl (5.6-5.8GHz) frequency bands for a broad range of
              emerging wireless standards
o	Low power, high performance wireless hardware
              implementations must be tested and measurement techniques must be developed and
              validated for future SoC applications in the LMDS bands at 17GHz, and
              above
o	Heterogeneous single-chip integration and test and measurement must be
              supported, allowing for the fabrication of RF, analog, high performance
              digital, and re-configurable subsystems within a single piece of silicon
The
              infrastructure contained in this proposal enables an investigation into the
              future of testing and measuring ultra-high-frequency SoC systems, years in
              advance of their commercialization. We will seek to develop and demonstrate a
              test and measurement methodology that can provide the benefits of multiple
              different resource types for numerous design domains. As an initial driver of
              these efforts, we will characterize a Human/Machine transducer chip, seeking to
              guide the development of future system-on-a-chip design and test methodologies.
              It is generally representative of future SoC systems that will operate at ever
              higher frequencies with ever-increasing levels of complexity. To support the
              design of such cutting-edge silicon systems, we will develop innovative
              techniques to handle numerous test issues:
o	Validation of techniques for
              integrating RF and Analog components into future ultra-low-voltage SoC
              designs.
o	Validation of high-performance, power efficient digital logic
              families for supporting these systems.
o	Integrated testing methodologies for
              complex, heterogeneous systems that can provide complete system test through an
              optimum combination of on-chip and off-chip ultra-high-frequency test
              environments.
In addition to the development of new approaches for testing and
              measuring SoC chip designs, we will also develop innovative techniques for
              educating future high-frequency SoC designers. By providing an integrated
              curriculum including high-frequency test and measurement, along with a
              just-in-time learning environment, we will help create system architects
              capable of harnessing these radically new design techniques and
              opportunities.

