Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a 300 Megahertz Broadband Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
               for Undergraduate Research and Research Training at Loras College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0116699

Award Number: 0116699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186436             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Speckhard dspeckha@loras.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loras College
	      1450 Alta Vista
	      Dubuque, IA  520014327    319/588-7100

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Speckhard at Loras College to purchase a
              high field Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer. Dr. Speckhard and
              Loras students will use the NMR to study the three dimensional structure of
              molecules that are used to probe the active sites of enzymes. Enzymes are large
              proteins that catalyze (accelerate) the chemical reactions that occur in living
              cells. Each enzyme has a small pocket or cleft, called the active site, where
              catalysis occurs. The shape of this site determines what kind of reactions they
              enzyme can accelerate. Probe molecules fit in the site like a hand in a glove.
              The NMR is used to determine the exact shape of those probes that fit best,
              thereby revealing the shape of the site. In one case the NMR can be used to
              evaluate where the site touches the probe giving an even better picture of the
              site.

The enzymes chosen for this study are all involved in cellular energy
              production, and all bind the phosphate containing compound Adenosine
              Triphosphate (ATP). Each enzyme can also bind other phosphate contatining
              compounds unique to their site shape. Examples include pyruvate kinase binding
              CEPA of PEP, and creatine kinase binding phosphocreatine. In the cell, a metal
              ion (magnesium) helps the phosphate compounds bind in the enzyme site.
              Substituting cobalt for magnesium creates a probe molecule that keeps its shpae
              long enough to study. The NMR is used to detemine which atoms of the probe
              mjolucule are connected to the cobalt. The NMR will also aid in the study of
              the glycerokinase site. In this case the probe will be carbon 13 enriched ATP.
              The MNR will report the distances from the carbon 13 atoms and phosphorous 31
              atom in the probe to a manganese atom substituted for magnesium in the enzyme
              site. These distances can be used to create a good map of the glycerokinase
              site.

The interaction of small molecules with large biomolecules is
              important in many areas of biochemistry. Studying the shape requirements in
              several kinase enzymes will help determine how enzymes have the ability to be
              such powerful and selective catalysts. These methods can be applied to drug
              receptor interactions to show how new medicines interact with biomolecules
              inside cells and how they may be designed to be more effective and have fewer
              side effects. These methods are also useful in agricultural chemistry to help
              produce better fertilizers and pesticides. A significant feature of the
              proposal is the opportunity provided to undergraduates to use the high field
              NMR in their research. This opportunity will significantly improve the
              educational experience for Loras College students since MNR techniques are so
              important in their future careers in medicine, biotechnology and chemical
              research.
