Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Xray Diffraction System for Interdisciplinay Materials
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0116153

Award Number: 0116153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Cocke cockedl@hal.lamar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ku-Yen Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Ho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shawn B. Allin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Malnur N. Srinivasan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lamar University Beaumont
	      4400 Port Arthur Road
	      Beaumont, TX  777055748    713/838-7011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program for Lamar
              University supports the acquisition of a multifunctional x-ray diffraction
              system to support interdisciplinary materials research and educational
              activities at Lamar University and Lamar's research and educational
              collaborators in other universities and industry. This system will supply the
              following advanced materials characterization capabilities: powder diffraction,
              particle sizing, strain analysis, texture, phase identification, quantitative
              phase composition, lattice parameter determination, amorphous component
              characterization, and thin layer analysis. These capabilities will be used to
              support research in the following areas: environmental science and engineering,
              polymers, nano-structured materials, structured thin films, high technology
              alloys, superconducting and magnetic materials, and geological and
              paleontological materials. The research will involve 19 senior personnel and
              numerous graduate and undergraduate students from Lamar University, Prairie
              View A&M University, Texas A&M University, and the Technological Institute of
              Saltillo, Mexico, as well as the steel and mining industries. The project will
              promote regional and international research collaboration and will give
              numerous research and educational projects access to high quality x-ray
              diffraction.

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation
              Program, Lamar University will acquire a high quality x-ray diffraction system
              to support interdisciplinary materials research and educational activities at
              Lamar University and research collaboration activities with other universities
              and industry. The system will provide advanced capabilities to characterize
              physical and chemical structural phenomena in a wide range of research and
              educational projects involving environmental samples, nanoscience and
              engineering, thin films, high technology alloys, advanced electronic and
              magnetic samples and geological materials. It involves several universities
              (Lamar, Prairie View A&M University, Texas A&M and the Technological Institute
              of Saltillo, Mexico). Nineteen senior personnel and numerous graduate and
              undergraduate students will be given access to a high quality research system
              that will promote regional and international collaboration.


