Title       : US-Tunisia Cooperative Research: Scheduling with Due Dates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0116655

Award Number: 0116655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Bulfin bulfin@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5928,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0116655
Bulfin

Description:  This project supports a cooperative research
              project between Dr. Robert Bulfin, Department of Industrial Engineering, Auburn
              University, Auburn, Alabama and Dr. Rym M'Hallah, Department of Quantitative
              Methods, Institute Superior de Gestion de Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia.  The focus
              of the research will be on using surrogate relaxation approaches to solve large
              scale scheduling problems with due dates.  The two scientists have already
              modeled the weighted number of tardy jobs for single and parallel machine
              systems as integer programs, induced knapsack structure for surrogate bounds,
              and developed heuristic and exact algorithms to solve the resulting problems. 
              This limited work has produced algorithms capable of solving the largest
              problem instances to date in short computer time.  The present research extends
              these ideas to other performance measures (tardiness, number of tardy jobs and
              their weighted counterparts) and various machine environments (single, parallel
              and flow shop problems).  Specifically the work will center on developing
              heuristic and exact algorithms to solve the single and parallel machine
              tardiness scheduling problems, and flow shop number of tardy jobs scheduling
              problems, and the flow shop number of tardy jobs scheduling problem.

Scope:
              Dr. Bulfin's research interests are on solving real world applications in
              production control and scheduling.  Dr. M'Hallah has been working on developing
              computer based solutions for the industrial sector, especially the chemical and
              garment industries in Tunisia.  She will make the results of this research
              available to the Tunisian garment industry and use them in a scheduling module
              as part of a computer-aided management software system. 

