Title       : Acquisition of a Stable Isotope Mass Spectrometer Facility for Life Science
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a0116203

Award Number: 0116203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288889             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond W. Lee rlee@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Kahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald E. Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles T. Robbins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristin Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Lee at Washington State University to set up a
              stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry (IRMS) facility for life science
              research. Stable isotopes occur naturally in all organisms. Virtually all
              biological activities involve compounds containing these isotopes. 
              Measurements of stable isotopes of carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur provide a
              powerful means of establishing the sources of these elements  and the processes
              involved in their deposition. Therefore stable isotope data provide a
              fingerprint revealing the history of an organism and the metabolic processes
              occurring within. Researchers at WSU will apply stable isotope data to
              investigate questions in diverse disciplines including: wildlife and population
              ecology, physiology, plant molecular biology, agricultural science, and human
              nutrition.

This is an exciting technology for biologists because information
              can be gained from wild populations without having to subject them to
              experimental manipulation. Minute samples can be analyzed, and can consist of
              leaves, feathers, blood, or a single hair. In addition, experimental
              investigations can be conducted using compounds labeled with stable isotopes,
              providing a non-radioactive method that can safely be used in humans and other
              organisms. C. Robbins and L. Shipley will use stable isotopes to investigate
              diets of wildlife that are difficult to observe in nature or have been extinct
              for thousands of years (e.g., grizzly bears and cave bears). Physiological
              investigations will be conducted by R. Lee, G. Edwards, K. Johnson, and M. Kahn
              to determine metabolic adaptations in unusual deep-sea vent organisms,
              mechanisms of photosynthesis in plants, the contribution of microorganisms to
              digestion in cows and sheep, and factors that promote nitrogen fixation by crop
              plants. M. Webster will use this technology as a novel means of tracking bird
              migrations. M. McGuire will use stable isotopes to determine the benefits of
              breastfeeding vs. formula-feeding in human infants by studying the metabolism
              of fatty acids found in breastmilk. 

While stable isotopes are finding
              increased use in life sciences, very few facilities are run by biologists.
              Consequently sample analyses are expensive and receive low priority. New
              studies are difficult to initiate. This newly funded facility will enhance
              existing research projects by enabling analyses to be performed quickly and at
              low cost. Acquisition of instrumentation at WSU will also allow principal
              investigator, postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate training in stable
              isotope methods. Expansion of use is likely, due to the large number of life
              science disciplines present at WSU. These disciplines are represented by
              academic divisions in biological sciences and molecular biosciences, as well as
              agriculture, veterinary medicine, natural resource science, and pharmaceutical
              science.  The presence of a facility geared towards biological studies will
              likely stimulate new and innovative applications of stable isotope techniques.
              

