Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-collector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass
               Spectrometer for Research and Training in the Earth and Environmental Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0116395

Award Number: 0116395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Lawrence Edwards edwar001@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc M. Hirschmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christina D. Gallup  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116395
Edwards

This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation
              (MRI) Program, provides partial support for the purchase of a Multicollector
              Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS), associated hardware,
              and some technical costs associated with the instrument.  The instrument will
              be housed in the Minnesota Isotope Laboratory at the University of Minnesota,
              Twin Cities Campus.  The main focus of the laboratory as well as the new
              instrument will be on problems that can be solved with high-precision,
              high-sensitivity measurements of actinides in natural materials.  The
              instrument will have multiple ion counting detectors, and therefore have the
              capability to measure more than one small ion beam simultaneously.  Testing and
              refining of the multiple ion counting system will be a major portion of our
              group's effort on this proposal.  The goal is a significant improvement in
              precision and/or sensitivity in measuring rare actinide isotopes.  One of the
              main results of such technical improvements will be increases in the precision
              with which uranium-series ages can be determined.  This improvement should
              impact a wide range of fields in the natural sciences, including climate
              change, paleoecology, paleoceanography, igneous petrology, anthropology, and
              geochemistry.  Among the specific areas that the new instrumentation will
              impact are:  calibration of the carbon-14 time scale and implications for the
              earth's carbon cycle, factors that control rapid climate and vegetation change,
               factors that control the removal of particle-reactive metals in the oceans,
              paleo-ocean circulation, rates of late Quaternary evolution, and factors
              affecting the formation of silicate melts in the mantle. 
***

