Title       : Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope to Support UCR's Accelerated
               Growth in the Cell/Molecular/Development Biology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0116267

Award Number: 0116267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435915             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Baldwin james.baldwin@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn I. Hatton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth M. Lord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prudence Talbot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephan Wilkens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. James G. Baldwin at The University of
              California, Riverside (UCR) for a new transmission electron microscope (TEM).
              The research and teaching needs of this growing campus and scheduling problems
              on the existing microscope will be met by adding this new TEM.  The new
              microscope is highly complementary with the existing TEM and both instruments
              will be housed and administered together in the campuswide Central Facility for
              Advanced Microscopy and Microanalysis (CFAMM) administered within the College
              of Natural and Agricultural Sciences (CNAGS).
  
This instrument provides
              functionality needed by experts, yet simplicity appreciated by students and
              less experienced microscopists.   The new microscope will be scheduled for
              projects that leverage its ease-of-use for diverse TEM work done by many
              biology researchers and students that do not require high accelerating voltage
              nor analytical capabilities.  Flexibility and scheduling conflicts will be
              further addressed by equipping the microscope with an electronically controlled
              rotating stage (required by many Cell, Molecular and Developmental Biology
              [CMDB]) investigators, e.g. those using stereo pairs) and digital image capture
              required for most CMDB scientists and crucial for cost effective printing,
              storage, 3D reconstruction, and easy interfacing with the adjacent Center for
              Visual Computing (CVC) with which it will be linked by an existing fiber optics
              system.  A new vacuum evaporator is also awarded and is vital for sample
              preparation for the electron microscope.
 
UCR is the most rapidly growing UC
              campus, with the highest representation of minority students in the UC system
              and among the highest nationally.  New faculty hires and new laboratory
              construction are underway to accommodate a 100% increase by 2010, with
              particular growth in life sciences.  The new TEM is essential for research and
              teaching programs to keep pace with the rapidly expanding interdepartmental
              program in CMDB and to address a worsening scheduling crisis on the only
              existing modern TEM on campus and shared by both life and materials scientists.
               For a significant group of Federally-funded UCR researchers in the life
              sciences, TEM is an indispensable tool, complementary to a range of additional
              techniques for acquiring structural information at the cellular and
              sub-cellular level.  These include special applications in cell biology that
              are relevant to basic science as well as agriculture, biomedicine,
              pathogenesis, mode of action of antibiotics, and exploring character changes in
              evolution.  UCR's existing CFAMM, interfaced with the CVC, provides a unique
              context for the new TEM dedicated for life science/CMDB research and training. 
              The new TEM will be the primary graduate and undergraduate TEM teaching tool
              for seven existing courses, and the PIs of this proposal will collaborate to
              develop a new training course specific to TEM techniques centered around the
              new instrument at the CFAMM.

