Title       : Enhanced Processing and Characterization Resources for Micro- and Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0116358

Award Number: 0116358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $471834             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandip Tiwari st222@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evelyn L. Hu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Fonash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program to Cornell University
              supports instrument acquisition for the National Nanofabrication User Network
              (NNUN). The NNUN consists of sites at Cornell, Stanford, Howard, Penn State,
              and Howard University, provides advanced nanofabrication resources to users
              from around the country. In the most recent year, NNUN served over 1500 users
              from fields as diverse as microelectronics, micromechanics, optics, biology,
              materials science, chemistry, and physics.  Modern equipment is key to our
              ability to serve this diverse user community. This award includes funds to
              upgrade critical NNUN facilities.

Under this award, CNF will purchase a
              Laser Pattern Generator. This instrument is crucial not only for fabrication of
              advanced photomasks but also for direct laser fabrication at dimensions as
              small as a quarter of a micrometer. Howard University will install an advanced
              ion source to its SIMS system to increase its capability for microanalysis. 
              Under this award, the facility at Penn State will purchase an advanced field
              emission SEM. When combined with an integrated scanning tunneling microscope
              from another award, an advanced nanoscale characterization tool will be made
              available to NNUN users. UCSB will purchase a new computer control system to
              upgrade its JBX5 electron beam lithography tool to allow it to continue to
              support microfabrication in the sub 
Micrometer range.

The National
              Nanofabrication User Network (NNUN), consisting of sites at Cornell, Stanford,
              Howard, Penn State, and Howard University, provides advanced nanofabrication
              resources to users from around the country. In the most recent year, NNUN
              served over 1500 users from fields as diverse as microelectronics,
              micromechanics, optics, biology, materials science, chemistry, and physics. 
              Modern equipment is key to NNUN's ability to serve this diverse user community.
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program includes funds to
              upgrade mask-making facilities at Cornell, to expand microanalysis capabilities
              at Penn State and Howard University, and to upgrade electron beam lithography
              facilities at UC Santa Barbara. This equipment is critical to enable NNUN to
              serve an exponentially growing number of users, faculty, students postdocs and
              users from industry.



