Title       : ACQUISITION OF AN INTEGRATED TESTING SYSTEM FOR CIVIL INFRASTRUCTURE ENGINEERING
               RESEARCH AND EDUCATION
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a0116273

Award Number: 0116273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abdeldjelil Belarbi belarbi@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Genda Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pedro F. Silva  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio Nanni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Schonberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1635,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY


The University of Missouri-Rolla (UMR) was awarded funds
              for the acquisition of state-of-the-art equipment and associated
              instrumentation to increase access and promote research, research training, and
              integrated research/education activities primarily in the area of civil
              infrastructure engineering. UMR has identified civil infrastructure engineering
              as one of six areas for development under the 'Mission Enhancement Program' of
              the University of Missouri System. The awarded equipment will support
              activities that are in line with the research and educational goals of the
              University and the National Science Foundation/Major Research Instrumentation
              (NSF/MRI) program goals.

A new state-of-the-art structural engineering
              research/education laboratory has just been completed in the Civil Engineering
              Department at UMR. With this brand new facility in place and in combination
              with the awarded equipment, UMR will be in the position to offer experimental
              facilities to its faculty, graduate and undergraduate students and to carry out
              significant research and education activities that address the nation's needs.
              In addition, cooperative research and development activities with government
              agencies and private industries will result in the advancement and
              implementation of scientific knowledge that is required for the safety of state
              and national civil engineering infrastructures. 

The equipment and
              instrumentation awarded in this proposal consists of: (1) three hydraulic
              actuators with servo-controlled valves capable of static, fatigue, dynamic and
              high-velocity testing; (2) hydraulic service manifolds and hydraulic power
              pump; (3) electronic control system; and, (4) high-capacity data acquisition
              system unit.  UMR faculty members are actively pursuing research/education
              activities at the national and international levels that address some of the
              world's needs for the development of modern design and repair methodologies for
              civil infrastructures.  These research/education activities demand equipment
              capabilities that far exceed current levels in the state of Missouri and/or at
              nearby regional universities.  Additionally, the newly constructed and equipped
              laboratory will allow UMR and its centers of excellence in attracting
              significant corporate and government research funding and draw a larger number
              of graduate and undergraduate students to pursue careers in engineering.
              

The new state-of-the-art structural engineering research/education
              laboratory will benefit students and faculty in the Civil Engineering
              Department as well as students and faculty from other academic departments such
              as Aerospace Engineering, Engineering Mechanics, Electrical Engineering,
              Mechanical Engineering and Mining Engineering.  Faculty in these departments
              are actively pursuing and conducting interdisciplinary research projects and
              have been successful in obtaining the support of private industry as well as
              state and federal agencies. The primary areas of research, research training,
              and educational activities that will be supported by the proposed equipment
              are: (i) structural testing of components and subassemblies; (ii) earthquake
              engineering and intelligent control of smart structures; (iii) use of advanced
              materials and FRP composites in construction; (iv) repair and rehabilitation of
              structural components in aging aircraft; (v) behavior of cold-formed steel
              structures; and, (vi) behavior of reinforced/prestressed concrete structures.
              

This award will enable UMR to address the following University and NSF/MRI
              program goals: (1) strengthen and expand existing experimental research,
              research training, and education activities and facilities; (2) increase the
              population of women and under-represented minority groups in the university's
              graduate and undergraduate programs through access to and use of
              state-of-the-art research/education equipment; (3) expand university-wide
              integrated interdisciplinary research and education activities; and, (4) build
              and strengthen industrial contacts and partnerships to promote and increase the
              scope of research, research training, and education opportunities available
              nationally as well as in the state of Missouri.

