Title       : Design of Elastomeric-Piezoceramic Smart Structures for Use as Tunable
               Resonators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0116240

Award Number: 0116240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84820              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paris R. vonLockette vonlockette@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raul Ordonez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric W. Constans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer A. Kadlowec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,9229,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The investigation and analysis of the behavior of piezoceramic-elastomer
              composites is the focus of this work. This newly emerging class of
              smart-structures combines the adaptability and passive damping characteristics
              of elastomers with the active capabilities of piezoceramics to create
              smart-structures with both passive and active vibration suppression
              capabilities.

The development of predictive constitutive models and
              effective control algorithms for the composites are the two primary objectives
              of this research project.  A prototype composite, tested in a two degree of
              freedom vibratory system, is used as a test case.

The piezoelectric-ceramic
              composite is modeled using a novel strain energy approach, following the
              rubrics of composite mechanics and rubber elasticity, that incorporates state
              of deformation dependence, composite geometry and anisotropy, the hyperelastic
              mechanical response of the elastomer and the piezoelectric component's
              electro-mechanical behavior. Experimental investigation of the composite's
              response to sinusoidal loadings is performed to develop a transfer function and
              thereby more robust control algorithms.  Experiment and theory are combined to
              generate analytical control algorithms that follows from the constitutive model
              of the composite, but allow for model dynamic uncertainty.

In completion of
              this project, constitutive models for the behavior of a new class of
              smart-structures, control algorithms for their use as vibration absorbers, and
              working prototypes of these absorbers are produced.  The adaptability of the
              composites allows for the creation of highly functional surface mounted,
              in-line, or molded components. This work will impact the field in a variety of
              applications, including but not limited to, active automotive mounts, vibratory
              isolation of specific components in assembly such as shock-proof CD players,
              telescopes, or rotating machinery, and in other situations where conventional
              techniques can not be applied.


