Title       : A Reassessment of Air-Sea Exchange of Mercury and of the Global Mercury Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a0116925

Award Number: 0116925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Simone Metz                             
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307474             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Mason mason@cbl.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0116925

Recently, studies on air-sea exchange have suggested
              that estimated evasion rates for Hg from the ocean are significantly higher
              that current deposition rates.  One potential reason for this lack of balance
              is that elemental Hg is oxidized by hydroxyl or halogen radicals in the surface
              ocean, or via reactive halogen species in the marine boundary layer (MBL).  The
              PI proposes to determine the importance of Hg oxidation at the air-sea exchange
              in controlling Hg cycling at the Earth's surface.  To achieve this goal, the
              scientist from the University of Maryland will measure the spatial and temporal
              variation in the concentration of Hg species in both the surface ocean and in
              the MBL.  In the atmosphere, reactive gaseous Hg (RGHg), particulate Hg and
              total gaseous Hg over the ocean will be measured on short timescales during
              both research cruises and from the atmospheric sampling tower at Bermuda and at
              a coastal site in Maryland.  These measurements will be carried out across
              seasons to assess the temporal and spatial variability in Hg evasion and
              deposition.  In conjunction with the air measurements, the speciation of Hg in
              the surface ocean (total Hg, Hg0 and methylated Hg) will be determined to allow
              the gas evasion from the ocean to be calculated.  The parameters that affect
              RGHg concentrations and the controls of Hg oxidation and reduction in the MBL
              and in the surface ocean will be ascertained using a combination of field
              incubation experiments and laboratory tests.  Results from this study will lead
              to an updated global Hg model and a revision of our understanding of how Hg
              cycles at the Earth's surface. 



