Title       : Acquisition of a PALM Laser Trap Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0116520

Award Number: 0116520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger D. Sloboda rds@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr Roger D. Sloboda at Dartmouth College to purchase
              a Microscope for laser based micromanipulation and collection of living or
              fixed cells and manipulation of subcellular particles.  This instrument will
              provide new capabilities for the Department of Biological Sciences at
              Dartmouth, with respect to faculty and graduate student research and
              undergraduate instruction.  The capabilities of this microscope are currently
              unavailable to this group of faculty anywhere else within a reasonable distance
              in New Hampshire or Vermont.  The microscope uses laser-based technology under
              computer control to move, manipulate, and collect cells and subcelluar parts of
              cells for further analysis.  The characteristics of design and ease of use
              indicate this microscope will bring these capabilities to the students and
              faculty at Dartmouth.     
	The faculty that will make use of this instrument
              are members of the Molecular and Cellular Biology graduate program, and they
              cover in their research the biological spectrum from yeast to higher plants and
              animals.  All of the ongoing research projects are amenable to approaches using
              modern, computer enhanced microscope image acquisition and analysis techniques.
               Thus, this instrumentation provides a unifying focus for the research efforts
              of the user group.  Some specific examples of the projects at Dartmouth that
              will benefit from this instrumentation here are studies on: membrane bound
              vesicle trafficking during lipid homeostasis, formation and maintenance of the
              poles of the mitotic spindle, the cell component responsible for separating the
              chromosomes at cell division, the effect of endogenous and exogenous steroids
              on early embryological development, the axoplasmic transport of membrane bound
              vesicles in neurons, changes in cellular autofluorescence as an indicator of
              future cancerous growth of cells in culture, and the role of specific nuclear
              proteins in cell division.  This brief list highlights just a few of the
              projects that will immediately benefit from the awarded equipment. 
	High
              resolution light microscopy and enhanced visualization technologies have long
              been the focus of faculty in the Biological Sciences at Dartmouth, and this
              award is coincident with the historical development of this department over the
              past three decades.  The acquisition of a microscope capable of laser ablation,
              laser based cell isolation, and laser trap manipulations of cells and
              subcellular particles will complement nicely the current instrumentation and
              greatly improve the research and training environment for the faculty and for
              the graduate and undergraduate students in this department.  The laser
              microscope will enhance the research productivity of the faculty as well as the
              training environment for the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students
              at Dartmouth.  Thus, the research enterprise in the Biological Sciences at
              Dartmouth will be significantly enhanced. 


