Title       : STS: Citizen Science in Ornithology: The Co-production of Knowledge by
               Scientists and Lay People
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0116814

Award Number: 0116814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14032              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce V. Lewenstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 0116814
Bruce Lewenstein, Cornell University
The Co-Production Of
              Knowledge By Scientists And Lay People : The "Citizen Science" Approach In
              Ornithology
 

The proposed study utilizes qualitative methods (ethnography,
              semiotics, discourse-analysis, and cross-national comparison) to examine an
              innovative "Citizen Science"  program developed by the Cornell University Lab
              of Ornithology (CLO) and its counterpart in France.  The Citizen Science
              program enrolls volunteers from the general public into field surveys and other
              scientific research projects. This program is interesting from a sociological
              point of view because it integrates in a single project people with different
              skills, scientific backgrounds, and interests into a coherent research program
              on a continent-wide (in North America) or national (in France) level. These
              programs provide a unique opportunity for observing change in the way
              scientific communities incorporate more and more lay experts to produce
              knowledge; our analysis encompasses a large network of non-scientists (15,000
              participants in the United States and Canada; in the French case, a different
              form of network defies enumeration) and a sophisticated process for
              concentrating data in a single center of calculation. It also exemplifies a
              form of hands-on science education that differs fundamentally from the more
              traditional forms of one- way communication from experts to novices.  The
              Principal Investigator and a French collaborator develop their existing
              involvement in the CLO and in ornithology in France into a systematic analysis
              exploring definitions of "scientist," "citizen," and "participation" revealed
              by the projects, which also allows for an international comparison.   The CNRS
              is supporting the efforts of the French co-PI.

This study's objectives are:
              (1 identification and description of emergent forms of lay-professional
              collaboration that are not covered by standard models in public understanding
              of science; (2) description of the "natural history of data" transformations in
              the form, personal significance, and scientific value of data collected by lay
              participants in field surveys and relayed to a research laboratory; and (3)
              analysis of written, electronic, and face-to-face communications between lay
              and professional participants in Citizen Science projects to assess the way the
              process of intersubjectivity, which is instrumental for groups to identify
              themselves, is created by the tools of action at a distance used by
              laboratories like the CLO and similar projects in France.  Findings from the
              research have intellectual value for the interdisciplinary field of science and
              technology studies (S&TS), including the particular area of public
              understanding of science.  The study's findings also have significant
              importance for science education, because they identify strategies, problems,
              and dilemmas associated with projects that involve schools and other lay
              organizations in actual research projects.  

