Title       : MRI: Acquisition of an Alinger and Bonder Instrument for Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0116291

Award Number: 0116291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239405             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reza Ghodssi ghodssi@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don DeVoe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elisabeth Smela  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Melngailis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program award provides funding to
              acquire a combined precision alignment system and wafer bonder.  The aligner
              part of the instrument precisely lines up multiple wafers and substrates and
              puts them into contact.  The bonder portion of the instrument permanently bonds
              the aligned substrates together.  This instrument will be used at the
              University of Maryland for research and education in micro-electro-mechanical
              systems, integrated optics, chip-scale and wafer-level packaging, 3D
              interconnections, and hot embossing.  Researchers will produce micro-turbine
              engines, biomedical drug delivery systems, microsurgical tools, micro-pumps for
              cooling high-density circuitry, and radio frequency devices.  The
              wafer-to-wafer alignment system will be permanently located in a new 11,000 sq.
              ft.  multi-user class 1000 clean room facility, the Engineering and Applied
              Sciences Building, dedicated to micro- and nano-systems research at the
              University of Maryland.

The availability of a wafer-to-wafer alignment
              system at the University of Maryland will benefit the following research
              projects: micro-turbomachinery, micro-combustion, safety and arming
              micro-systems, micromachined cooling structures, 3-dimensional
              micro-mechanisms, conjugated polymer films for microfluidics, and actively
              positioned neural probes. This equipment will also enhance education by making
              available to undergraduate and graduate students hands-on training on
              state-of-the-art equipment in a modern clean room environment.  Newly developed
              undergraduate and graduate courses in microsystems in both the Electrical and
              Mechanical Engineering departments will also utilize this instrument for class
              projects. The instrument will also assist research and interdisciplinary
              collaboration between the University of Maryland and surrounding universities
              and national laboratories.  

