Title       : Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope to Support Research in Cell and Molecular
               Biology at Susquehanna University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0116352

Award Number: 0116352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129522             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Peeler peelert@susqu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Richard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret T. Peeler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Susquehanna University
	      University Avenue
	      Selinsgrove, PA  17870    717/374-0101

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Thomas C. Peeler at Susquehanna University to
              acquire a confocal microscope system to support student/faculty collaborative
              research in cell and molecular biology.  This instrument is an advanced laser
              scanning confocal microscope that offers enhanced resolution in
              immunofluorescent applications and the ability to reconstruct 3D images from
              ultathin optical sections.

There will be three main faculty users of this
              instrument.  Dr. Thomas Peeler's work examines the interaction of external
              signals, specifically angiotensin II, on actin cytoskeleton structure in
              cardiac cells.  The confocal microscope will allow Dr. Peeler to visualize the
              cytoskeletal network in heart cells.  Disruption of this network stimulated by
              external signals may play a role in the development of the cardiac hypertrophy
              associated with hypertension.  Dr. David Richard's lab explores the endocrine
              control of vitellogenesis, or yolk deposition, in Drosophila oocytes.  Dr.
              Richard hopes to use this instrument to better understand the role of certain
              key proteins in the uptake of yolk during egg development.  Disruption of this
              process may be a key to novel methods of insect population control.  Dr.
              Margaret Peeler's lab focuses on the role of signal transduction pathways in
              cell fate determination during the early development of the sea urchin embryo. 
              The confocal microscope will be used in experiments to follow the expression of
              regulatory proteins believed to be responsible for directing cell fate in
              embryonic development.

The acquisition of the confocal microscope will have
              significant impact on the research training of undergraduate students at
              Susquehanna University.  Approximately 15 to 20 undergraduates will use the
              instrument each year as part of their capstone senior research experience.  The
              availability of this microscope system will enhance and expand the scope of the
              research projects being pursued and provide significant training opportunities
              for these students, many of whom intend to pursue careers in biomedical
              research either through graduate work or through employment in academic or
              biotechnology labs.

