Title       : Acquisition of a 400-MHz Solid-State NMR Spectrometer for Investigations of
               Synthetic and Naturally Occurring Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0116430

Award Number: 0116430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259784             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus Schmidt-Rohr srohr@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay-lin Jane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valerie S. Ashby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua U. Otaigbe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The new 400-MHz solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer
              supported by this Major Research Instrumentation award will enable an
              interdisciplinary team of researchers at Iowa State University to characterize
              complex polymeric materials in unprecedented detail. Multidimensional NMR in
              particular will be applied to provide detailed and quantitative information on
              the chemical structure, conformations, inter segmental distances, and
              reorientations of molecules in disordered macromolecular solids. The insights
              obtained will be the basis for the rational design of improved materials and
              for controlling the interactions of macromolecular organic substances in the
              natural environment with contaminants and nutrients. Specifically, the new NMR
              instrument will enable the investigators to perform research on: 1) chain
              conformation, packing, and dynamics in amorphous synthetic polymers, and their
              effects on macroscopic materials properties, including physical aging; 2) the
              configuration and sequence distribution of polymers containing new polar,
              functionalized dienes; 3) nanometer-scale structures in technologically
              important heterogeneous polymer systems; 4) structure and dynamics in
              nano-composites of polymers with novel inorganic glasses of low
              glass-transition temperature; 5) the structure and improved properties of
              plastics from renewable resources; 6) the structure of soil organic matter, its
              formation, and its influence on the sorption of organic and inorganic
              contaminants; 7) mechanisms of carbon sequestration in soil, which can reduce
              atmospheric "greenhouse gases"; 8) the development of advanced, often
              multidimensional NMR pulse sequences to provide an "arsenal" for NMR analysis
              of organic solids with at least three-fold increased structural resolution. 
              The diversity of the faculty collaborating in the use of this instrument will
              provide an excellent environment for students of chemistry, materials science,
              agronomy, and food science to learn and perform research in a stimulating
              interdisciplinary atmosphere.

This award from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program to Iowa State University supports the acquisition of a 
              400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) instrument. NMR is one of most
              powerful methods for analyzing complex organic materials.  It uses the magnetic
              properties of the nuclei of many atoms. These nuclear magnets act as local 
              "spies" reporting on their molecular environment, and they do so in response to
              radio-frequency pulses. These pulses can be designed to "tease out" specific
              information about the chemical structure, about nanometer-scale domains, or
              about motions of segments in the material under investigation.  The new NMR
              instrument will help researchers to develop materials with tailored properties,
              such as less brittle biodegradable plastics, better membranes for use in fuel
              cells, strong plastics from renewable resources, improved adhesives, or
              lightweight materials providing increased fuel efficiency in vehicles.  It will
              also enhance our understanding of how soil organic matter and fossil fuels are
              formed, and aid in the development of improved procedures for environmental
              clean-up and for the sequestration of "greenhouse gases" from the atmosphere.
              The diversity of the faculty collaborating in the use of this instrument will
              provide an excellent environment for students of chemistry, materials science,
              agronomy, and food science to learn and perform research in a stimulating
              interdisciplinary atmosphere.


