Title       : MRI: Acquisition of an Image Analysis Suite for Aquatic Ecology Research and
               Research Training at the University of Illinois at Springfield
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0116630

Award Number: 0116630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112396             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Jenkins jenkins.david@uis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Lemke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Ill at Springfield
	      One University Plaza
	      Springfield, IL  627035407    217/206-7409

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. David Jenkins and Michael Lemke at the
              University of
Illinois at Springfield (UIS) to purchase an image analysis
              suite to be used in aquatic ecology
research and st udent (B.S., M.S.)
              research training. The image analysis suite will also be available
to o ther
              scientists and students at t he UIS campus. The suite will be composed of three
              different
research-grade Olympus microscopes: a compound light microscope with
              epifluorescence and
phase-contrast capabilities; a stereo dissecting
              microscope; and an inverted light microscope. All
three microscopes can be
              connected to a computer Image Analysis System with a digital camera,
plus that
              camera can be used to photograph electrophoresis results. Finally, a Polaroid
              HR 6000
Digital Palette Color Film Recorder will allow digital images to be
              converted to film suitable for
publication or presentation at scientific
              meetings or in the classroom, and a printer will provide
hardcopy
              capability.
Research with the image analysis suite will focus on two related
              disciplines of aquatic ecology:
invertebrate and microbial ecology. Aquatic
              invertebrate ecology research at UIS investigates:
the potential of
              invertebrates as wetland indicators in central Illinois; mechanisms of
              organismal
spatial patterns in temporary freshwat er ponds; empirically-based
              models of metapopulation
networks and gene flow; and endosymbionts in
              microcrustaceans. The microscopes will be used
frequently for all of that
              research (e.g., taxonomic identification, fluorescence microscopy to
indicate
              symbiont presence), and images of electrophoresis gels will facilitate research
              on
population genetics. Aquatic microbial ecology research at UIS heavily
              relies on microscopic
analysis (e.g., fluorescent staining for enumeration and
              biomass) to investigate: bacterial
population dynamics in
              anthropogenically-impacted st reams, t he identification of culturable
              and
non-culturable river microbial communities by advanced molecular biology
              techniques,
degradation of natural and t oxic subst ances by microbial
              assemblage (i.e. domains Bacteria and
Archaea), and rain-pulse effects on
              bacterial and viral abundance. Students will be trained in use
of the suite,
              and will then conduct research for independent and honor's projects, Masters
              theses,
and advanced courses (e.g., Aquatic Ecology, Microbial Ecology). Ot
              her science faculty and
students will also share in use of the
              microscopes.
The requested instruments will permit an expansion of current
              research and research training,
and will facilitate the collaboration of UIS
              faculty with investigators at other institutions. UIS
students will have
              greatly improved training and access to important scientific equipment
              for
aquatic ecology, which will in turn advance UIS r esearch capabilities and
              st rengthen the curricula
in the UIS Biology and Chemistry departments.
