Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Isolation and Overexpression of Thermostable
               Cellulase Genes from Egyptian Microorganisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a0116854

Award Number: 0116854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Wilson dbw3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5944,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0116854
Wilson

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              between Dr. David Wilson, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell
              University, Ithaca, New York and Dr. Ahmed El-Diwany, Department of Molecular
              Biology, and Director, Mubarak City for Scientific Research & Technology
              Applications, Alexandria.   The research is aimed at identifying and
              characterizing new cellulases with properties that are desirable for certain
              applications. They plan to construct cellulase mixtures that have high
              thermostability, broad pH optima, and high activity on crystalline cellulose. 
              They will enrich and isolate thermophilic cellulolytic microbes from various
              Egyptian soils.  The cellulase systems produced will be analyzed and those
              isolates producing enzyme systems with the desired properties will be further
              characterized and genes encoding enzymes with interesting properties will be
              cloned and expressed.

Scope: The project supports collaboration between two
              well-known scientists who have the expertise and resources for important
              research.  The research will add to our knowledge in environmental biology and
              will generate useful information for producing interesting new enzymes from a
              relatively untapped source in the Egyptian flora.  Interesting enzymes
              resulting from this work could be extremely valuable in biotechnological
              processes.  Dr. Wilson is an expert in cellulase cloning, expression and
              characterization.  Dr. El-Diwany is well published on the biotechnological
              aspects of this project, and has the facilities to carry out the work proposed.
               This project has the potential to greatly benefit both sides by developing
              novel cellulase systems for efficient use of biomass, e.g., in ethanol fuel
              production. It will promote teaching, training, and learning of Egyptian and US
              graduate students.  The project combines the complementary strengths of the two
              PIs in molecular biology and biochemistry.  This project meets the INT
              objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest.

