Title       : Acquisition and Development of a Non-linear Optical Microscope Workbench
               Facility for Research and Education at the Harvard Center for Imaging and
               Mesoscale Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0116547

Award Number: 0116547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303101             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bertrand I. Halperin halperin@hall.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Mazur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Weitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mara G. Prentiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoliang S. Xie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Instrumentation Program is for the acquisition of a
              confocal microscope at Harvard University. This confocal microscope will be the
              heart of a state-of-the-art optical microscopy facility which will be a core
              component of the Center for Imaging and Mesoscopic Structures (CIMS), recently
              established at Harvard University as part of a general initiative of renewed
              support for the sciences. The facility will provide the Harvard research
              community with a complete range of modern optical microscopy that will enable
              optical imaging with unprecedented resolution and sensitivity. This will
              facilitate a broad range of new research, and will help establish new
              interdisciplinary research programs at Harvard University, bridging the
              disciplines of chemistry, physics, engineering, materials science, biology and
              medicine. This will help meet the important educational aim of CIMS, and this
              facility, which is to ensure that students become skilled in state-of-the-art
              microscopy, and are well versed in interdisciplinary collaboration. The
              research to be conducted ranges from materials science to biology, from
              synthesis of novel structured materials to probing single macromolecules inside
              living cells.

This award from the Major Instrumentation Program will help
              Harvard University with the acquisition of a confocal microscope. This
              equipment will be the heart of a state-of-the-art optical microscopy facility
              which will be a core component of the Center for Imaging and Mesoscopic
              Structures (CIMS), recently established at Harvard University as part of a
              general initiative of renewed support for the sciences. The facility will
              provide the Harvard research community with a complete range of modern optical
              microscopy that will enable optical imaging with unprecedented resolution and
              sensitivity. This will facilitate a broad range of new research, and will help
              establish new interdisciplinary research programs at Harvard University,
              bridging the disciplines of chemistry, physics, engineering, materials science,
              biology and medicine. This will help meet the important educational aim of
              CIMS, and this facility, which is to ensure that students become skilled in
              state-of-the-art microscopy, and are well versed in interdisciplinary
              collaboration.

