Title       : Acquisition of a Focused Ion Beam Workstation for Processing of Single Crystals
               and Nanometer-Size Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0116780

Award Number: 0116780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sy-Hwang Liou sliou@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              You Qiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrzej Rajca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard Doudin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Sellmyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a joint award from the Major Research Instrumentation program and the
              NSF/EPSCoR program to the University of Nebraska (UN). The award supports the
              acquisition of a focussed ion beam (FIB) workstation for processing of single
              crystals and nanometer size materials in order to investigate their magnetic
              and magneto-optic properties. FIB is an ultra-high precision tool for etching
              and writing with 10-nanometer resolution. The workstation will complement
              existing facility at UN and will be used in a number of currently funded
              projects at the institution. It provides new capability for the study of
              devices at the nano scale with a high probability for discovery of new
              phenomena. The instrument will benefit the education and training of a large
              number of graduate and undergraduate students as well as postdocs at the
              University of Nebraska.
%%%
This is a joint award from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program and the NSF/EPSCoR program to the University of
              Nebraska (UN). The award supports the acquisition of a focussed ion beam (FIB)
              workstation for processing of single crystals and nanometer size materials in
              order to investigate their magnetic and magneto-optic properties. FIB is an
              ultra-high precision tool for etching and writing with 10-nanometer resolution.
              The workstation will complement existing facility at UN and will be used in a
              number of currently funded projects at the institution. It provides new
              capability for the study of devices at the nano scale with a high probability
              for discovery of new phenomena. The instrument will benefit the education and
              training of a large number of graduate and undergraduate students as well as
              postdocs at the University of Nebraska.

