Title       : Analysis and Control of Time-Dependent Translating Media for High Speed, High
               Precision Mechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0116425

Award Number: 0116425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weidong Zhu wzhu@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              PI's name:  Weidong Zhu
Institution:  University of Maryland, Baltimore
              County
Proposal number: 0116425
Proposal title: Analysis and Control of
              Time-Dependent Translating Media for High Speed, High Precision Mechanical
              Systems
Project abstract:

Translating media model such high-speed slender
              members as magnetic tapes, conveyer belts, transmission chains, and transport
              cables.  While much is known about the dynamics of translating media with
              constant length and transport speed, the dynamic behavior of translating media
              with variable length and/or transport speed is not well understood.  This
              proposal addresses new analytical and experimental techniques to analyze and
              control the vibration of translating media with variable length and/or
              transport speed.  A unified method that differs from classical parametric
              excitation approach will be employed to analyze the stability of both systems. 
              Analytical and computational methods will be developed to predict their free
              and forced responses.  Active and parametric control methodologies will be
              explored to dissipate their energies of vibration.  In conjunction with the
              experimental investigation, a novel scaled model will be developed for a
              high-rise, high-speed elevator.  Experiments will be conducted on the model to
              validate the theoretical predictions.  In collaboration with Otis Elevator
              Company, the methodologies developed for translating media with variable length
              will be applied to the design of high-rise elevators.  The developments for
              translating media with variable speed will be applied to wiresaw manufacturing
              processes and magnetic tape drive systems.  The success of this research will
              enhance our fundamental understanding in the general field of dynamic systems,
              as well as meet the immediate goal of enabling higher operating speeds in a
              variety of technological systems featuring translating media.

 

