Title       : SGER: A Method to Genomic Sequence Uncultured Marine Phage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a0116900

Award Number: 0116900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Farooq Azam fazam@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Forest Rohwer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Our understanding of the marine environment was fundamentally changed when it
              was shown that marine phage (viruses that infect bacteria) are present in
              extraordinary numbers (ca.1010 per liter). Since this observation, marine
              microbial ecologists have attempted to incorporate phage into the microbial
              food web concepts. This work has shown that under various conditions phage
              account for 12-600% of all bacterial production via lysis. The high number of
              observable phage and their high production rates have called into question
              concepts of energy and nutrient cycles in the world's oceans. The observation
              of large numbers of phage in the ocean also raised two other extremely exciting
              questions: 1) What type of phage inhabit the marine environment?, and 2) How
              might phage affect genetic transfer (e.g., transduction or lysogenic
              conversion) in the marine environment?. Available evidence suggests that marine
              phage diversity is ten times as great as prokaryotic diversity and like their
              prokaryotic counterparts, it is believed that each phage will have a unique
              strategy for surviving and multiplying in the marine environment and these
              strategies will be reflected in the genes that each phage encodes. The life
              strategies adopted by phage will in turn help shape the MMFW and the
              biogeochemical processes of the ocean.

Current methods of phage
              characterization rely on phage morphology, genome size, and host range.
              However, these approaches are extremely limited in their applicability to
              environmental samples, primarily because the majority of host are not
              culturable. Drs. Azam and Rohwer ill attempt to circumvent this problem by
              sequencing the genomes of uncultured phage. This will be accomplished in three
              steps. First, phage genomes will be separated from each other using pulse field
              gels. Second, randomly amplified shotgun libraries (RASLs) will be constructed
              from the bands isolated from the PF-gels. Finally, the shotgun libraries will
              be sequenced.

