Title       : Laser Heated Gradient NMR Studies of Ceramic Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0116361

Award Number: 0116361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Marzke robert.marzke@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George H. Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The growing technological importance of ceramics has highlighted the need for
              new studies of the fundamental physical and chemical properties of ceramic
              melts, where temperatures are very high (up to and beyond 2,000 Celsius) and
              where much industrial processing is performed.  We have built the apparatus
              required for both spectroscopic and time-domain NMR measurements of the
              properties of insulating materials at ultra-high temperatures, and have to date
              determined both chemical shifts and nuclear spin relaxation times of 27Al in
              several molten ceramics between 1700 and 2600 C.  This apparatus will be used
              to extend these measurements in well-known refractory systems, e.g.
              silica-alumina, calcium-alumina and yttrium-alumina, as well as in new systems
              under investigation.  In addition, we plan to further develop the technique of
              ultra high-temperature NMR measurements by incorporation of a magnetic field
              gradient into our NMR probe.  This has the twin purposes of improving our
              understanding of sample temperature gradients in the apparatus, and of
              implementing the direct measurement of diffusivities.  

With the addition of
              these innovations to the well-known repertory of basic measurements, the
              application of NMR has the potential for significantly increasing our
              understanding of liquid phases over a broad range of ceramic systems.  In
              molten ceramics, however, measurements are particularly challenging.  The high
              temperatures and strong reactivities of a typical ceramic liquid's constituents
              preclude the use of sample containers.  In our experiments a small sphere of
              material, about three mm in diameter, is levitated in an upward flow of argon
              gas and heated above ~2000 C by a CO2 laser.  For NMR measurements the sample
              must also be located in a large magnetic field, at the center of a
              superconducting magnet.  Sample temperature and composition may be varied, and
              the NMR data provide direct information about the effect of these variations
              upon the average chemical environments of different nuclei in the liquid. 
              Diffusion rates can also be obtained. From this information a clearer
              understanding emerges, of the atomic scale structural and dynamic properties of
              molten ceramics.  With this, we can better understand the macroscopic
              properties of a melt, for example its viscosity, and better control the
              properties of the resulting ceramic material for many applications.

This
              project is co-funded with AFOSR (6.1).

