Title       : Acquisition of a Dual-Photon/Confocal Microscope for a Greater New Orleans
               Consortium of Biological Researchers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0116511

Award Number: 0116511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377728             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kay C Dee kcdee@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Blake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Dotson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry D. Bavister  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Kay C  Dee at Tulane University to acquire a
              dual-photon/laser scanning confocal microscope.  This microscope will support
              the activities of a diverse consortium of biological researchers and educators
              in or near New Orleans, Louisiana (from Tulane University, the University of
              New Orleans, Xavier University, the Audubon Center for Research of Endangered
              Species, and the USDA Southern Regional Research Center).  A broad range of
              biologically-oriented research and education efforts will be significantly and
              positively impacted by the new instrumentation, ranging from fundamental
              studies of embryonic development, to examinations of cellular and molecular
              functions, to studies of bacterial biofilms and cotton fiber organization. 
              These distinct projects are connected through geographic location (greater New
              Orleans area) and through the need to obtain high-resolution, three-dimensional
              images of subcellular structures, in real-time or time-lapse, without
              associated phototoxicity or bleaching.  Confocal microscopy offers image
              resolutions far superior to those obtainable via conventional fluorescence
              microscopy, and allows the collection and assembly of sequential
              two-dimensional images to construct three-dimensional representations of a
              sample.  Dual-photon microscopy utilizes short pulses of a lower energy laser
              to control fluorescence from a sample in three dimensions, increasing
              sensitivity and drastically reducing the problems of photobleaching and
              phototoxicity. The dual-photon microscope is a state-of-the-art imaging tool,
              ideal for use in the research-intensive learning environments of the
              consortium.
The microscope will be housed in the Coordinated Instrumentation
              Facility (CIF) at Tulane University.  The mission of the CIF is to maintain,
              manage, and operate high-priced instrumentation for academic, non-profit, and
              private sector researchers; the CIF is a well-established provider of
              maintenance, operation, and technical support for instrumentation.  The CIF
              microscopy laboratory at Tulane is a convenient, central location for the new
              microscope, easily accessible by all members of the consortium of contributing
              researchers.  A summary list of the types of consortium research/educational
              projects for which the microscope will be used includes: embryo development and
              preservation; bacterial biofilms; tissue engineering, cellular signal
              transduction, and biomechanics; neurophysiology, endocrinology, and renal
              hemodynamics; cotton genetics and fiber quality; pharmaceutical and
              biotechnology applications; and oocyte maturation and fertilization.
By
              housing this state-of-the-art microscope in the CIF, whose goal is to supply
              instrumentation to researchers at Tulane as well as any and all neighboring
              institutions, the cutting-edge technology of dual-photon microscopy will
              certainly benefit researchers in the greater New Orleans area.  Moreover, this
              award has potential impact far beyond New Orleans, since no instrument with
              similar capabilities is currently available in the entire state of Louisiana. 
              The new microscope system will not only be accessible to researchers, but will
              also be used in mentored training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
              students.  Furthermore, programs (such as the Louisiana Alliance for Minority
              Participation, a "3+2" program between the Tulane School of Engineering and
              Xavier University, etc.) are in place to make these educational opportunities
              available to minority students.  In summary, the installation and shared use of
              the microscope will significantly strengthen scientific expertise and
              collaborations in Louisiana, and will therefore have a major impact on an area
              of the country geographically underrepresented in nationally-recognized
              scientific and engineering efforts.

