Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for the Electric Energy Processing Systems
               Laboratory at UPRM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0116314

Award Number: 0116314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Efrain O'Neill-Carrillo oneill@ece.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lionel R. Orama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guillermo Riera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Javier Quintana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Miguel Velez-Reyes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 9001, Mayaguez,P.R.00681
	      Mayaguez, PR  00681    787/834-7620

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Energy Systems Group at the University of Puerto Rico in Mayaguez (UPRM)
              proposes the acquisition of instrumentation to upgrade energy research
              infrastructure to 15 kVA. Proposed instrumentation includes power electronics
              converters, dynamometers, transformers and motors for testing, a surge
              generator, power quality analyzers, computers and data acquisition cards, and
              measuring devices. The Group is requesting these instruments to improve
              existing computational and experimental facilities at the Electric Energy
              Processing Systems Laboratory (EEPSL). Improving this research facility is
              vital in order to carry out research projects and meaningful industry
              collaborations in energy systems, especially in power electronics and power
              quality. The requested instruments will also be used to develop design projects
              and laboratory experiments that will improve research training activities
              (graduate and undergraduate levels). These tools will bring research to the
              classroom through undergraduate research projects, seminars, special topics
              courses and demonstrations.

The proposed instrumentation will provide
              resources needed to expand the scope of research and education in power
              systems, power electronics applications, alternate energy sources, and power
              quality. EEPSL will be better equipped to integrate UPRM work to mainstream
              research of the Center for Power Electronics Systems (CPES). UPRM is a core
              academic partner in CPES, an NSF ERC led by Virginia Tech. Current capabilities
              at EEPSL only allow testing of models and equipment below 500 Watts. The
              equipment will provide tools for the validation of models using scaled-versions
              of a power system at higher power levels. The laboratory will also serve as a
              testing facility for devices such as motors, drives and other industrial-size
              loads. A facility such as EEPSL, its personnel and improved resources, does not
              exist in the Caribbean.


