Title       : Acquisition of Controlled-Environment Chambers for Plant Biological Research at
               Michigan State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0116401

Award Number: 0116401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne H. Loescher loescher@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Kells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dean DellaPenna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jan A. D. Zeevaart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond Hammerschmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Wayne Loescher and colleagues at Michigan State
              University to acquire controlled environment chambers for plant biological
              research.   Such chambers are necessary for three major reasons:  (1) the
              potential to achieve consistent, standard, or optimum environmental conditions
              not found in greenhouses or fields; (2) containment and sanitation to avoid
              contamination; and (3) the opportunities to improve experimental designs and
              thus the efficiency of the research.

The work to be done and the methods to
              be used are the result of recent advances in plant genomics and proteomics, and
              also in plant development, biochemistry, breeding, genetics, molecular biology,
              and plant-environment and plant-pathogen/pest interactions.  Contemporary work
              in plant biology and particularly that in genomics often utilizes Arabidopsis
              thaliana as a model.  Although this plant's size and short reproductive cycle
              make it well suited for growth in controlled-environments, it is nonetheless
              quite sensitive to environmental cues.  Moreover, successfully using large
              populations for mutant selection and evaluation often depends on abundant,
              highly-consistent and/or well-regulated environmental conditions.  Beyond
              Arabidopsis, many Michigan State University plant researchers also utilize crop
              species, and attempting to grow these under defined environmental conditions
              can present significant challenges, e.g., high light requirements for most
              crops cannot be met in older growth chambers or under conventional glasshouse
              conditions in the winter.  For molecular genetic work, and especially that with
              transgenic plants, containment is important, and is often required in working
              with such systems.   Pollen and other propagules must be contained, and,
              conversely, unique genetic materials must be protected from foreign pollen. 
              Avoiding contamination by pests and diseases is also essential for all plants,
              and this is more readily achieved in growth chambers than in glasshouses.
              

The broader significance and scientific importance of this equipment is
              that modern controlled environments offer much more flexibility in manipulating
              temperature, light, humidity, and atmospheric composition.  Computer controls
              and monitoring systems now allow for manipulating temperatures, light intensity
              and duration so as to replicate specific seasonal and daily environmental
              variations and combinations and monitor experimental conditions for long
              periods.  New generation growth chamber designs minimize vertical temperature
              gradients, horizontal light gradients, humidity and other atmospheric
              differences along the borders and walls, thus maximizing the efficiency of
              chamber space.  These factors, along with increased equipment reliability, also
              reduce the numbers of replicates required for experimentation. Most
              importantly, new generation equipment allows researchers who want specific
              conditions (e.g., temperature, light quality, intensity, and duration, or
              atmospheric manipulations such as CO2 enrichment) much improved capabilities. 
              The new facilities will provide a multi-investigator, interdepartmental
              resource to support the broad spectrum of plant biology research at MSU. 
              Progress is expected in developing new crops and new and better varieties of
              traditional crops, in understanding how plants function, how they respond to
              environmental conditions and resist environmental stresses such as temperature,
              drought, and salt, and how they might better resist pests and diseases.  

