Title       : Development of an all-optical, broadband electron paramagnetic resonance
               spectrometer with picosecond time-resolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0116622

Award Number: 0116622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $949999             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Andreas Schroeder andreas@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Norris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Longworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the Chemistry
              Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs, W. Andreas Schroeder, 
              Charles E. Brown and James W. Longworth of the University of Illinois in
              Chicago, and James R. Norris of the University of Chicago will develop an
              all-optical, broadband electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer with
              picosecond time resolution.  This ultrafast EPR spectrometer will allow the
              investigators to perform picosecond time-resolved absorption and echo
              spectroscopy on the formation and decay of triplet states, radicals, and
              radical ion pairs in both chemical systems and biochemical enzymes.  The
              spectrometer will have 10 picosecond temporal resolution, which is three orders
              of magnitude faster than conventional EPR spectrometers.  

This instrument
              will require the construction of a high-power picosecond laser system, the
              generation of optical frequencies by optical parametric generation, the
              generation of ultrashort microwave pulses by optical rectification, its optical
              propagation, detection by electro-optic sampling and analysis of the detected
              microwave signals by advanced signal processing.  Each of these exemplifies the
              current state-of-the-art and thus represents an education opportunity for both
              graduate and undergraduate students.  This technology will become widely
              adopted, due to the significance of photochemistry and photobiology in both
              research and industry.  
