Title       : Development of an Ultrasensitive Ultrafast Phase Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0116564

Award Number: 0116564
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick P. Trebino   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mostafa A. El-Sayed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs Trebino and El-Sayed at the Georgia Institute of
              Technol-ogy to develop a novel ultrasensitive ultrafast intensity-and-phase
              spectrometer, which yields the full intensity and phase vs. time (or frequency)
              of luminescence and other light pulses relevant to biology and many other
              fields. The spectrometer will have a very high sensitivity for single-shot
              measurements and a <1-photon-per-pulse sensitivity for multi-shot measurements.
               These sensitivi-ties are approximately six orders magnitude better than those
              of current measurement techniques.
The proposed instrument involves combining
              a spectrometer with a coherent reference light pulse.  Specifically, it will
              use an ultra-short pulse with a spectrum ranging from 400 nm to 1600 nm and
              generated by propagating readily available, low-energy, 100-fs pulses through
              microstruc-ture optical fiber (recently developed by Lucent Technologies.
              Demonstrations of the new instru-ment will involve simple photochemical systems
              relevant to photobiology.  Examples include dou-ble proton transfer processes
              in 7-azaindole and its analogues (important in understanding radiation-induced
              DNA mutation) and the photo-isomeri-zation around double bonds, e.g., in the
              merocyanine dyes (important for understanding of the primary processes in
              proteins of vision, such as rhodopsin and bacteriorhodopsin photosynthesis). 
              Later, we propose to use this device to further understand the complex primary
              dynamics in bacteriorhodopsin and to distinguish between different theoretical
              models proposed for its primary photo-dynamics.
This instrument will also have
              applications far beyond biology.  For example, semi-conductor experiments often
              generate weak light pulses of new wavelengths, which cannot be measured with
              conventional methods, but potentially can with this.  Also, astronomers
              routinely measure the intensity vs. frequency (the spectrum) of light from
              astrophysical sources, but they cannot currently measure the spectral phase. 
              With this instrument it should be possible to do so and  yield information
              previously unavailable regarding extraterrestrial light sources.  In addition,
              the spectrometer will allow measurements of the phase of signal and idler beams
              in a broadband optical parametric generators-a system that is interesting
              because the phase of these two beams is quan-tum-mechanically entangled with
              many degrees of freedom and so can be used for quantum com-puting.  Finally,
              the ultrafast intensity and phase vs. time of virtually any light-emitting
              medium could be studied using this highly sensitive instrument.

