Title       : MRI: Development of an Ultrafast Time-Resolved Microscope for Imaging of Charge
               Carrier Dynamics in Complex Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0116034

Award Number: 0116034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412832             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hrvoje Petek petek@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Yates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy Levy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric U. Borguet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, the University
              of Pittsburgh will be able to develop a unique instrument for studying both
              momentum and spatially resolved charge carrier dynamics in solid state
              materials. The combination of photoemission electron microscopy and ultrafast
              laser excitation of two-photon photoemission will be used for the
              spatiotemporal imaging of electrons in solid-state materials with less than
              twenty nanometer spatial resolution and less than one femtosecond temporal
              resolution.  The proposed time-resolved photoemission electron microscope will
              offer several orders-of-magnitude better resolution over the currently
              available technology, which is necessary to obtain dynamical images quantum
              mechanical phenomena in solid state materials. The expected outcome of the
              research is a better understanding of charge carrier dynamics in the quantum
              regime, discovery of new physical phenomena, improved understanding of optical
              and electronic devices, and education of students in instrument science and
              nano-science.

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation
              Program, the University of Pittsburgh will be able to develop a unique
              instrument for studying both momentum and spatially resolved charge carrier
              dynamics in solid state materials. As the size of optical and electronic
              devices shrinks to the nanometer scale, the physics describing their properties
              changes from the classical to the quantum regime. This presents a need for
              instrumentation for imaging of the dynamical electronic properties on nanometer
              scale.   A unique instrument for time-resolved microscopy to be developed will
              provide an unprecedented ability to create movies with less than one
              femtosecond temporal and less than twenty nanometers spatial resolution of how
              electrons in a solid state material evolve in energy, space, and time.  The
              development project will educate students in techniques of lasers, vacuum, and
              microscopy at the forefront of nanotechnology and device physics. The
              time-resolved microscope will provide an indispensable and strategic tool for
              understanding novel physical phenomena and for developing advanced optical and
              electronic devices.



