Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation Cluster to Establish a Nanomagnetics
               Characterization Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0116498

Award Number: 0116498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. Tuominen tuominen@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Lahti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Candela  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent M. Rotello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1417,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS- 0116498
MRI:  Acquisition of an Instrumentation Cluster to Establish a
              Nanomagnetics Characterization Facility

Mark T. Tuominen
University of
              Massachusetts Amherst
$320,000

Abstract

New nanofabrication methods are
              emerging that serve to provide a pathway to single-domain magnetic terabit
              technology. Such data-storage density is equivalent to storing 25 full-length
              DVD-quality movies on a disk the size of a quarter. This grant involves the
              acquisition of an equipment cluster for characterizing the properties of
              designer nanoscale magnetic materials. This facility will consist of a three
              instruments: a SQUID-based magnetometer, a high-resolution magnetic force
              microscope (MFM), and a swept-field NMR probe.  These instruments provide
              complementary experimental information that advances the development of
              nanomagnetic materials fabricated using self-assembly and chemical techniques.
              The SQUID magnetometer will be used to obtain magnetization characteristics on
              arrays of nanoscopic magnetic elements, including hysteresis curves, switching
              fields, coercivity, saturation magnetization, and remanent magnetization.  The
              MFM will provide local magnetic information on individual nanoscopic elements,
              heterostructures, and patterned nanomagnetic media. The swept-field NMR probe
              will developed at UMass and be used to identify different crystalline phases
              and crystalline orientations of magnetic nanostructures through the swept-field
              spectrum.
	
These instruments will impact many different research projects
              and provide an education and training environment for numerous users. The
              facility will be used to develop techniques to engineer the magnetic properties
              of terabit arrays of magnetic elements made by oriented diblock copolymer
              templates. Magnetic behavior will be manipulated through nanowire growth
              conditions, array scale, and hybrid patterning. These efforts will be augmented
              by supplemental neutron and x-ray scattering measurements at National
              Laboratory facilities.  The scope of this research is broadened by
              international, federal, and industrial collaborations. Unique configurations of
              magneto-transport devices will be developed and investigated using laterally
              patterned magnetic arrays, magnetic heterostructures, and engineered magnetic
              nanoparticle assemblies.  New synthesis and assembly approaches will be
              explored in studies of molecular magnetism.  Education and training activities
              include instrumentation training and nanofabrication process training through
              the use of interactive digital-video.

