Title       : MRI: Inductively Coupled Argon Plasma Spectrometer - Dept. of Geosciences,
               Franklin & Marshall College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0116484

Award Number: 0116484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123695             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol B. deWet C_dewet@Acad.FandM.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      Office of the Provost
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116484
de Wet

This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation
              (MRI) Program, provides partial support for costs of acquiring a Thermal
              Jarrell Ash IRIS Advantage Inductively Coupled Argon Plasma Spectrometer (ICAP)
              with Extended Wavelength Range Dual Plasma. This equipment includes settings
              for both a vertically oriented (radial plasma) torch and a horizontally
              oriented (axial) torch. Such a dual system is a significant improvement over
              earlier types of ICP spectrometers that contained a fixed, radial plasma torch
              orientation because low wavelengths can be measured more accurately using the
              axial orientation. Long wavelength analysis is optimized using the vertically
              oriented torch configuration. This instrumentation provides maximum flexibility
              for an undergraduate institution servicing diverse research and teaching needs.
              This increased flexibility increases our user base and ensures maximum access
              to the equipment. Funds are also allocated for microdrilling equipment,
              specifically a New Wave Research Micromachining System with a high speed
              precision drill. The microdrilling system enhances small scale sampling by
              combining speed and precision relative to hand-held devices that are prone to
              user error. Both the ICAP and micromachining system work in conjunction to
              produce data more accurately, more precisely, at a faster rate, in a more
              user-friendly manner. This is important in undergraduate research where
              students have less time to devote to their research, but where solid research
              methodologies and techniques are first learned. Instrumentation that
              facilitates the learning process, with fewer frustrations and set-backs, is
              important in retaining students in science and encouraging them to continue
              with graduate research. Specific research areas that will benefit from the new
              instrumentation include: diagenesis of Cambrian microbial carbonates; trace
              element geochemistry of Devonian reefal carbonates from the Canning Basin,
              Australia; trace element distribution in igneous feldspar growth zoning; minor
              element chemistry of watershed and wetland sites (soil and water); and
              interdisciplinary studies in Archeology (local artifacts and chert provenance),
              and Art History (paint fleck analysis). 
***

