Title       : Development and Application of a New Model for High Temperature Creep Based on
               the Jogged-Screw Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0116126

Award Number: 0116126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Mills mills.108@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at the development of a new model for high temperature
              deformation behavior of structural metals and alloys based on direct
              microstructural evidence using transmission electron microscopy. The emphasis
              of the work is on Ti alloys that find application in many technologies
              including transportation, power and energy, etc. Currently there is no adequate
              model for the dislocation creep of these materials. The jogged-screw model in
              its conventional form severely over-predicts the observed creep rates. In the
              absence of such a fundamental understanding of this critical deformation mode,
              prediction of creep response, and developing improved alloys and
              microstructures for future applications, will remain a costly and
              time-consuming empirical process. The main goals of this study are to
              incorporate the recent microstructural observations on the nature and character
              of jogs on screw dislocations so that a predictive, physically based
              description of creep can be put forth. These are accomplished by combined
              experimental work on creep testing and detailed electron microscopy analyses of
              dislocation characteristics; by extending the application of the model to
              single-phase single crystals of Ti2AI and Ti6AI; and finally by applying these
              models to a wider range of materials including BCC solid solutions,
              diamond-cubic and zinc-blend structures. The model provides a link between
              atomic-level processes and macroscopic properties, and is a natural platform
              from which to build multi-scale treatments of dislocation creep. 
%%%
This
              research develops new understanding of the ftmdainental mechanisms involved
              with high temperature creep and has significance in several important materials
              systems where a fundamental knowledge of high temperature performance is
              crucial for present and future applications.
*** 

