Title       : RUI: Acquisition of Microscopy Equipment for Research and Research Training in
               Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0116743

Award Number: 0116743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236102             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curt M. Peterson cmpeter@bentley.unco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine Gardiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Northern Colorado
	      SPARC
	      Greeley, CO  80639    970/351-1910

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Curt M. Peterson, Catherine Gardiner, and John
              Moore at the University of Northern Colorado to significantly improve the
              ability of faculty and students in the biological sciences to utilize modern
              microscopy tools in their research, enhance their opportunities to expand into
              new research areas, and increase the competitiveness of their research programs
              for external funding.  The grant will be used to purchase ancillary support
              equipment for a scanning electron microscope (SEM) including a digital image
              analysis system, a critical point dryer, and a sputter coater.  In addition, a
              confocal microscope and equipment to prepare and observe biological specimens
              for light and electron microscopy including a tissue processor, an
              ultramicrotome, and a diamond knife will be acquired.  At present, there are
              active research programs in the department ranging from cellular biology of
              early embryo development to studies of soil community ecology that will benefit
              from the availability of this equipment.  

Five research projects will
              utilize this microscopy equipment to advance current and projected research
              efforts.  One project will use confocal microscopy and fluorescent dyes to
              study the three-dimensional distribution of specific cellular compounds that
              protect cells during early cellular differentiation in developing mouse
              embryos.  This study will increase our understanding of the development of
              mammalian embryos.  A second project will use the ultramicrotome and confocal
              microscope to record, reconstruct and analyze sectioned tissues of venom glands
              in rear-fanged snakes in order to elucidate mechanisms allowing for long-term
              storage and stabilization of venom components.  The goal of a third project is
              to develop a theoretical framework for the dynamics and stability of food webs
              that couple primary producers, detritus, consumers and nutrients.  Accurate
              identification of invertebrate taxa using SEM and microbial biomass using
              confocal microscopy will provide more precise identification of food web
              organisms than is possible with existing techniques.  The goal of a fourth
              study is to use SEM and confocal microscopy to investigate the positional
              differentiation of the separation layer leading to abscission or dropping of
              cotton leaves and the shattering or breaking apart of seed heads of native
              grasses.  Both forms of microscopy will permit much clearer imaging of the
              cellular processes that lead to abscission and shattering.  The fifth project
              will use this microscopy equipment to investigate the embryo anatomy and
              morphology of Eugenia, a very large and poorly known genus in the plant family
              Myrtaceae.   Embryo anatomy has been shown to be an important source of
              variation in this genus and will further elucidate the taxonomy of this
              ecologically widespread genus.

The equipment will not only strengthen
              current and projected research efforts of faculty in the biological sciences
              and each of the respective research areas but will have a broad impact on
              undergraduate and graduate research training as well.  Many of the questions
              and problems forming the basis for the five research projects described in this
              grant can be answered or resolved with this modern microscopy technology.  This
              equipment also will significantly improve access to and increase the use of
              modern instrumentation and state-of-the-art microscopy applications in the
              research training and education of both undergraduate and graduate students in
              biology.  Finally, this equipment will have a significant impact on K-12
              outreach efforts designed to increase college entrance and graduation rates of
              minority students traditionally underrepresented in science, mathematics, and
              technology disciplines.  

