Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation to Establish an Optical and Electrical Materials
               Characterization Facility for Undergraduate Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0116095

Award Number: 0116095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112656             (Estimated)
Investigator: Toni Sauncy toni.sauncy@angelo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Bixler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Wallace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Angelo State University
	      2601 West Avenue N
	      San Angelo, TX  76909    915/942-2131

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program, Angelo State
              University will be able to acquire research instruments required to establish
              an advanced, modern facility capable of supporting professional research
              activity for faculty collaborators and essential research training for
              undergraduate students. The facility will enable the study of  material
              properties under the variations of temperature, optical excitation, and
              magnetic and electric fields. Students, along with faculty mentors, will
              perform advanced electrical and optical measurements, such as photoluminescence
              spectroscopy, photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy, optical absorption,
              Raman scattering spectroscopy, photoconductivity, and Hall-effect measurements
              in the examination of standard and novel semiconductor materials and
              heterostructures and novel superconductor materials. The new instrumentation
              will establish a new realm of possibilities for advanced research, offering
              undergraduate students appropriately challenging, exciting and educational
              research training while conducting relevant and interesting scientific
              investigations.

With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation
              Program, Angelo State University will acquire research instruments required to
              establish an advanced, modern facility capable of supporting professional
              research activity for faculty collaborators and essential research training for
              undergraduate students. The facility, aimed at the study of material
              properties, will support opportunities for faculty-sponsored undergraduate
              research projects, fulfilling an integral part of the university mission of
              integrating meaningful advanced research into the educational experience of
              physics, applied physics, and pre-engineering majors. The new instrumentation
              will establish a new realm of possibilities for advanced research, offering
              undergraduate students appropriately challenging, exciting and educational
              research training while conducting relevant and interesting scientific
              investigations. 

