Title       : MRI: Acquisition of laser ablation for ICP-MS and electron microprobe upgrade,
               for geological and environmental research and research training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0116660

Award Number: 0116660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas E. Pingitore nick@geo.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher L. Andronicos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jorge L. Gardea-Torresdey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116660
Pingitore

This grant, made through Major Research Instrumentation
              Program, provides partial support of the costs for upgrading the operating
              system of UTEP's 14-year-old, first generation Cameca SX-50 electron
              microprobe. We will acquire a control system upgrade to replace the antiquated
              DEC PDP-based software on our Cameca microprobe. The DEC system is no longer
              supported by DEC or Cameca; newly developed analytical and imaging capabilities
              have not been available to us. The original Kevex EDS (energy dispersive
              spectrometer) system likewise is seriously outdated and has no EDS imaging and
              mapping capability or light-element detection. We will replace this with a
              system featuring a full imaging and mapping package, high counting rate, and
              light-element detector window.  UTEP's electron microprobe laboratory is a
              multi-user and multi-disciplinary facility. It serves research, research
              training and instructional functions for individuals and groups from across our
              campus, including members of the Colleges of Science, Engineering, Liberal
              Arts, and Health Sciences. The microprobe laboratory also assists individuals,
              businesses, educational institutions, government agencies, and non-governmental
              organizations in the El Paso-Juarez community and beyond.  The three
              co-investigators and their research groups have 15 projects, currently
              underway, which will make use of the upgraded facility. These research projects
              include the following topics: tectonics, metamorphic reactions,
              phytoremediation, environmental bio-sensors, desert varnish, particulate matter
              air pollution, plutonism, biosorption of heavy metals, trace elements in
              corals, microprobe data quantification, speciation of metals in soil, and foram
              Mg/Ca paleothermometry. Additional microprobe equipment use on funded projects
              from other UTEP researchers includes such topic areas as pigments, catalytic
              materials, archaeology, health, soil salination, composites, and exotic alloys.
               Early and continued exposure to research is an essential part of UTEP's
              strategy to attract and retain students in science and engineering, 
              particularly under-represented minorities. Mexican-Americans comprise
              approximately 2/3 of the student body at UTEP. Two of the Co-PIs are minority
              members, who serve as special role models and close student mentors.
              Instrumentation and hands-on laboratory experience  are important to establish
              the "connection" with students that often determines their
academic choices,
              success, and ultimate career paths.
***

