Title       : Massively Parallel Platform for the Center of Computational Materials Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0116566

Award Number: 0116566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas G. Kioussis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruqian Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donna Sheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  913308309    /   -

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will allow California
              State University Northridge to expand and strengthen the computational
              facilities at the Computational Materials Theory Center at California State
              University Northridge. The general goals of the Center are: (1) To conduct
              fundamental and applied research that enhances our knowledge in materials
              properties and processing through theory, modeling, simulation, visualization
              and computation; (2) To educate and train students through a program of studies
              and research activities on current and future materials-related technological
              challenges; and  (3) To stimulate and develop strong
              industrial-university-national laboratory partnerships in materials research.
              The research programs include the electronic and mechanical properties of
              metals and intermetallics, the properties of strongly correlated electrons, the
              Quantum Hall effect and high temperature superconductivity, the optical and
              magneto-optical properties of materials, catalysis, and the Quantum Hall
              effect, the optical and magneto-optical properties of materials, catalysis, and
              magnetic and electronic properties of nanostructure materials in general. The
              award will provide a parallel computing paradigm capability allowing the center
              (1) to treat large numbers of atoms ab initio electronic structure codes, (2)
              to sample a larger number of configurations in Monte Carlo simulations and (3)
              to decrease the time steps in molecular dynamics simulations. The Center
              comprises of faculty, postdoctoral fellows, visiting scientists and
              students.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program will
              allow California State Northridge to enhance the parallel computing capability
              at the Computational Materials Theory Center at California State University
              Northridge. This award will be leveraged substantially using funds from other
              federal agencies. The resulting massively parallel platform state-of-the-art
              facility will allow enhanced capability to investigate problems that are beyond
              current capabilities at the institution, such as bridging different length
              scales, increasing the configuration space in Monte Carlo simulations, and
              decreasing the time scale in molecular dynamics simulations. The facility will
              train students, including underrepresented minority students, and educate them
              in materials related technological challenges of the next century.  The
              University was ranked first among master's degree-granting institutions in the
              number of baccalaureate graduates who went on to complete the Ph.D. in science
              and engineering fields.


