Title       : Acquisition of an Energy Filtering Transmission Electron Microscope for Research
               and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0116530

Award Number: 0116530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis J. DiSalvo director@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul L. McEuen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shefford P. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ulrich B. Wiesner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mandayam V. Parthasarathy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program will allow Cornell
              University to acquire an Energy Filtering Transmission Electron Microscope
              (EFTEM). The new capabilities for atomic scale imaging provided by the LEO 922
              OMEGA, particularly the abilities to rapidly obtain element-specific image
              contrast and to image thick samples at low beam energies, will enable an
              extraordinarily broad range of research. These research projects are led by
              principal investigators from four Colleges and eleven departments at Cornell
              University. It will also be available for use by outside collaborators and
              users, academic, government or industrial organizations. The research topics
              range from studies of complex polymeric, ceramic and metallic materials to
              biological cells, their internal structures and metal ion concentrations.
              Central to meeting these research goals is the training of many post-doctoral,
              graduate and undergraduate students in the use and exploitation of such a
              powerful research tool. Since it will be only the second machine of its type in
              the US, this will be a fantastic and almost unique opportunity to carry out
              frontier research. It is clear that the EFTEM will have a large institutional
              impact and will be an important resource for the external community of
              scientists and students who will be visitors and users, some of whom will be
              coming primarily to use the EFTEM. It will further enable us to attract and
              retain the best faculty and students, including women and minorities.
              
%%%
This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program will allow
              Cornell University to acquire an Energy Filtering Transmission Electron
              Microscope (EFTEM). The new capabilities for atomic scale imaging provided by
              the LEO 922 OMEGA, particularly the abilities to rapidly obtain
              element-specific image contrast and to image thick samples at low beam
              energies, will enable an extraordinarily broad range of research. These
              research projects are led by principal investigators from four Colleges and
              eleven Departments at Cornell University. It will also be available for use by
              outside collaborators and users, academic, government or industrial
              organizations. The research topics range from studies of complex polymeric,
              ceramic and metallic materials to biological cells, their internal structures
              and metal ion concentrations. Central to meeting these research goals is the
              training of many post-doctoral, graduate and undergraduate students in the use
              and exploitation of such a powerful research tool. This will be only the second
              machine of its type in the US, this will provide a unique opportunity to carry
              out frontier research. The EFTEM will have a large institutional impact and
              will be an important resource for the external community of scientists and
              students who will be visitors and users, some of whom will be coming primarily
              to use the EFTEM. It will further enable Cornell University to attract and
              retain the best faculty and students, including women and minorities.

