Title       : MRI: Acquisition Of An ESEM With EDX And EBSD Capability For Microanalysis At
               The State University Of West Georgia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0116375

Award Number: 0116375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300871             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catalina M. Luneburg clunebur@westga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hermann Lebit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johnny A. Waters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julie K. Bartley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : State Univ of West Georgia
	      
	      Carrollton, GA  30118    404/834-1311

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116375
Luneburg

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides
              funds for the acquisition of electron microscopy equipment consisting of an
              environmental scanning electron microscope (ESEM) with attached Energy
              Dispersive X-ray (EDX) and Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) systems and
              partial support for a technician to oversee operations of the instrument.  A
              carbon coater will also be purchased.  This equipment is essential for
              innovative research and state-of-the-art education of science students and will
              therefore strongly benefit the State University of West Georgia in research and
              education. The Department of Geosciences plans to establish a center for
              microanalysis comprising the requested equipment as well as already available
              instruments such as optical microscopes and an x-ray texture goniometer.  Such
              a facility will be unique in the southeastern United States.  The wide range of
              users and applications from within and outside the State University of West
              Georgia requires an instrument like the ESEM whose particular technology allows
              analysis of a wide range of specimens under low or high vacuum conditions with
              minimum contamination. The EDX system is essential for quantitative chemical
              analyses of the samples. The EBSD system will allow crystallographic
              orientation analyses of individual minerals which, in combination with the
              texture goniometry measurements of bulk samples, will promote new approaches to
              fabric analysis in rocks.  Planned research topics include fabric development
              in heterogeneous deformation fields such as folds and shear zones, the
              kinematic significance of stretching lineations, fabric development during a
              complex deformation history and the relationship between fabrics and physical
              rock anisotropy. Studies will be performed in the Southern Appalachians as well
              as in the Alps. The equipment would also permit novel research in the field of
              microbial taphonomy (decomposition and fossilization) and would permit detailed
              investigation into the respiratory and feeding structures of well-preserved
              blastoids, thus complementing existing research programs. Significant research
              and teaching projects would also be undertaken in biology, chemistry and
              physics.
***

