Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Magnetic Resonance Imaging Accessory for a Bruker 400 MHz
               NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0116263

Award Number: 0116263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184623             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy H. Kolodny NKolodny@Wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Kohler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara S. Beltz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joanne E. Berger-Sweeney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      106 Central Street
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    781/283-1000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of a Magnetic Resonance Imaging Accessory
 for a 400 MHz NMR
              Spectrometer: 
Interdisciplinary Research in MRI in an Undergraduate College
              Setting

ABSTRACT

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Nancy H. Kolodny and her
              colleagues at Wellesley College, an undergraduate liberal arts college for
              women, to establish a Magnetic Resonance Micro-Imaging Facility in Wellesley's
              Science Center. This facility will offer unique interdisciplinary research,
              teaching, and learning opportunities to Wellesley's faculty and students, with
              initial research projects in the emerging field of neuroscience.  
	
With the
              establishment of the micro-imaging facility, two different types of Magnetic
              Resonance Imaging (MRI) techniques, functional MRI (fMRI) and contrast enhanced
              MRI will be developed. These techniques will be used to answer important
              neurobiological questions.  Functional MRI will be utilized to examine the
              brains of crustaceans such as lobsters, and mice.  Details of activity patterns
              in the olfactory pathway of the crustacean brain will be elucidated.  In mice,
              the question of whether gender and age affect brain function will be
              investigated, focusing on the response of the brain to stimulation of the
              whisker barrels.  Contrast enhancement techniques will be used to address
              questions related to the role of serotonin, an important brain biochemical, in
              olfactory neurons in newborn crustaceans.  An MRI experiment will be introduced
              into Wellesley's undergraduate introductory developmental biology course. 
              Students will use MRI to explore the pupal development of tobacco hawkmoth. 
              Not only will this give students experience with MRI, it will also provide an
              opportunity for dynamic observation of living organisms during
              development.
	
The scientific problems to be examined in the new Magnetic
              Resonance Micro-Imaging Facility at Wellesley College are of importance in the
              developing basic understanding of brain and neuron function.  Furthermore,
              training undergraduate students in the use of MRI will both inspire them to
              further study of science and enable them to pursue sophisticated research
              during their college years and beyond.


