Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: The Endgame for Reverse Genetics: Isolation and Distribution
               of a Knockout Mutant for Every Gene in Arabidopsis.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0116945

Award Number: 0116945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1698622            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Sussman msussman@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Amasino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Arabidopsis 2010: The Endgame for Reverse Genetics.  The Arabidopsis 2010
              Project is focused on determining the function of each of the 26,000 genes
              found in the genome of the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. One of the most
              definitive methods for determining gene function is to create an organism in
              which that gene is missing and then ask the question: how does that simple
              genetic defect change how the organism develops and functions? Such mutant
              organisms are commonly called 'knockouts' and this project is focused on
              developing and using new technologies  to provide knockout plants  to the
              research community.   Funds from this project will continue to support the
              University of Wisconsin Knockout Plant Facility, established under a previous
              award, as well as support research on using new high throughput methods for
              more easily identifying large numbers of knockout plants. The research
              community and public can obtain information on the procedures used to screen
              for mutants and to obtain seeds from this project via the website already
              established and maintained at the University of Wisconsin Biotechnology Center
              Knockout  Plant Facility
(http://www.biotech.wisc.edu/Arabidopsis/). 
One new
              technology supported under this project is the use of a recently developed
              method for creating 'DNA chips' (i.e., small pieces of glass on which a very
              large number of different DNA sequences are synthesized and displayed) to
              develop new methods of finding and cataloging knockout organisms.  Results from
              this research will be published in the appropriate scientific  journals and the
              methodology for high-throughput screens to find new knockout plants will be
              described on the above website.  More broadly, results from this project may
              provide new methods for determining the function of genes in any sequenced
              genome, information which is critical for further advances in agriculture and
              medicine. 


