Title       : Acquisition of Instruments for Environmental Science Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0116164

Award Number: 0116164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23199              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason Kelsey jason.kelsey@marymount.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marymount University
	      2807 N Glebe Road
	      Arlington, VA  222074224    703/522-5600

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jason W. Kelsey at Marymount University to
              purchase an HPLC Chemstation and a  Protector fume hood.  The equipment will be
              used to study the bioavailability and toxicity of soil-aged organic pollutants.
               Important components of the research are the detection and extraction of
              compounds from soil and organisms that have been exposed to contaminated soil. 
              High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) is used in the Marymount
              environmental science laboratory to quantify both recovery of the compound from
              soil as well as biological uptake.  The Chemstation will greatly enhance the
              analysis of HPLC data.  Currently, data are printed onto paper by means of an
              integrator, making complex analysis difficult.  The fume hood will allow work
              on a wide range of volatile organic pollutants that are otherwise difficult to
              handle.  The absence of a fume hood in the environmental science laboratory
              makes investigation of volatile compounds difficult and dangerous.  The
              equipment will also be used in the teaching of Integrated Advanced
              Environmental Laboratory, a course in which upper-division biology
              undergraduates learn a number of analytical techniques used in experimental
              environmental science.
The bioavailability of phenanthrene, a constituent of
              petroleum, and atrazine, a widely used herbicide, to earthworms and turtle eggs
              will be assessed.  Of interest is the effect of species differences on the
              bioavailability of soil-aged pollutants.  Sterile soil samples will be amended
              with phenanthrene or atrazine and allowed to age for a predetermined number of
              days.  The experiments will be designed to yield samples in which the compounds
              have been aged for different lengths of time (e.g., 120, 60, 30, and 0 days). 
              Organisms will be added to the samples and then extracted to determine the
              tissue concentration of the compounds.  Parallel samples will be extracted to
              confirm that the unaltered parent compounds (i.e., the added phenanthrene or
              atrazine) are present in the soil after aging.  Extracts will be analyzed using
              HPLC (with the Chemstation) to quantify uptake and recovery from soil.
This
              work is important for the accurate assessment of the risk of pollutants in
              soil.  Although data reported by the investigator and others demonstrate that
              many contaminants become progressively less available for uptake as they are
              aged in soil, estimations of risk of polluted sites are typically based on the
              total amount of compound present in (i.e., extractable from) soil and not
              biological availability.  Consequently, the risk associated with a particular
              contaminant in soil is frequently overestimated.  This incorrect calculation of
              risk could lead to the misdirection of resources in an attempt to meet
              unrealistic and possibly unnecessary clean-up goals.  In addition, sites with
              the highest levels of contamination may not be the sites of highest risk to
              human and ecological receptors.  Exposure assessments that rank environmental
              and human health risks in a way that appropriately reflects bioavailability
              will lead to more accurate risk assessments and, ultimately, to more efficient
              allocation of limited financial and natural resources.  Information about
              species differences will improve predictions of the risk of pollutants in soils
              as well as further our understanding of the factors that influence
              bioavailability.

