Title       : Acquisition of Computing Infrastructure for Bioinformatics Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0116574

Award Number: 0116574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhiping Weng zhiping@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Simon Kasif  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandor Vajda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles DeLisi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Berwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of Computing Infrastructure for Bioinformatics Research and
              Education

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Zhiping Weng at Boston University
              to establish a high-performance, cost-effective computing infrastructure to
              support the research and educational needs of the University's Bioinformatics
              Program.  Dr. Weng and six co-investigators of this grant form the
              computational core of the program.  Their research spans structural proteomics,
              functional genomics and gene expression/regulatory networks.  On a daily basis
              they work with all known sequences, all available genomes, all known protein
              structures, transcriptional levels of all genes in an organism, and the like. 
              Their computational needs far exceed currently available facilities.  Boston
              University is among the first to establish a graduate degree program in
              Bioinformatics.  The program is currently funded by an NSF IGERT grant and has
              been growing very rapidly.  The large number of students in the program places
              great demand on computing resources.
This NSF grant will allow for the
              purchase of a computer cluster dedicated to Bioinformatics research and
              educational activities at Boston University. The cluster will have the
              following components: a file server with 1 terabyte storage, an 80-node compute
              server with dual Intel 1GHz processors, 2 GB RAM, and 106 GB storage per node,
              a backup file server and a web server.  A fast giga-bit network will connect
              the file server and the compute server.  Such a cluster coincides ideally with
              the high-throughput, large-scale nature of Bioinformatics research
              programs.
The computer cluster will be able to support innovative research in
              biomolecular systems including functional genomics, structural proteomics, and
              cell systems analysis. It will enable the faculty, postdoctoral researchers,
              graduate and undergraduate students to attack research questions that require
              months of CPU time, and which could not otherwise be addressed within the
              constraints of currently available facilities. It will also greatly strengthen
              our Bioinformatics Program at Boston University, which is dedicated to training
              a new generation of scientists and biotech industry leaders capable of
              implementing high-performance computational solutions to the biological
              problems of the 21st century.

