Title       : Acquisition of Computer-Assisted Microscopy Imaging System for Cytogenetic
               Research and Training in Neuroscience and Reproductive Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0116477

Award Number: 0116477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98492              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane Lee dlee6@csulb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dessie L. A. Underwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Lee and Underwood at California
              State
University Long Beach to acquire an imaging system comprised of a
              fluorescence
-capable microscope with motorized stage, CCD camera, computer,
              and software.  
This system will provide unbiased stereology capabilities, as
              well as the ability to 
1) visualize immunofluorescent labeled samples; 2)
              produce 3-dimensional (3-D)
reconstructions; and 3) establish image databases
              accessible via the internet.
     The goal of Dr. Lee's research is to
              understand the effects of memory
formation and hormones on neurogenesis in the
              zebra finch hippocampus.  The
hippocampus of adult birds and mammals retains
              the capacity for substantial
plasticity including the birth of new cells
              (cytogenesis) and neurons
(neurogenesis) in response to a number of
              environmental influences including
learning and memory formation.  Dr. Lee
              recently found that hippocampal cells
are also born as a result of injury and
              collect around the damaged site in the
zebra finch brain.  Injured brain areas
              become rich in aromatase as well, an
enzyme that converts testosterone to
              estrogen.  Estrogens, in turn, are known
to promote differentiation and
              survival of neurons.  These intriguing results
are being used to investigate
              factors influencing cytogenesis and
differentiation of new cells into neurons
              and glia.  The aim then is to exploit
the ability of the avian hippocampus to
              respond to environmental influences by
training birds on learning tasks,
              lesioning the hippocampus, injecting them
with BrdU (a mitotic marker), and
              assessing the patterns of cell proliferation,
migration, and/or
              differentiation through the use of immunohistochemical
techniques.  New
              BrdU-positive cells will be visualized and counted using the
MicroBrightField
              StereoInvestigator imaging system; double labeling procedures
will be used to
              determine whether new cells are neurons or glia.
     The goal of Dr.
              Underwood's research is to understand the relationship
between chromosomal
              abnormalities, a biased sex ratio, and the evolution of
"excess" males in the
              madrone butterfly.  Dr. Underwood's research led to the
discovery of
              abnormalities in chromosome pairing during germ cell formation in
the madrone
              butterfly.  One subspecies shows a normal complement of 26
bivalents; however,
              another subspecies shows extreme variations from cell to
cell within the same
              individual.  The primary sex ratio of the abnormal
subspecies is 75% male
              while the normal subspecies appears to have a normal sex
ratio of 50% males. 
              Butterflies have chromosomal sex determination.
Spermatogenesis is extremely
              abnormal with multivalent chromosomal associations
and lagging chromosomes
              formed during metaphase and anaphase, and the
production of micronuclei
              associated with sperm nuclei.
     NSF funding will also make it possible to
              digitize samples obtained from a
variety of research projects.  This will
              result in public databases to be used
by interested scientists with access to
              the internet and thus offers an
unparalleled opportunity to share information
              both locally and globally.
Individuals from multiple labs will perform
              procedures remotely thus broadening
the scope of research and increasing the
              opportunity for publication and
dissemination of results, while minimizing
              labor and the number of animals.
Beyond the immediate research applications,
              instructors and their students will
be empowered through accessibility to data
              previously reserved for only a
select few.  Image databases, accessed as
              classroom exercises, will expose
students to topical and exciting new research
              as well as train them in the use
of 21st century technology thus advancing
              science and giving them a competitive
edge.


