Title       : Acquisition of Electron Microscope at the University of Michigan-Dearborn
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0116468

Award Number: 0116468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pravansu S. Mohanty   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vaman M. Naik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kent S. Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ghassan T. Kridli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pankaj K. Mallick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The University of Michigan-Dearborn is a non-PhD granting institution. This
              award from the Major Research Instrumentation program will allow the University
              of Michigan-Dearborn to acquire a variable pressure scanning electron
              microscope (VP-SEM) and with a energy dispersive x-ray (EDX) to support ongoing
              research and education in engineering and science. The long-term objective of
              the college is to establish a world-class manufacturing education base.
              Significant amounts of experimental data are being generated in currently
              existing centers at the University. However researchers are seriously limited
              in their ability to examine the microscopic phenomena dictating physical
              behavior. A scanning electron microscope with an energy dispersive x-ray
              analytic tool will help overcoming some of the most troublesome bottlenecks in
              understanding the microscopic phenomena and their impact on physical behavior.
              This new equipment will benefit a broad range of research involving polymers,
              metals, composites, electronic materials, geological sciences as well as
              biology. The university has committed in matching funds to make this facility.
              A user-fee system will be set up to cover expenses for expendable supplies and
              maintenance. This equipment will be located within the engineering laboratory
              building of the University of Michigan-Dearborn. The instrument will be
              integrated into several courses for education and training of students. Local
              industry will indirectly benefit.  

The University of Michigan-Dearborn is a
              non-PhD granting institution. This award from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program will allow the University of Michigan-Dearborn to
              acquire a variable pressure scanning electron microscope (VP-SEM) and with a
              energy dispersive x-ray (EDX) to support ongoing research and education in
              engineering and science. The long-term objective of the college is to establish
              a world-class manufacturing education base. Significant amounts of experimental
              data are being generated in currently existing centers at the University.
              However researchers are seriously limited in their ability to examine the
              microscopic phenomena dictating physical behavior. A scanning electron
              microscope with an energy dispersive x-ray analytic tool will help overcoming
              some of the most troublesome bottlenecks in understanding the microscopic
              phenomena and their impact on physical behavior. This new equipment will
              benefit a broad range of research involving polymers, metals, composites,
              electronic materials, geological sciences as well as biology. The university
              has committed in matching funds to make this facility. A user-fee system will
              be set up to cover expenses for expendable supplies and maintenance. This
              equipment will be located within the engineering laboratory building of the
              University of Michigan-Dearborn. The instrument will be integrated into several
              courses for education and training of students. Local industry will indirectly
              benefit.

