Title       : Collaborative Research: Initiation and Maintenance of Population Maxima of the
               Ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi in Northern Coastal Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0116236

Award Number: 0116236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243668             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Costello costello@providence.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Providence College
	      River Avenue and Eaton Street
	      Providence, RI  02918    401/865-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,5915,5920,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Initiation and Maintenance of Population Maxima of the Ctenophore Mnemiopsis
              leidyi in Northern Coastal Waters

Substantial increases in peak
              concentrations of the ctenophore Mnemiopsis leidyi have occurred in the last
              decade in Narragansett Bay, an estuary at the northern boundary of the
              geographic distribution of this species. The seasonal timing of Mnemiopsis
              pulses has also shifted from late summer to early spring during years with
              earlier warming of bay water temperatures. Significant ecological consequences
              of this temporal introduction are potentially great. Mnemiopsis is now abundant
              during the peak period of fish spawning in the region. Severely depleted stocks
              of zooplankton have been observed in spring and summer of 2000. Similar changes
              in seasonality and abundance of the species are likely to be occurring in other
              estuaries in the northeast. Despite the clear ecological importance of large
              pulses of ctenophores, the quantitative basis for understanding conditions
              giving rise to rapid population increases is limited. While temperature and
              food supply must ultimately be dominant variables controlling growth and
              reproduction of this species, there is little information about reproduction of
              over-wintering populations or conditions
which favor growth of larvae in
              spring.  In this study the investigators will conduct field and laboratory
              studies of Mnemiopsis over the full annual cycle to determine effects of
              temperature, food supply and food quality on reproductive rates and larval
              growth. The role of microzooplankton, addressed in only two previous laboratory
              studies will be fully addressed in both field and laboratory components. Areas
              of Narragansett Bay which have recently been observed to sustain unexpectedly
              large population of Mnemiopsis in winter, as well as areas in which populations
              pulses are delayed until spring will be compared. Hydrographic data will be
              collected and examined for both direct and indirect effects of physical factors
              on population growth, including the role of thermal stratification in
              population pulse initiation. Given the evidence for disruptive effects on
              ecosystems of seasonal or geographic invasions of Mnemiopis leidyi and the
              limited number of studies of this species at the northern edge of its
              geographic range, justification for this study is compelling. Quantitative
              information on the influence of temperature and food on both larval and adult
              M. leidyi at the level of detail collected in this study will significantly
              advance our understanding of factors required for initiation and maintenance of
              population pulses of this species.

