Title       : Research in Quantum-Enhanced, Ultrafast Sensing and Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a0116045

Award Number: 0116045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian A. Walmsley walmsley@optics.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This document outlines a program of research to develop practical methods for
              ultrabroadband imaging with quantum enhancement of the detection sensitivity.
              In particular it presents several novel techniques for the characterization of
              ultrafast optical and X-ray waveforms, and then discusses ways to apply them to
              broadband dynamical imaging, including possibilities for going well beyond the
              shot-noise limit for phase and
amplitude measurement accuracy. The program
              covers both development of appropriate dynamical image detection, protocols for
              image transmission, and the sources of particular quantum states needed for
              enhanced sensitivity.

The program has four major experimental objectives.
              (I) The first goal consists of developing a novel method for measuring the
              conplete spatio-temporal properties of an ultrafast optical pulse. The basic
              idea involves extending interferometric methods of ultrafast pulse measurement
              into a new domain of accuracy and precision. In particular we shall develop an
              ultrafast multi-wavelength interferometry: for dynamical space-time imaging.
              (II) The second portion of our program entails the development of a novel
              method for obtaining attosecond temporal resolution for dynamical X ray
              imaging. The project will first study a recently demonstrated nonlinear optical
              mechanism for atomic ionization to implement an interferometric pulse
              measurement technique for completely characterizing the electric field of the
              attosecond pulse. This technique is based on the quantum interference on two
              pathways for ionizing an electron, which leads to an interference pattern in
              the electron energy spectrum. From this pattern the spectral phase of the
              ionizing attosecond pulse can be reconstructed using a simple, noniterative,
              algorithm. (III) Another project involves the use of entangled states of
              ultrashort photon wavepackets to implement time-resolved and quantum-enhanced
              sensitivity for near-field microscopy. This provides phase sensitivity in
              principle well beyond the shot noise limit, and will allow the development of
              ultrasensitive nanoscale measurement when combined with standard laboratory
              methods of near-field microscopy. A novel feature of the approach is that the
              nonclassical light does not need to enter the interferometer and probe the
              phase shifting object the quantum enhancement is achieved using local
              entanglement. (IV) The final effort will be to develop a means for the secure
              transmission
of images encoded in ultrashort single photons: a type of
              ultrabroadband quantum teleportation. This work explores new avenues in quantum
              communications by exploring possibilities for multimode teleportation and
              builds upon recent work in the applications in quantum optics of high-quantum
              efficiency CCD array detectors. These provide a novel tool for both quantum
              state measurement, which itself has useful imaging
applications, and for
              providing the broadband classical information needed for the teleportation
              protocol.
