Title       : Development of Integrated Seismic, Geodetic and Volcanic Gas Surveillance
               Instrumentation for Volcanic Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a0116577

Award Number: 0116577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148363             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip R. Kyle kyle@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Aster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0116577
Kyle

This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs, the
              Division of Earth Sciences, and the Office of Integrative Activities at NSF,
              supports development of an integrated instrument package for surveillance of
              volcanic gas, seismic activity, and elevation change. Seismic and geodetic
              methods are the principal tools used to monitor volcanoes, as these have been
              shown to be the most useful means of forecasting volcanic eruptions through the
              remote sensing of deviatoric stress release and intruding and withdrawing mass
              fluxes of magma. During the past 10 years, technological advances have resulted
              in a new generation of instrumentation and data acquisition methods in both
              seismology and geodesy. This collaborative project involving NM Tech
              researchers, staff from UNAVCO, and Guralp Systems will develop and deploy a
              low-power cost-effective real-time integrated instrument package of seismic,
              geodetic and environmental sensors primarily for monitoring the activity at
              active volcanoes and in tectonically active areas. The Integrated Surveillance
              Instrumentation (ISI) stations that will be developed and installed under this
              project are intended to have low power requirements (approximately 2 watts) and
              to run unattended for periods of up to 12 months under the harshest of
              environmental conditions. The plan calls for deployment of 5 ISI stations at
              Mt. Erebus and one in New Mexico. At Mt Erebus, the project will monitor
              on-going volcanic activity associated with the persistent anorthoclase
              phonolite magma lake. The NM station will monitor ongoing seismic and long-term
              deformational activity associated with the inflating Socorro magma body in the
              Rio Grande rift. The instrumentation developed should have wide application in
              both applied and basic earth science projects with the potential to contribute
              significantly to societal goals of better predicting volcanic and seismic
              natural hazards.


