Title       : Experimental Studies in High-Spin Molecular Magnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0116808

Award Number: 0116808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Myriam P. Sarachik sarachik@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the magnetic properties of molecules containing
              clusters of magnetic atoms that are exchange coupled to produce a lattice of
              identical "nanomagnets; in particular, Mn12-Acetate and Fe8.  These materials
              have a number of interesting properties: resonant spin tunneling, quantum
              interference (Berry's phase) effects in the magnetic relaxation, quantum
              coherent oscillations of the spin, and evidence for an abrupt crossover between
              thermally assisted magnetic relaxation and relaxation by pure quantum
              tunneling.  Although much progress has been made, a full understanding of these
              materials awaits the resolution of a number of important issues, including the
              strength of spin-phonon coupling, the roles of dipolar interactions and
              hyperfine fields, and the nature of the crossover between thermally-assisted
              and pure quantum tunneling.  Through measurements at very low temperatures
              using micron size Hall bars, this project will study the effect of externally
              applied transverse magnetic fields, the effect of microwave radiation, and to
              search for possible ferromagnetic or dipolar ordering.  Molecular magnets are
              interesting from a fundamental point of view because they represent the
              borderline between classical and quantum magnetism.  They are also interesting
              for their possible use for very high-density storage, and as potential
              candidates for elements in quantum computation.  Graduate students involved in
              the project receive training in fundamental experimental techniques with
              cutting edge technology. This training will prepare them for a range of careers
              in academe, industry or government.

Mn12-acetate and Fe8 are organic
              molecular crystals containing a very large number of regularly spaced,
              magnetically identical spin-10 clusters of a size that is borderline between
              the quantum and classical regimes.  Interest in these materials has been
              sparked by a remarkable series of experimental observations of
              quantum-mechanical effects, including quantum tunneling of the spin magnetic
              moment, quantum-mechanical phase interference and the superposition of quantum
              states.  Although much progress has been made, a full understanding of these
              materials awaits the resolution of a number of important issues, including the
              strength of the coupling of the spin magnetic moment to lattice vibrations, the
              roles of dipolar interactions and nuclear fields, and the nature of the
              crossover between the quantum and classical regimes.  Through measurements at
              very low temperatures using micron size Hall bars, we propose to investigate
              the effect of externally applied transverse magnetic fields, the effect of
              microwave radiation, and to search for possible ferromagnetic or dipolar
              ordering.  In addition to their interest for fundamental reasons, these
              materials are important for their possible use in very high-density storage,
              and as potential candidates for elements in quantum computation.  Graduate
              students involved in the project receive training in fundamental experimental
              techniques with cutting edge technology.  This training will prepare them for a
              range of careers in academe, industry or government. 

