Title       : Acquisition of an Eye Tracking System for Human Factors Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0116030

Award Number: 0116030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84527              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Schieber schieber@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Human Factors Psychology program at the University of South Dakota (USD)
              will purchase an ASL Model ETS-PC eye tracker for the purposes of improving its
              capacity to meet critical strategic research and research training objectives.
              This device will enable researchers to accurately and precisely measure an
              observer's 'point of fixation' in the visual field, thus allowing powerful,
              objective and verifiable inferences to be made regarding heretofore
              unobservable behavioral processes. The ETS-PC instrument has many advanced
              features making it uniquely compatible with the program's wide range of needs
              for performing quality transportation research both in the laboratory and in
              the field (e.g., while studying driving behavior with the USD advanced
              instrumented research vehicle). Three faculty members, designated as major
              users of the purchased device, will use the eye tracking system to
              significantly expand both the depth and breadth of their existing experimental
              research programs in transportation human factors. Four innovative projects
              will investigate perceptual and cognitive mechanisms mediating: (1) the
              legibility distances afforded by computer-enhanced symbol highway signs, (2)
              the visual advantages afforded by fluorescent colored traffic control devices,
              (3) the visual effectiveness of novel temporal-chromatic lighting signatures
              generated by next-generation emergency vehicle lighting technologies and (4)
              the visual workload demands imposed by advanced transportation-related
              graphical displays and interfaces. The purchase of the ETS-PC eye tracker will
              enhance current research capabilities and provide senior research personnel
              with new opportunities to attract external support from our traditional as well
              as new funding sources. The impact of these developments will also extend to
              the quality of the research training experience for graduate students enrolled
              in USD's Ph.D. program in Human Factors Psychology.
