Title       : Instrumentation To Study The Control Of Blood Pressure Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0116105

Award Number: 0116105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Carlson carlsosc@luther.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Luther College
	      700 College Drive
	      Decorah, IA  521011045    563/387-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                       A grant has been awarded to Dr. Scott Carlson at Luther College to
              acquire instrumentation necessary to pursue basic research related to control
              of blood pressure regulation.  Specifically, the grant provides funding for
              purchase of a telemetric monitoring system, isolated tissue bath setup, doppler
              flow probe system, a microtome with a freeze stage, and a gamma counter.  This
              equipment provides state-of-the-art technologies necessary for basic research
              related to rat cardiovascular physiology, and will be utilized by faculty and
              undergraduate students to pursue research projects related to cardiovascular
              control under normal and pathological conditions.   
         Three
              faculty/student research projects will be supported by this grant.  The first
              project focuses on how the rat brain receives information regarding dietary
              intake and normally responds to prevent alterations in blood pressure. The
              second study will examine the effects of diabetes on blood pressure and
              vascular function.  The third study will investigate whether estrogen protects
              cognitive function, in part by maintaining proper blood flow to regions of the
              brains associated with learning and memory.   
         The projects described
              above will allow the awardee and his students to pursue 
basic research which
              addresses significant physiological questions.  The projects 
will directly
              involve undergraduate students, giving them experience in 
cardiovascular
              research methods and in the scientific process.  Furthermore, students will
              present research at national meetings and in publication format.  It is
              expected that the equipment will increase collaborative opportunities within
              the college and with other institutions through the use of the instrumentation
              as core equipment for the Biology Department.  This instrumentation will also
              be integrated into the classroom curriculum, through a planned  "Introduction
              to Cardiovascular Research" course as well as in the current physiology
              laboratory courses.  Thus, in addition to the 6 undergraduate students which
              are currently working in the awardee's laboratory, it is expected that
              approximately 110 students will annually utilize this equipment during their
              course work.  Finally, the instrumentation will be used in the Summer Science
              Program, which exposes minority students to scientific research.  Thus,
              acquisition of this equipment will greatly benefit the educational and research
              goals to which Luther College and the National 
Science Foundation are
              committed.

