Title       : Acquisition of Microscopy Core Facility for Biological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0116149

Award Number: 0116149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78643              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean C. Hardwick jhardwick@ithaca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jason G. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc D. Servetnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ithaca College
	      Danby Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/274-3111

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Jean Hardwick at Ithaca College for the
              acquisition of a core microscopy facility for the Biology Department.  This
              instrumentation will be used by four separate faculty members with diverse
              research interests in developmental biology, comparative physiology,
              neurobiology and  plant ecology.  Specifically, these funds will be used for
              the acquisition of a research-quality compound microscope equipped with
              advanced imaging capabilities such as DIC, phase contrast  and fluorescence
              imaging.  This microscope will also be equipped with a cooled digital camera
              (CCD) and image analysis system for the capture of publication-quality
              electronic images as well as advanced image analysis. In addition, this
              facility will included a stereomicroscope with a epi-fluorescence for imaging
              of fluorescently-labeled plant and animal specimens and a dual viewing bridge
              for training students in various procedures.  
	This instrumentation will
              become a major component of a core departmental facility for microscopy which
              will complement existing equipment as well as expanding our facilities to
              include electronic imaging and analysis. Several faculty members use microscopy
              as part of their ongoing research efforts in projects including the
              localization of neuropeptides in the amphibian nervous system, analysis of the
              regulation of embryonic development in Xenopus, the physiology and biochemistry
              of mucus production in invertebrates, and the response of plants to injury. 
              All of these projects require significant analysis of tissue specimens using a
              variety of optical techniques.  For example, analysis of neuropeptide
              localization utilizes the technique of immunohistochemistry to determine the
              specific organization and function of neurotransmitters in the nervous system. 
              The developmental studies use gene markers, such as the green fluorescent
              protein (GFP), to investigate the molecular signals underlying specific aspects
              of development.  The study of mucus production requires histological analysis
              of the mucus producing organs themselves, and the analysis of plant response to
              injury will also use a GFP marker to determine the cellular responses to insect
              herbivore.  Thus, this facility will become an integral part of the research
              facilities for a wide range of current faculty as well as future hires.  
The
              Biology department at Ithaca College has a long-standing commitment to the
              involvement of undergraduates in research.  All biology majors are required to
              spend at least one semester doing research in a faculty member's lab. 
              Undergraduates are involved in every facet of faculty research and are trained
              in the use of all equipment associated with that work.  This would mean that,
              with at least four different faculty members using this facility as a part of
              their research program, a significant number of undergraduates will also have
              the opportunity to use this equipment.  Undergraduates at Ithaca College
              routinely present their research efforts at conferences and are included as
              co-authors on publications. Continued involvement of undergraduates in ongoing
              scientific research is critical in stimulating students to pursue careers in
              science, as well as increasing their overall scientific literacy.

