Title       : MRI: Acquistion of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy System for Surface
               Chemical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0116260

Award Number: 0116260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125155             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Batteas batteas@postbox.csi.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Staten Island
	      2800 Victory Boulevard
	      Staten Island, NY  10314    718/982-2254

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program to City University of
              New York-Staten Island is for the acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron
              Spectroscopy (XPS) system to carry out basic surface chemical analysis in
              support of innovative surface and interfacial research efforts. The research
              topics supported include: nanotribology; development of surface chemical
              sensors; surface bound photonic devices; studies of molecular interactions at
              interfaces, growth of II-VI wide bandgap materials and basic surface
              functionaliztion.  XPS is a highly sensitive surface analytical tool that
              allows for the details of surface chemical composition and local chemical
              environment (such as oxidation state and to some extent molecular connectivity)
              to be evaluated for a variety of materials. The sensitivity of this technique
              provides information on chemical concentrations at the surface for routinely of
              fraction of monolayers of a material adsorbed on a surface. This
              instrumentation will also support a large number of educational activities both
              at The College of Staten Island and within CUNY. This includes annual use in an
              Instrumental Methods in Chemistry Course (taught by the PI), undergraduate
              research activities in The College of Staten Island's NSF supported REU program
              on Polymers and Biopolymers, graduate education and training in our NSF
              supported IGERT program on Nanostructural Materials and Devices, and as part of
              a 1 semester laboratory rotation course in our newly formed Ph.D. program in
              Nanotechnology and Materials Chemistry. The instrumentation will have wide
              usage and improve the overall research and educational capabilities of the
              participating faculty as well as the institution.
This award from the Major
              Research Instrumentation Program to City University of New York-Staten Island
              is for the acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) system to
              carry out basic surface chemical analysis in support of innovative surface and
              interfacial research efforts. The research topics supported include:
              nanotribology; development of surface chemical sensors; surface bound photonic
              devices; studies of molecular interactions at interfaces, growth of II-VI wide
              bandgap materials and basic surface functionaliztion.  XPS is a highly
              sensitive surface analytical tool that allows for the details of surface
              chemical composition and local chemical environment (such as oxidation state
              and to some extent molecular connectivity) to be evaluated for a variety of
              materials. The sensitivity of this technique provides information on chemical
              concentrations at the surface for routinely of fraction of monolayers of a
              material adsorbed on a surface. This instrumentation will also support a large
              number of educational activities both at The College of Staten Island and
              within CUNY. This includes annual use in an Instrumental Methods in Chemistry
              Course (taught by the PI, undergraduate research activities in The College of
              Staten Island's NSF supported REU program on Polymers and Biopolymers, graduate
              education and training in our NSF supported IGERT program on Nanostructural
              Materials and Devices, and as part of a 1 semester laboratory rotation course
              in our newly formed Ph.D. program in Nanotechnology and Materials Chemistry.
              The instrumentation will have wide usage and improve the overall research and
              educational capabilities of the participating faculty as well as the
              institution.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program to
              City University of New York Staten-Island is for the acquisition of an X-ray
              Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) system to carry out basic surface chemical
              analysis in support of innovative surface and interfacial research efforts. The
              instrumentation will have wide usage and improve the overall research and
              educational capabilities of the participating faculty as well as the
              institution. The research topics supported include: nanotribology; development
              of surface chemical sensors; surface bound photonic devices; studies of
              molecular interactions at interfaces, growth of II-VI wide bandgap materials
              and basic surface functionaliztion. XPS is a highly sensitive surface
              analytical tool that allows for the details of surface chemical composition and
              local chemical environment (such as oxidation state and to some extent
              molecular connectivity) to be evaluated for a variety of materials. This
              instrumentation will also support a large number of educational activities both
              at The College of Staten Island and within CUNY. This includes annual use in an
              Instrumental Methods in Chemistry Course (taught by the PI), undergraduate
              research activities in The College of Staten Island' s NSF supported REU
              program on Polymers and Biopolymers, graduate education and training in our NSF
              supported IGERT program on Nanostructural Materials and Devices, and as part of
              a 1 semester laboratory rotation course in our newly formed Ph.D. program in
              Nanotechnology and Materials Chemistry. 

