Title       : MRI: Development of a Biology Research Laboratory for Art and Communication
               Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0116864

Award Number: 0116864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98699              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zafra M. Lerman zafral@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Y. Ilio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia College
	      600 S Michigan
	      Chicago, IL  606051901    312/663-1600

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Zafra Lerman and Dr. Ken Ilio at the Science
              Institute of Columbia College, Chicago to establish a state-of-the-art cell and
              tissue culture laboratory. The proposed laboratory will support the research of
              Dr. Kenneth Ilio
(co-PI) on prostate development that he will be conducting
              with students taking Science Institute courses.  In particular, he is devising
              a method to isolate stem cells, the most primitive cells in the adult prostate
              membranous tissue.  A major component of this research is cell culture,
              particularly defining culture conditions that will shift
differentiation of
              candidate primitive stem cells to a more differentiated adult cell.  The
              long-term goal of this research is to establish both normal and transformed
              cell lines of specific lineages that are derived from the stem cells of the
              prostate.  The differentiated cells that arise from stem cells could be
              valuable tools as cell culture models for the study of prostate normal and
              abnormal development, particularly cancer development.
	The cell culture lab
              complements existing laboratories in the Science
Institute, namely (1) the
              Science Visualization and Communications Laboratory where students can produce
              2-D and 3-D models of scientific concepts and processes, and (2) an analytical
              laboratory where students can perform and replicate sophisticated experiments
              similar to those used in forensic and environmental investigations.  The
              proposed laboratory will service the cell culture needs of all the biology
              courses taught at the Science Institute.  Students will gain hands-on exposure
              in and basic understanding of cell biology in both microscopic and molecular
              levels.  In addition, acquisition of the cell culture laboratory will allow
              Chicago public school teachers in the Science Institute's network to conduct
              projects during the summer as well as during the academic year.  These research
              projects will enhance the teachers' instructional methods and materials in
              their classrooms.
	The benefits of this curriculum to the general public are
              substantial by providing a strong science background to Columbia College's
              television, radio, journalism, education and other students, and to teachers in
              the Chicago public schools, the Science Institute is
positively influencing
              the education of millions of people through these professionals.  Providing
              these communication and education students with first-hand research experience 
              will guarantee that an accurate and positive image of science will be
              communicated to the public, and will dramatically improve the public
              understanding of science.  It is anticipated that the exposure of teachers to
              this proposed facility and
to the creative methods of teaching developed by
              the Science Institute will increase the number of students seeking careers in
              the sciences. Project results will be reported in professional conferences and
              in scientific journals, in addition to the print and electronic media that
              regularly report on programs of the Science Institute.



