Title       : Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0116835

Award Number: 0116835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas Holzenburg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Crooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Andreas Holzenburg (PI) and Dr. Richard Crooks
              (Co-PI) at Texas A&M University to acquire a state-of-the-art field-emission
              scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) equipped for electron backscattered
              diffraction (EBSD), cathodoluminescence (CL), energy dispersive analysis (EDS),
              and tensile/heating stage testing, in addition to the more standard secondary
              electron (SE) and backscattered electron (BSE) imaging.  The microscope as
              specified in the proposal will allow high resolution imaging using BSE, SE and
              CL, elemental microanalysis, orientation contrast imaging and automatic
              orientation analysis.  The tensile heating/cooling stage will allow imaging
              during experiments in tension or compression, with heating functions to 1200 C.
               Another strength of the microscope is the geometric arrangement of  the
              detectors and stage enabling CL, EDS, EBSD and tensile/heating stage testing in
              various simultaneous applications.  The instrument will also support projects
              requiring imaging of uncotaed biological specimens.  It therefore lends itself
              to uniquely support a wide range of diverse and interdisciplinary research
              activities in engineering as well as the biological, chemical, geological and
              physical sciences. 

The imaging and analytical capabilities of the
              instrument as described above will enhance specific research projects in a
              number of areas including the following: development of novel chemical sensors
              and catalyst materials; semiconductors, high-temperature superconductors;
              micro-electromechanical systems; morphology and composition distribution in
              polymer systems; soil morphology; contaminants in near-surface geologic systems
              and hazardous waste sites; roles of fluids in rock deformation; evaluation of
              earthquake risks; creep compaction of reservoir sands; origin of magma;
              rheology of the Earth's crust and mantle; mechanical property-microstructure
              relationship of advanced materials; and phospholipid bilayers and integral
              membrane proteins; surface topography of biological specimens.

The exact
              configuration was chosen to effectively underpin interdisciplinary research and
              training needs existing on campus at Texas A&M University (College Station) as
              well as within the region (Lamar University, Sam Houston Sate University and
              Prairie View A&M University, USDA).  The instrument will also enhance
              educational activities directed towards undergraduate and graduate studies. 
              Research activities at Texas A&M and other regional universities (including
              primarily undergraduate institutions) are intimately linked with teaching, and
              the FE-SEM will be used within coursework as well as to advance student
              research.  Furthermore, ongoing educational outreach, through web-based
              activities, provides access to these technologies to K-12 students. 


