Title       : Investigating the Interrelated Development of Mathematics and Literacy in Urban
               Secondary Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0231807

Award Number: 0231807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1062084            (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen M. Doerr hmdoerr@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joanna O. Masingila  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen Hinchman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly Chandler-Olcott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The central idea in this proposed work is to conceptualize the nature and
              development of teachers' knowledge as they, in turn, learn about how students
              in culturally diverse urban secondary schools negotiate the literacy demands of
              reform-based mathematics curricula. We make three central claims as a rationale
              for this proposed work. First, the mathematical tasks that students and
              teachers encounter in the reform-based secondary school curricula represent a
              significant shift from traditional curricula in terms of the literacy demands
              they make on students and teachers. Second, students in urban settings, where
              literacy and mathematics achievement often lags behind achievement of students
              in other settings, are at great risk for not being able to meet the increased
              literacy demands of the reform-based curricula and of the communications
              standard put forward by the NCTM. Third, secondary mathematics teachers are
              underprepared to mediate the intersections between mathematics and literacy.
              Our driving perspective in this work will be to understand the nature of what
              teachers need to know to support students' development of mathematical
              communication in ways that lead to effective learning of algebra and to
              understand how it is that this knowledge is developed among a community of
              urban mathematics teachers. 

In this project, we will investigate these
              research questions:

How do teachers understand student use of the language
              of algebra for mathematical communication when using reform-based mathematics
              curricula in diverse, urban settings?

How do teachers' understandings about
              the language of algebra for mathematical communication develop in ways that
              lead to the effective teaching of algebra?

We will use qualitative research
              methods to explore the sociocultural aspects of mathematics communication.
              These analyses will describe the nature and development of the teachers'
              learning, in the context of the students' learning of algebra, using reform-
              based curricula. We will use quantitative measures of mathematics and literacy
              performance to discern relative effectiveness of teachers' instructional
              strategies that attend to the literacy demands of the curricula.  This study
              will address important theoretical issues in understanding the underlying
              structures of language in the acquisition of algebraic thinking and learning. 
              The analyses of the data on the learning and growth of teachers through an
              examination of the artifacts of practice will contribute to theoretical issues
              as well as pragmatic issues in the use of reformed-based curricula by secondary
              mathematics teachers.  

The broader impact of this project will be: (1) a
              model and underlying principles for how teachers acquire knowledge in areas in
              which they are underprepared; (2) processes for teachers to analyze
              mathematical tasks and their contexts in terms of their literacy demands; (3)
              principles for transforming their analyses into practice; (4) principles for
              ways of using multimedia cases of practice to support teacher
