Title       : GK-12, Wayne State University/ Detroit Public Schools Science and Mathematics
               Teaching Fellowship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a0231883

Award Number: 0231883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1498265            (Estimated)
Investigator: Regina Zibuck rzibuck@chem.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Varner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria M. Ferreira  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Carl Freeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Building upon and expanding a previous GK-12 project (DGE 9979550), this
              partnership between the Colleges of Science and Education at Wayne State
              University (WSU) and the administration and teachers of the Detroit Public
              Schools (DPS) Fellow/teacher teams is working in two Detroit inner city middle
              schools, (Foch and Hally). The teams negotiate the role of each team member and
              discuss science and mathematics content and concepts; effective classroom
              management techniques; and teaching methods and the research on teaching and
              learning that undergirds them during summer workshops in pedagogy and classroom
              management and academic year Math and Science workshops. The subject foci of
              these workshops are determined by the requirements of state standards and the
              needs of the middle school classes.  They provide fellows with content
              knowledge outside of their major and give the teacher and fellow teams a more
              coherent view of middle school math and science. In addition to their work with
              teachers in the classroom, the Fellows organize and participate in family
              mathematics and science nights, assist with science fairs, and forge ties
              between the schools and community based outreach organizations, such as The
              Greening of Detroit, Earth Force and Friends of the Rouge.  Wayne State
              science, math and engineering faculty visit the partner schools and conduct
              science and math activities with the students. The broader impacts of the
              program include the strong partnership being forged between the students and
              faculty of Wayne State and the students and faculty of two urban schools with
              predominantly African American student populations and the many community
              groups, including parents, it is enlisting in its effort to build a local
              comprehensive learning community that nourishes children's interests and
              abilities in mathematics, the sciences and technology.  Overall broader student
              and teacher contacts are being developed and there is an increase in the number
              of faculty participating in outreach activities.   Part of the support for this
              project comes from the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences. 
              

Title:  GK-12, Detroit Science and Mathematics Fellowship Program,
              
Institution: Wayne State University  
PI/co-PI: Regina Zibuck, PI; Maria
              Ferreira, Carl Freeman, Wayne State; Karen Harrison, Nancy Varner, Detroit
              Public Schools
Funding: $1,498,265 total for 3 years
Partner School District:
              Detroit Public 
Fellows per year: 6 graduate and 14 undergraduate  
Target
              grades: 6-8 
Setting: Urban
NSF supported disciplines involved: Science and
              Mathematics    

