Title       : A Collaborative Project: Development of an Undergraduate Data Mining Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2002  
File        : a0231245

Award Number: 0231245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20489              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guozhu Dong gdong@cs.wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Data mining is an emerging field. The knowledge of data mining has been in
              demand in the IT industry and in new areas like bioinformatics, information
              assurance, and homeland security where data are massive. Traditionally, data
              mining courses are offered at the graduate level; now, this type of course is
              needed at the undergraduate level to increase interest in this area and address
              labor market demands. This collaborative project between Arizona and Wright
              State Universities develops an undergraduate data mining course for junior and
              seniors. The objectives are: develop a course that can be taught either by
              semester ASU or quarter WSU term, establish vehicles and approaches to increase
              student retention in the course, and promote data mining skills essential to
              problem solving. The objectives are accomplished in several ways: designing a
              pre-assessment instrument measuring student knowledge of data mining, and
              on-line tutorials; develop course materials that will enhance problem solving
              skills through reflection, critique, exercises, discerning theory from
              practice; and using a continuous evaluation process that addresses not only
              student achievement but also enrollment retention. Input from leading IT
              industry is used to incorporate immediate practical needs. The results of the
              project including evaluation are published via various means. Notes, supporting
              materials, projects, and exams are made available on the course web site. 
