Title       : Teaching, Experimentation And Mentoring in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0231796

Award Number: 0231796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1466807            (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Blankenship jblankenship@uop.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judi S. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick R. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Pharmaceutical and Chemical Sciences Graduate Program (PCSP), a joint
              program from the School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry in the College
              of the Pacific at the University of Pacific in Stockton, California, is placing
              eight Project Fellows (graduate students) each year in grades 7-12 classrooms
              within San Joaquin County, California. Project partners include the San Joaquin
              County Office of Education, and retired scientists from UC Berkeley's Lawrence
              Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore, California. Project objectives are
              1) to enhance science lessons and labs with standards based inquiry approach
              provided by targeted teachers and Project Fellows, and 2) to complete a
              yearlong research investigation matched to grade level state science standards
              which involves students and is conceived, led and carried out through a
              collaboration between teachers, Project Fellows, master teachers, retired
              scientists, and faculty mentors (TEAM Science). TEAM Science combines
              excellence in teaching, an emphasis on inquiry and experimentation, and the
              important benefits of retired scientist and university faculty mentoring. 
              Eight teams recruited for each year of the project consist of two elementary
              grades 7-8 teachers, two 9-12 teachers, one retired research scientist, one
              Project Fellow, and one master teacher or university faculty mentor. Teachers
              recruited for the teams are a combination of non-, partial or newly
              credentialed teachers and experienced credentialed teachers. Each member of the
              eight teams participates in the following activities according to their role:
              1) presentations on inquiry teaching and its application, and support for its
              implementation, 2) networking, ongoing support and coaching for Project Fellows
              and collaborating teachers and faculty, and 3) training in the research process
              which is enhanced through interaction with the retired research scientists
              including a final research project presentation at a university research
              symposium. Project participants are exposed to the National Board for
              Professional Teaching Standards certification process, science careers, cutting
              edge content presentations; inquiry based teaching, and specific strategies for
              English language learners.  The teams represent a unique collaboration that
              brings together a blending of content and pedagogy expertise, teacher
              professional development leadership and school district involvement. Team
              meetings and training sessions during the summer and throughout the year target
              the building of a community of learners to enhance science content expertise
              and pedagogy for teachers and achievement for students with the assistance of
              graduate students, master teachers, retired scientists and faculty
              mentors.

Project title:  Teaching, Experimentation and Mentoring in
              Science
Institution:  University of the Pacific
PI/Co-PI: James Blankenship,
              Patrick Jones, Judi Wilson
Partner School Districts:  San Joaquin County,
              Lincoln Unified, Linden Unified, Stockton Unified, Ripon Unified, Tracy
              Unified, Manteca Unified, Galt unified
Funding: $ 1,466,807 total for 3
              years
Number of fellows/year: 8 graduate
Setting:  urban, rural,
              suburban
Target audience: 7-12
NSF supported disciplines involved: biology,
              chemistry


