Title       : On-Line Support for Object-Oriented Programming Language Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0231328

Award Number: 0231328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2003  
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert N. Moll moll@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen R. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher R. Eliot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the issues of attracting, engaging, and competently
              training students in computer science by developing innovative multimedia-based
              instructional software for introductory computer science classes. The software
              tools is built on top of an existing system called Online Web-based Learning
              (OWL), a system that has been used with great success in chemistry, physics,
              and mathematics. 
 
This project identifies three broad characteristics of
              first year CS instruction in object-oriented (OO) programming instruction,
              particularly in Java: 1) there is too much material for students to learn in a
              single 14 week semester; 2) staffing in introductory courses is stretched too
              thinly and devotes too much time to background chores such as grading; and 3)
              because of very uneven instruction in high schools and varying expectations
              about the purpose of programming instruction, student competence, interest, and
              expectation varies greatly in a single class. Moreover three additional
              features characterize defects in teaching strategies: 1) students are reluctant
              to read code (programs) carefully; 2) students often complete the first two
              semesters of Java programming instruction with a very poorly developed sense of
              high-level design; and 3) students are isolated and work together poorly. 

              
We are implementing the following pedagogical and technical remedies for
              these problems in the context of the first two courses in a traditional CS
              curriculum, introduction to programming and data structures. These remedies
              include: the development of a wide range of on-line exercises that teach about
              the fundamental concepts of OO programming and data structures; the development
              of exercises that train students to be careful code-readers; the development of
              exercises that teach students first to understand code from a UML perspective,
              and second to use UML thinking to design code at a high level; and finally,
              through the mechanism of an informal drop-in center, and through the
              development of multi-student on-line exercises, we train students to
              collaborate more effectively with their peers. 

