Title       : PLTL National Dissemination: Building a National Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0231349

Award Number: 0231349
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1532880            (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Gosser gosser@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Gaines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor S. Strozak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pratibha Varma-Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As the faculty, staff, and administrators of institutions of higher learning
              respond to the call to shift to student-centered pedagogy, there is a need to
              inform them of robust and flexible curriculum reforms that have documented
              success.  This project seeks to create a national dissemination network for the
              Peer-Lead Team Learning (PLTL) teaching strategy.  
PLTL is an instructional
              model that emphasizes student achievement through active learning in a peer-led
              workshop.  The workshops are integrated into regular coursework and provide an
              opportunity for students to engage in the workshop discussion and problem
              solving activities under the guidance of a trained undergraduate leader. 
In
              prior work, the PLTL Workshop Project has managed to stimulate interest, deepen
              understanding, assist implementation, and develop new leadership in PLTL in
              biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics across a wide range of
              institutions. The project has also built partnerships that enable science
              students to broaden their career and professional interests and has introduced
              the pedagogy to the high school sector.  In this phase of the project, the
              emphasis is on consolidating this informal network and engaging this faculty
              fully in the national dissemination effort. The network of faculty committed to
              PLTL will also conduct research regarding student learning in the context of a
              well-defined pedagogical model. 
A final goal of this project is to mobilize
              the project network to increase the number of peer-leaders who join a teacher
              preparation program, thus creating a large nationwide pool of science and
              mathematics majors who may become highly qualified teachers. 

