Title       : Centerpiece Projects: Developing Large-scale, Interdisciplinary Design
               Experiences for Freshman Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0231231

Award Number: 0231231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74921              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark H. Somerville mark.somerville@olin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Burt S. Tilley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jill Crisman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Stolk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin W. Olin College
	      1735 Great Plain Avenue
	      Needham, MA  024921245    /   -

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the last twenty years, NSF and the engineering community have called for
              systemic changes in engineering education, including a shift to
              interdisciplinary approaches, increased emphasis on teaming and communication,
              and greater engineering practice and design throughout the curriculum. Our
              project involves centerpiece projects, a substantial, motivational, design
              project that reinforces and integrates science and math content for the
              freshman year. These projects could lower the barriers associated with adoption
              of integrated curricula and offer synergistic reinforcement of benefits not
              fully exploited in other curricular approaches. Our project involves the
              development, implementation, and assessment of prototype curricular materials
              for centerpiece projects. The results of our study will be disseminated via
              publications, presentations, and electronic distribution. The interdisciplinary
              centerpiece projects are transferable to a variety of institutions, and a full
              development program, including beta testing at other institutions, will be
              pursued should the prototypes prove promising. Centerpiece projects are
              grounded in established pedagogical methods, address calls for
              interdisciplinary approaches, and are an attempt to help attract and retain
              members of underrepresented groups. In short, centerpiece projects represent a
              significant opportunity to improve retention and learning in the freshman year.
