Title       : SBIR Phase I: Speculative Compilation for Energy Efficency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a0231492

Award Number: 0231492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Csaba Moritz andras@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : BlueRISC
	      28 Dana Street
	      Amherst, MA  010022206    413/545-2442

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will outline a plan
              to commercialize the retargetable power-aware compilation technology that we
              have developed over the past several years. The central thesis of this proposal
              is that much speculative information about a program can be extracted at
              compile time that is currently not exploited. This information can then be
              exposed and used in making operational decisions (such as throttling various
              system sub- units) to reduce power consumption with minimal (or no) impact on
              performance. Our approach relies primarily on compiler-based energy reductions,
              rather than on circuit and architectural techniques. The key difference between
              our work and that of others is that we do not require all our compiler-derived
              information to be provably correct: all that we require is that predictions are
              correct often enough that they can be usefully exploited in making
              resource-control decisions. Relaxing the requirement to be provably correct in
              making predictions (of, for instance, the instruction-level parallelism of
              certain portions of a program) greatly reduces the complexity of otherwise
              highly sophisticated analysis techniques (e.g., flow-sensitive alias analysis)
              and expands their scope to large and complex applications. 
     Extensive
              preliminary work has been carried out to validate this approach. We believe
              this approach is orthogonal to many other power-aware approaches currently
              being used, and that its effects can be additive to these traditional
              approaches. Further, the nature of our approach lends it to being retrofitted
              to current technology. Extensive analysis of the significant power-aware
              computing market indicates the high level of applicability of our techniques to
              a very wide range of applications.

