Title       : GK-12: Middle School Investigators in Environmental Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0231857

Award Number: 0231857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1267299            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy J. McMillan nmcmilla@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Summary

New Mexico State University is partnering with the three
              public school districts in south-central New Mexico and the Chihuahuan Desert
              Nature Park (CDNP), a non-profit organization that provides environmental
              science experiences for K-12 teachers and students.  The Fellows, graduate
              students in biology, chemistry, biochemistry and geology, partner with middle
              school science teachers and the CDNP to use weather software produced by AWS
              Convergence Technologies, Inc. to allow students, Fellows, teachers, and the
              CDNP staff to access, process and analyze weather data from over 6,000
              locations nationwide.  The teams are involved in both implementing existing
              CNDP and AWS learning modules and developing new modules that integrate weather
              data, geology, biology, and chemistry to fit curricular needs and address New
              Mexico and national science education standards. The broader impacts of this
              activity include the mentoring relationships developed between the middle
              school students and the Fellows who work with them; the increased interest of
              middle school students in pursuing STEM studies and careers; the enhanced
              abilities of participating teachers to develop climate focused classrooms
              modules reflecting the teachers' increased content knowledge and their
              increased comfort with inquiry-based learning techniques.  The fellows are
              developing improved communication skills (especially with non-scientists), and
              knowledge of teaching methods and learning processes.  In addition the
              interdisciplinary nature of the teams are resulting in increased Fellow
              appreciation for interdisciplinary research and an enhanced understanding of
              the broader scientific and social implications of their research.

Title of
              Project: GK-12: Middle School Student Investigators in Environmental
              Science
Institution: New Mexico State University
PI/Co-PI: Nancy J. McMillan,
              New Mexico State University; Stephanie Bestelmeyer, Chihuahuan Desert Nature
              Park; Erlinda Martinez, Las Cruces Public Schools District;
Cynthia Nava,
              Gadsden Public Schools District; Georgia Lane, Hatch Public Schools
              District
Partner School Districts:  Las Cruces, Gadsden, Hatch 
Budget:
              1,267,299 total for three years
No of Fellows/year: 11 Graduate
              Fellows
Target Audience:  Middle School 
Setting:  Urban, Rural
Disciplines:
              Biology, Chemistry, Biochemistry, Geology

