Title       : GK-12: Exploring California Biodiversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0231877

Award Number: 0231877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1432160            (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary G. Gillespie gillespi@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary E. Power  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig C. Moritz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Lindberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald L. Dahlsten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The overall objective of the project is to inspire K-12 students in the study
              of
biodiversity and give graduate fellows an understanding of issues in K-12
              education. This project connects the museums and field stations at UC Berkeley
              with the local K-12 community.  Early in the academic year, the graduate
              fellows take the K-12 students and their teachers on a field trip to one of the
              Berkeley Natural History Field Stations that allow access to diverse natural
              habitats in California. The students collect natural history items that form
              the kernel of subsequent classroom activities. Together with the graduate
              fellows, the school students curate and/or identify the specimens collected
              using additional information from the large BNHM collections. The K-12 students
              and teachers enter specimen data and associated information into a database,
              which is linked to the already established databases of the BNHMs, and has a
              web interface. They then use interpretive tools to study their data. The
              students develop hypotheses, based on the information collected and analyses
              performed, and test these in the field. The data that the students generate and
              associated interpretations are shared among participating schools, and the
              information is made accessible to schools throughout the Bay Area. There are
              broad impacts from this project to a number of beneficiaries.  The PIs and
              graduate fellows benefit from (i) the expanded database on spatial and temporal
              patterns of biodiversity, information that is critical to developing hypotheses
              as to historical processes responsible for biogeographic patterns, current
              factors affecting distributions, and future trajectories; and (ii) development
              of skills in communication and leadership. The K-12 teachers benefit from
              direct involvement in research and enrichment in the approach to, and
              understanding of, evolutionary biology, including a strong sense of
              participation in monitoring of biodiversity. The schools benefit from the
              enhanced access to technology, and development of their own natural history
              collections and associated databases coupled with interpretive
              tools.

Project title: GK-12: Exploring California Biodiversity
              
Institution:  University of California Berkeley
PI/Co-PI: Rosemary
              Gillespie, Donald Dahlsteen, David Lindbergh, Craig Moritz, Mary Power
Partner
              School Districts:  West Contra Costa Unified, 
Funding: $ 1,432,160 total for
              3 years
No of fellows/yr: 6 graduate, 2undergraduate, yr 1; 8 graduate, 8
              undegraduate yr 2,3
Setting:  Urban
Target audience: middle-high school
NSF
              supported disciplines involved: Science and Mathematics, Environmental
              Science



