Title       : SBIR Phase I: Automated Pattern Recognition in Images Produced by Comprehensive
               Two-Dimensional Gas Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  2002  
File        : a0231746

Award Number: 0231746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Reichenbach   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GC Imaging
	      PO Box 57403
	      Lincoln, NE  685057403    402/310-4503

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 5371,9139,9150,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project initiates rigorous
              investigation of automated pattern recognition in images produced by
              comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography. Comprehensive two-dimensional
              gas chromatography (GCxGC) is an emerging technology for chemical separation
              that provides a multiplicative increase in separation capacity over traditional
              GC.  With this greatly increased performance, GCxGC generates data in
              significantly larger quantity and with significantly greater complexity.  The
              quantity and complexity of GCxGC data makes human analyses of GCxGC images
              difficult and time-consuming and motivates the need for automated processing. 
              This Phase I project undertakes both experimental and theoretical
              investigations into automating the process of matching observed patterns of
              chemical separations against previously recorded patterns annotated by human
              experts. The goals are to determine promising statistical models for GCxGC
              pattern matching and to demonstrate the feasibility of automated recognition.
              In this Phase I work, important anticipated results include statistical
              characterization of pattern variations and warping in GCxGC images, a catalog
              of useful annotations of previously observed pattern templates, and development
              of a prototype algorithm for automated pattern recognition. Phase I results,
              characterizing GCxGC patterns, cataloging annotations, and demonstrating the
              feasibility of automated processing, will provide a foundation for Phase II
              research aimed at developing commercially sign cant GCxGC methods.
This
              research has high potential impact for a variety of applications.  Commercial
              applications of GC include analyses of petroleum, environmental samples, foods
              and beverages, fragrances, and toxins (e.g., chemical warfare agents).  The
              availability of software for automated recognition of chemical components from
              GCxGC images will facilitate adoption of GCxGC technology in laboratories using
              traditional GC and will contribute to the development of new markets, which
              require superior separation performance.

