Title       : NSF/USDOT Development and Testing of a Vehicle Based Zero-Public-Infrastructure
               Real-Time Traffic Information System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0231651

Award Number: 0231651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299678             (Estimated)
Investigator: Athanasios K. Ziliaskopoulos a-z@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall A. Berry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              \Proposal Title NSF/USDOT: Development and Testing of a Vehicle Based
              Zero-Public-Infrastructure (Zero-PI) Real-Time Traffic Information
              System

Project Abstract: The research focuses on an innovative traffic
              information system, fully decentralized and based only on information exchanged
              by the vehicles themselves.  The system (called Zero-PI) assumes that on-board
              devices are installed on vehicles, but no infrastructure installed on the
              network. Vehicles exchange traffic information as they move through the
              network, which allows drivers to adjust their routes and avoid or be prepared
              for congestion, incidents or other hazards. Since the system is solely based on
              in-vehicle devices, it will be market driven and self-maintained.  It will work
              on all types of roadways, given sufficient market penetration. It will be
              upgraded as newer cars, with more advanced technologically capabilities for
              exchanging and processing information are introduced into the market.  The only
              requirement will be for newer systems to be compatible downwards with the older
              systems.  

The feasibility and performance of the Zero-PI system (NSF/USDOT
              FY2001) both analytically and in a simulated environment provided very
              encouraging results. It was demonstrated that meaningful information is
              communicated to vehicles, even at low levels of market penetration.  A
              preliminary feasibility analysis of the communications requirements of the
              system suggests that existing wireless technologies, such as the IEEE 802.11b/g
              provide sufficient bandwidth.

The objective of this research is to develop
              and test the necessary communication and computing devices and methods, the
              routing algorithms, and the data schemata that will enable relevant real-time
              traffic information to be exchanged, processed and used.  
To meet these
              objectives, a small number of prototype devices will be developed and tested in
              a limited field experiment.  Efficient data structures will be designed to
              concisely store and exchange the experienced traffic data.  Routing algorithms
              will be developed that take advantage of the exchanged data and produce
              navigational information.  Finally, a large-scale traffic simulator will be
              modified to represent the behavior of the Zero-PI system.  The simulator will
              allow investigating system-wide impacts and analyze issues of network
              equilibria and stability.

If the system is successful, it can radically
              change the way traffic information is collected, disseminated and how the
              traffic network is managed. It can lead to a system that: 
does not require
              tax-payers' money to be implemented/maintained,
is self-maintained,
will work
              on all roads,
will be market driven,
will be totally decentralized (and more
              robust to failure and terrorist attacks).
Finally, transportation agencies
              will benefit from such a system, since they can strategically locate receivers
              on the network and obtain information that, in turn, can be used for control,
              management and planning applications.


