Title       : Developing and Disseminating New Laboratories on Plant Molecular Genetics and
               Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0231287

Award Number: 0231287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katherine J. Denniston                  
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499603             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Micklos micklos@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Plant molecular genetic and genomic research still lag behind medically-oriented
              research on microbes and higher animals. As a result, relatively few lab
              experiences that expose students to the growing insights into plants offered by
              genomic biology are available at the lower college level. This CCLIproject is
              developing a laboratory- and Internet-based curriculum to bring students to the
              forefront of modern plant research.  The project is based largely on data
              emanating from major NSF-funded plant research at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
              (CSHL) and includes substantial input from active researchers. It builds on the
              Dolan DNA Learning Center's 16 years of experience developing and disseminating
              innovative laboratory curricula, and its experience as a publisher of Internet
              sites with strong multimedia content and shared use of student-generated data. 
              
A comprehensive set of laboratoriesis based on rapid and reproducible PCR
              chemistry developed
under a previous grant from the Advanced Technological
              Education Program. Using the model plant Arabidopsis and important food crops,
              the laboratories illustrate key concepts of gene and genome analysis,
              including: the relationship between phenotype and molecular genotype, genetic
              modification of plants and detection of transgenes in foods, and linkage and
              bioinformatic methods for gene mapping.  Students also have the unique
              opportunity to explore functional genomics by assisting CSHL researchers with
              the cellular analysis of Arabidopsis genes of unknown function. An Internet
              "super site"  supports the laboratories with online protocols, custom analysis
              tools, shared databases, and collaborative bulletin boards and chat
              systems.
The proposal is comprised of an initial development phase,
              culminating in a focus workshop of
faculty advisors drawn from two- and
              four-year colleges representing six regions of the United States.
During the
              dissemination phase, faculty advisors will organize weeklong training workshops
              to reach 144 instructors. Applied Biosystems, Bio-Link National Center for
              Advanced Technological Training in Biotechnology, Carolina Biological Supply
              Company, and Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press are committed to provide key
              assistance to the project.
