Title       : Seeing the Connections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0231342

Award Number: 0231342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Benson SBenson@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen G. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neil Portnoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/618-2227

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The connections between higher- level mathematics such as abstract algebra and
              mathematics generally taught at the secondary level are deep. But rarely are
              these connections made explicit in the education of pre-service teachers Hence
              their potential contributions to the teaching of secondary mathematics is left
              undiscovered. These connections are often left undiscovered in professional
              development for in-service teachers as well. 

Seeing the Connections is a
              collaborative among the Education Development Center, The University of New
              Hampshire and California State University at Chico. The project produces,
              pilots, and disseminates curriculum modules that help teachers develop a
              knowledge of mathematics for teaching that bridges the gap between higher level
              mathematics and the mathematics generally taught at the secondary level.  These
              modules form a library of materials that are innovative in addressing the needs
              of both pre-service and practicing secondary mathematics teachers. The project
              builds mechanisms to ensure wide dissemination of the developed material, which
              contributes to the intellectual merit of the field. The project pilots both new
              and revised materials from previous proof of concepts for a variety of college
              and university settings for both mathematics content courses and mathematics
              education courses. The broader impacts are realized through the broad piloting
              and dissemination of the developed modules.

