Title       : Science Partners in Inquiry-based Collaborative Education (SPICE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0231856

Award Number: 0231856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1445013            (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Levey dlevey@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Betty D. Camp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean M. Andino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Jo Koroly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberta Harbrucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Florida's Museum of Natural History, Center for Precollegiate
              Education  and Training, College of Education, Center for Women's Studies and
              Gender Research, and  Departments of Environmental Engineering Sciences and
              Zoology, will team with the School  Board of Alachua Country to promote science
              and engineering careers by placing graduate  students into classrooms to
              implement inquiry-based modules on Ecosystem Health and  Sustainability.  The
              target will be middle schools in Alachua County with large populations of 
              students from populations underrepresented in science and engineering. 
              Graduate students in  Zoology and Environmental Engineering Sciences will be
              paired with teachers.  As a team,  they will participate in a summer institute
              and a workshop to learn and discuss pedagogy  associated with inquiry-based
              learning, to review state and national science standards, and to  decide upon
              specific topics that meet the needs of individual classrooms and take advantage
               of team members' expertise.  Graduate Fellows and teachers will design and
              modify modules  focused on Ecosystem Health and Sustainability. These modules
              will specifically address  national and state science standards, and will
              stress hands-on exploration of environmental  "mysteries".  Experimentation,
              data collection, analysis, and interpretation of results will be  stressed. 
              Projects will have immediate relevance to the students' lives and will be
              posted on a  website.  All classrooms participating in the project will be
              furnished with computers and  technical support to facilitate this web-based
              communication.  After testing and refinement,  modules will be made widely
              available through summer training workshops, in which kits for  implementation
              of modules will be provided free of charge.  Modules and complete  instructions
              will also be made available and widely advertised on the web.  To provide
              mentoring, Graduate Fellows will select from a menu of options for  working
              individually or in small groups with students.  Likewise, middle school
              students will  become role models for peers and younger children by
              participating in already-established  science programs designed to provide
              opportunities for sharing scientific learning.      Specifically, the program
              aims to:  o foster middle school students' desire to pursue careers in science,
              technology,  engineering and mathematics, especially within underrepresented
              groups.  o provide support and preparation for Graduate Fellows to pursue a
              career in education.  o improve science, technology, engineering, and
              mathematics curricula in the public  schools while addressing state and federal
              standards. 

Project Title:  Science Partners in Inquiry-based Collaborative
              Education  (S.P.I.C.E.)    
Institution:  University of Florida
PI/Co-PI: 
              Douglas Level, Jean Andino, Betty Camp, Roberta Harbrucker, Mary Jo
              Koroly
Partner School Districts: Alachua County
Financing: $1,445,013
Number
              of fellows per year: 9 graduate
Setting:  Rural 
Target audience of the
              project: Middle School
NSF supported disciplines involved: Science and
              Engineering  

