Title       : SGER: Reducing the Rates of Oxidation of Essential Domains of Genomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0231403

Award Number: 0231403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Heller heller@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1762,9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This exploratory research project will statistically analyze databases
              containing the nucleotide sequences of genomes of different species to define
              the boundaries of their genes' exons, introns and intergene domains to
              determine (a) whether the oxidation rates of essential domains of the genomes
              are reduced by making these noble through exclusion of rapidly oxidized
              nucleotide sequences, and (b) whether the essential domains are cathodically
              protected by rapidly oxidized sequences in nearby non-essential domains. The
              species will be ranked by the relative survival value of the reduction of the
              oxidation rate of their essential domains, the value increasing with the time
              required for their species to reproduce, and with the inverse of the number of
              offspring per generation. The aim is to test the hypothesis that the essential
              domains are ennobled when the survival value is low but are cathodically
              protected when it is high. 

Certain precursors are generated in living cells
              and react to form strong oxidizing agents at residual concentrations high
              enough to produce many oxidative lesions in the DNA of every cell. Although DNA
              repair enzymes continuously recognize, excise and repair these lesions, there
              are many oxidative genome lesions in every cell, causing aging and mutations.
              Just as the corrosion rate of an alloy depends on its constituent metals, the
              oxidation rate of DNA depends on its nucleotide composition. Reducing the
              oxidation rates of those DNA segments that code for proteins and control
              protein production should be critical to the survival of species. The proposed
              exploratory research will test the hypothesis that the degree and complexity of
              oxidation protection increases with its value for the survival of the species.
              Ultimately, avoiding oxidation of essential DNA sequences of genomes is
              important in reducing human aging and cancer.

