Title       : Geometric Structures for Elementary Teachers (GeoSET)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0231161

Award Number: 0231161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Wolfe wolfe@math.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas B. Aichele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              National reports over the last decade have focused on the need for change in the
              way mathematics is taught at the elementary and secondary levels. The GeoSet
              project supports the full development and dissemination of the curriculum and
              pedagogy for a discovery-based course in geometry for prospective elementary
              teachers.

Geometry is an ideal course in which to model discovery-learning
              and the use of technology for pre-service teachers. This project draws on the
              experiences gained from a well-established course in geometry for elementary
              teachers and an experienced team of project directors at Oklahoma State
              University.  Project materials support a cognitive level and require a
              substantially higher level of participation than is normally the case for the
              course audience.

A wide range of curricular and pedagogical activities is
              supported by the prototype workbook-style text currently being used. The
              intellectual merit is realized through the development of materials that
              include: group activities, extensive writing, math-literature connections,
              projects, construction with manipulatives, and mathematical proofs.

 The
              broader impact of "GeoSet" is realized through the development, testing, and
              revision of innovative materials that targets pre-service elementary teachers.
              In addition, these materials support innovative professional development
              activities both as a basis of discovery-style pedagogy and as a foundation to
              promote ongoing professional growth as teachers through a lesson study
              model.


