Title       : The Neuron Connection: a neuroscience lab manual for the 21st century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0231019

Award Number: 0231019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72446              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol Ann Paul cpaul@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julio J. Ramirez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      106 Central Street
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    781/283-1000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to collect and develop pedagogically sound,
              inexpensive, teaching tools for the undergraduate Neuroscience laboratory, that
              can be used by a wide variety of institutions including those that have
              limitations on funds for laboratory equipment.  This collection, "The Neuron
              Connection", contains tested labs that span the breadth of the discipline.  It
              is a collection for the 21st century that is in digital format and includes
              digital videos, which show lab set-up and technical tips.  The digital format
              allows continuity of access, and materials that can be modified according to
              the needs of each institution.  The audience for this manual is instructors at
              2 and 4-year colleges and their students

This first phase develops an
              initial series (at least three) of laboratory exercises.
These could be in the
              form of any of the following:
Simulations or animations of "classical"
              experiments where students are referred to the original literature to make
              predictions of what should happen.
Laboratories that require little or no
              equipment.
Equipment based laboratory exercises that could include
              instructions on how to make commercially expensive equipment (such as
              amplifiers) on a relatively low budget.

These materials will be distributed
              in a form that is compatible with National Science Digital Library
              (NSDL).

An Advisory Board is responsible for assessing the direction and
              implementation of the goals outlined in the grant application.  This assessment
              involves one formative evaluation and two summative evaluations of the
              project's progress in selecting appropriate laboratory exercises, developing
              prototype simulations, and delivering at least three working examples of
              hands-on laboratory exercises accessible to a wide range of college and
              university environments.

The authors are from 3 different academic
              institutions and represent both the biological and psychological sub fields of
              neuroscience.  They will draw advice and ideas through their connections with
              other faculty-teaching undergraduate Neuroscience.


