Title       : CCLI-EMD: Development of Low-Cost Laser Spectroscopy Experiments for Physical
               Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0231005

Award Number: 0231005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107448             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Whitten James_Whitten@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Lowell Res Fdn
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  01854    978/934-4750

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physical chemistry instructional laboratories at colleges and universities in
              the United States are in need of modernization.  Not only do they lack modern
              equipment, but many of the topics in the lecture are not reinforced by the
              laboratory component.  The problem is largely due to the expense involved in
              purchasing spectroscopic equipment such as lasers.  In this project we are
              developing several laboratory modules which will utilize new generations of
              blue and near-UV diode lasers that can serve as low-cost spectroscopy sources
              for physical chemistry experiments.  The planned modules cover the following
              topics: laser Raman spectroscopy, laser light scattering to monitor particle
              size, laser ionization of alkali metal atoms, and luminescence decay to measure
              excited state life times.  Previous experiments that utilize the blue diode
              lasers which examine the photoelectric effect, laser-induced fluorescence, and
              electronic spectroscopy of argon atoms are also being developed into full
              modules.  The instructional modules to go along with the equipment are being
              developed both as traditional laboratories and inquiry-based activities. 
              Partner institutions will test the modules as they are developed.  A commercial
              vendor will also be a partner to develop these experimental modules into
              low-cost instrumental packages for those who are unable to build these
              experiments on their own.
