Title       : The Prospective Value of Space Solar Power as Renewable Energy: Implications for
               the Biosphere, Energy Security, and Overall Sustainable Economic Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0231743

Award Number: 0231743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Molly K. Macauley macauley@rff.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Resources For Future Inc
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0231743  Macauley  This proposal responds to the NASA/NSF request for the "study
              of costs and opportunities, and how to optimize them, for understanding the net
              impact of SSP on the biosphere and on sustainable growth."   This proposed
              research will model and analyze the relationship among space solar power (SSP)
              and the earth environment, energy security, and sustainable development.  It is
              responsive to key areas of understanding of costs and opportunities, and how to
              optimize them, for the net impact of SSP on the biosphere and on sustainable
              growth.
The research will involve detailed computer-based modeling and
              evaluation of the economic value of SSP as a source of commercial power by the
              year 2020.  The research will focus on the potential effects on the biosphere
              from SSP operation and the potential contribution of SSP to energy security and
              power supply resiliency.  Both of these factors are key determinants of the
              role of SSP in sustainable economic growth around the world.  To fully
              understand the contribution of SSP to sustainable growth, however, requires a
              broader economic context.
Additional intellectual merits of the model will be
              explicit and the formal incorporation of uncertainty for all parameters,
              including terrestrial and SSP energy supplies, costs, biosphere and security
              effects, and adoption rates towards the year 2020.  The research will result in
              a computer-based simulation model of the relative benefits and costs of SSP and
              explicit representation of energy, environmental, and security impacts.

