Title       : Science That Matters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0231179

Award Number: 0231179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104230             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Potter potter@chuma1.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dana Zeidler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerry G. Meisels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce J. Cochrane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The science literacy needs of future teachers and other non-science majors are
              being addressed through implementation of a multi-site college level
              interdisciplinary science course sequence based on the National Science
              Education Standards and focused on real-life issues. Instructional capacity is
              also being addressed through faculty professional development and curriculum
              materials upgrades involving faculty from five institutions (University of
              South Florida, Hillsborough Community College, Manatee Community College and
              St. Petersburg College from Florida and Fairmont State College in West
              Virginia). Project direct outcomes include a network of 15-25 prepared
              instructors, 10-12 upgraded modules (beta versions), and measures of improved
              science literacy of the target student population, a diverse population of
              college students including those preparing to be teachers. 

Intellectual
              Merit: Faculty in the program are introduced to recent literature on learning
              and practice these strategies through the implementation of the "Science That
              Matters" courses and curricular material. Faculty reflection and feedback is
              used to improve instruction and the curricular materials.  Measures of student
              outcomes included Test of Logical Thinking (TOLT), The ACT's Collegiate
              Assessment of Academic Progress (CAAP), a project developed writing assessment
              measuring intellectual progress, and faculty assessment of student learning. 
              

Broader Impacts: The project provides a model two course sequence and
              curricular materials for achieving science literacy among non science
              majors/future elementary school teachers. Implementation at diverse
              institutions and among diverse student populations provides valuable guidance
              for implementation around the nation and for continuing improvements to
              materials. The modular curricular materials and the evaluation instruments are
              broadly applicable and useful to a diverse audience. 




