Title       : Graduate Math And Science Teaching Education Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0231853

Award Number: 0231853
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1359290            (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Midden midden@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lena Ballone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Van Hook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Teams consisting of a cooperating teacher, a Fellow and a mathematics or natural
              sciences faculty member are working to introduce hands on inquiry science
              curriculum materials into four school districts that vary widely in the
              demographics of their student body and in their environment, ranging from a
              high needs urban district with a very  high percentage of students on free or
              subsidized lunches to rural schools, to schools in affluent suburbs. 
              Collaborative professional development  is being provided during an intense six
              week summer session with follow-up during the academic year.  GK-12 Fellows and
              their cooperating K-12 teachers are learning hands-on inquiry teaching 
              strategies and how to engage K-12 students in long-term research projects. They
              are  working together to use these strategies in the classroom.  The broad
              impacts of these activities include benefits to the students, the teachers and
              the institutions involved.  The Fellows are developing skills, such as improved
              teaching abilities, useful in their role as future faculty.  They are gaining
              an appreciation of their ability to contribute to improving K-12 math and
              science education and the benefits of doing so;  establishing patterns of
              behavior that will result in their future support of K-12 math and  science
              education throughout their professional careers.    The university is building
              strong connections between graduate training in mathematics and the natural 
              sciences with K-12 and undergraduate math and science education.  It is
              strengthening existing ties with local school districts.  The K-12 students are
              beginning to realize their own potential to follow a career in science by
              working with graduate student scientists who provide strong role models.  Other
              benefits include improved K-12 student understanding of mathematics and science
              and of scientific methods of inquiry.  Part of the support for this project
              comes from the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences 

Title:
              Graduate Math and Science Teaching Education Reform
Institution: Bowling Green
              State University
PI/Co-PI: William Midden, Lena Ballone, Stephen Van
              Hook
Partner School Districts: Springfield Local, Toledo Public, Wood County,
              Bowling Green City
Funding: $1,359,290 total for 3 years
# of Fellows/year: 5
              Graduate year 1,  10 Graduate in years 2 & 3
Setting: Urban, suburban,
              rural
Grade Band: K-12
Disciplines Involved: mathematics, biology, physics,
              psychology, geology, chemistry

