Title       : Teacher Professional Development in Mathematics and Science: Do the Policies Add
               Up?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0231884

Award Number: 0231884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $592384             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Smith thomas.smith@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura Desimone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The project would focus on examining aspects of in-service professional
              development of elementary and secondary teachers.  The researchers propose to
              use existing national surveys, such as the Schools and Staffing Survey and the
              Eisenhower Professional Development Program to analyze how state and school
              district policies influence teacher participation in professional development. 
              The study would also address how the content covered in professional
              development is associated with the content covered in teachers' instruction and
              student achievement.     One hypothesis is that school organization influences
              the teacher's participation in professional development and that the
              content-focus of professional development influences the content of instruction
              which is associated with student achievement for particular content areas.  The
              study is intended to emphasize the role of professional development within the
              causal framework of affecting the adoption of reform efforts and student
              achievement.  

The proposal seeks to use large existing databases about
              teachers to learn more about linking state and local policies to improving
              professional development and how it is linked to student achievement, if at
              all.  The researchers will conduct extensive analysis of large databases.  
