Title       : Turning to the Evidence: What Teachers Learn About Using Classroom Records and
               Artifacts in Mathematics Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0231892

Award Number: 0231892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1669696            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn Goldsmith lgoldsmith@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nanette Seago  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/618-2227

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
In this project, the researchers propose to examine how teachers use student
              created artifacts of mathematics learning in their own professional
              development.  The conceptual framing for the proposal comes from two strands of
              work. The first strand involves theory and research about the conceptual
              systems teachers use to understand student thinking. Several investigators have
              recently described cognitive schemata for mathematics education as "lenses"
              through which educators perceive, organize, and enact their practice.  The
              researchers posit that two lenses are particularly relevant to the way teachers
              identify and interpret evidence of student thinking from classroom artifacts
              and records: a "mathematical content" lens and a "mathematical epistemology"
              one. The second conceptual strand comes from theories of the situated nature of
              practice, which emphasize that knowledge itself is a function of the contexts
              in which it develops. Although practice-based professional development seeks to
              narrow the distance between the learning teachers do in professional
              development settings and tasks of classroom practice, the differences between
              the two contexts can nonetheless be significant. 
The project will investigate
              two overarching questions: (1) what do teachers learn by participating in
              professional development that uses classroom records and artifacts? and  (2)
              what aspects of their learning do teachers apply to their classroom practice?
              The study will investigate teachers' learning as they participate in either one
              of two professional development programs that focus on analysis of classroom
              artifacts, Fostering Algebraic Thinking Toolkit (TK) or VideoCases for
              Mathematics Professional Development (VCM). 
Four sites have been selected,
              two TK and two VCM seminars. Comparisons to teachers not in the treatment will
              be included.  Seminars will meet monthly for three semesters. Data bearing on
              questions about teachers' learning in the seminars will include: pre/post
              measures of teachers' algebra understanding, pre/post interviews focusing on
              teachers' analysis of student work samples, video records and field notes of
              seminar sessions, and embedded assessments of teachers' analyses of student
              thinking. Data about the application to classroom practice will include
              videotaped pre/post classroom observations of all teachers in the study
              (observations include briefings with teachers before and after the lesson) and
              monthly observations of a sample of target teachers. A comparison on some of
              these measures will be made with teachers who do not participate in the
              professional development programs.  Data analysis will involve a combination of
              cross-case analyses and quantitative comparisons, where appropriate.

