Title       : Semidefinite Programming and Approximation Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0231600

Award Number: 0231600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147639             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yinyu Ye yinyu-ye@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the development, analysis, and
              implementation of semidefinite programming approximation algorithms for solving
              large-scale combinatorial, discrete, and global optimization problems that
              arise in production management, manufacture engineering, and network planning.
              In solving many optimization problems, it is impossible or too costly to obtain
              a 100 percent optimal solution. However, approximation algorithms can,
              cost-effectively, deliver a sub-optimal solution with a quality guarantee, say
              at least 87 percent optimal, which is satisfactory in practice.  The
              semidefinite programming algorithm is a newly developed algorithm for
              approximating some difficult problems with the best quality guarantees to date.
              This project is to develop semidefinite programming algorithms for solving a
              wider class of hard problems with an even better guarantee, and to implement
              the algorithms in a robust computer code.  We then validate the code by solving
              the network and circuit bisection problem frequently used in the chip design
              industry, and will test the code on a set of bench-mark problems collected from
              the industry.
     If successful, the project would result in one of the most
              complete and powerful solvers for approximating hard optimization problems with
              wide real-world applications. It will strengthen and improve
              theoretical
results and practical performance of existing approximation
              algorithms, and will lead to the development of new efficient methods for a
              variety of discrete optimization problems. Progress in the area of developing
              efficient algorithms for solving large-scale combinatorial problems is of great
              importance in improving the efficiency of manufacturing systems, communication
              networks, aircraft routing, multiple-flow operations,
and resources planning.
              The underlying theory of the project would also be valuable to education and
              basic scientific research.
