Title       : Microtechnology and Nanotechnology: A Connected Approach to Small Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0231482

Award Number: 0231482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65164              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse Adams jdadams@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of our project is the creation, testing and dissemination of a
              prototype textbook entitled in Microtechnology and Nanotechnology: A Connected
              Approach to Small Systems, intended for upper-undergraduate and graduate level
              study of microtechnology, specially microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and
              nanotechnology. As new courses in these areas continue to emerge at American
              universities the need for an innovative well-written understandable textbook
              grows as well. We recognize that some MEMS-specific and nanotechnology-specific
              textbooks are available, but none that effectively tie these disciplines
              together. A broader and more cohesive viewpoint is overdue and a gap currently
              exists in the marketplace. Our book is being developed to appeal to a wide
              audience and to better augment instruction by representing all of the required
              knowledge bases from engineering and science. Expert colleagues currently
              working and teaching in the field will editorially evaluate our new textbook's
              materials throughout the composition process. Pilot tests in the form of
              courses taught by the PI will share the title and content of the proposed
              textbook and generate important feedback. Our final product will be a saleable
              first edition that, having proved effective in beta site testing, will be
              published by a major house. Preliminary discussions with McGraw-Hill suggest a
              market exists for such a product, as well as a desire to publish it.
