Title       : Media Computation as a Motivation and Structure for a Non-Majors CS1 Class:
               "Data-First" Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2002   
File        : a0231176

Award Number: 0231176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73430              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Guzdial guzdial@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The problem addressed by this proposal is the disinterest in computer science
              exhibited by large groups of students, especially non CS majors and women. This
              is a particular problem at institutions like Georgia Tech where an introductory
              computing course is required. A prototype course in Introduction to Media
              Computation aimed at non CS majors will be utilized. The argument is that these
              audiences are most interested in computing to manipulate data of interest to
              them. A data first approach where computing in terms of creation, manipulation,
              and transformation of data of interest to students is implemented in this
              course. At GIT, non CS majors are often manipulating multimedia in English and
              other communications classes. Literature on gender issues in computing suggests
              that women seek an applications oriented focus to computer science and
              assignments that lend themselves to creativity. The media computation approach
              addresses these needs. The base premises for the course are: all media are
              moving to a digital format; digital media are manipulated using software; and
              learning to control computation, including programming, then becomes a
              communications skill. The products of this project will include: A course
              structure, lecture slides, and course notes in support of such a class;
              technology to support such a course, including a student development
              environment, media manipulation tools, and a cross-platform multimedia API
              appropriate for novice programmers; and evaluation results, focusing on
              retention, motivation, and learning.
