Title       : Rhode Island Marine and Environmental Graduate Teaching Fellows in K-12
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0231834

Award Number: 0231834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1499754            (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Merrill   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara C. Hickox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gail Scowcroft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

The University of Rhode Island's (URI) Graduate School of
              Oceanography (GSO), Office of Marine Programs (OMP), fifteen of the
              university's marine and environmental academic departments and four Rhode
              Island school districts are building upon a previous GK-12 partnership to
              introduce K-12 students to current issues in ocean and environmental sciences
              through locally created classroom modules and field exercises involving
              coastal, estuarine, and fresh water ecosystems.  In addition to partnering in
              the classroom, Fellows and teachers are spending three weeks in a summer
              institute during which Fellows present current information and concepts
              concerning ocean and environmental sciences and lead field studies, while
              Teacher Partners instruct the Fellows in classroom management, student
              assessment, and curriculum implementation. The teams produce academic plans for
              integrating the Fellows and relevant science content into the school year. A
              URI faculty member mentors each Fellow and makes two visits each year to their
              Fellow's K-12 classroom. The Faculty Mentors, Fellows, and Teacher Partners
              convene for a mini-institute each November to build partnerships, reacquaint
              everyone with the goals of the project, and investigate national and state
              science standards relevant to their ocean and environmental modules.  In
              addition to their classroom experiences Fellows give presentations relating to
              their coursework, theses research and Fellowship experiences to parents,
              teachers, and other members of their school district communities in
              district-organized events. The broader impact of the project includes its
              affects on the participating Fellows, teachers, and K-12 students and is
              reflected in the demography of the school districts involved.  The Fellows are
              learning how to present their scientific findings and interests to a broad
              audience and are developing useful teaching strategies that reflect current
              insight into teaching and learning. The teachers are gaining increased
              confidence in their knowledge of environmental and ocean sciences, in
              conducting inquiry activities and in taking groups of students out into the
              field. The K-12 students are gaining a new appreciation and understanding of
              science because of seeing the Fellows as role models for themselves, improving
              their science literacy, and engaging in a study of science that investigates
              global issues that have definite local implications. The school districts
              involved range from an urban district with 88% of the students eligible for
              free or reduced lunch and 71% from minority populations to a suburban district
              with 13% eligible for free or reduced lunch and 5% from minority populations.
              

Title:  Rhode Island Marine and Environmental Graduate Teaching Fellows in
              K-12 Education (RIME)
Institution:  University of Rhode Island 
PI/co-PIs: 
              John Merrill; Gail Scowcroft; Sara Hickox
School District Partners:  Central
              Falls, Warwick, Cranston and Narragansett
Award:  $1,499,753 total for 3
              years
Number of Fellows/year: 11 graduate
Target Audience: K-12
Setting: 
              Urban, Suburban
NSF supported Disciplines Involved: Ocean and environmental
              sciences


