Title       : Directional Thermal Diffusivity of Deformed Elastomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0231574

Award Number: 0231574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148263             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil T. Wright ntwright@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


Proposal Number: CTS-0084276

Principal Investigator:   N.
              Wright

Abstract:

The uniaxial thermomechanical response of elastomers has
              been studied for nearly two centuries, but the multiaxial response has been
              less studied.  The multiaxial mechanical response can yield complex and unique
              behavior, such as unequal biaxial deformation of sheets of rubber subject to
              equibiaxial loading.  Not surprisingly, complete constitutive models of the
              elastic response are lacking, largely due to the scarcity of suitable
              multiaxial data.  Scarcer still are multiaxial measurements of thermophysical
              properties.  This project will extend the flash thermal diffusivity method to
              measure the thermal diffusivity of elastomers subject to multiaxial finite
              deformation.  This extended method will allow for the thermal diffusivity of
              such materials to be arbitrarily anisotropic.  These property measurements and
              resulting constitutive relations should lead to improved continuum models of
              the general thermoelastic response of elastomers.  

Developing new property
              measurement techniques remains important and relevant even with the increased
              use of computer modeling, because experiments remain, in most cases, the only
              method of developing the constitutive relations that the models need.  The
              techniques developed here can be applied to materials other than elastomers,
              for example composites and biological tissues, whether or not these materials
              are deformed.

