Title       : A Framework and Network for Evaluating the Impact of Ubiquitous Computing in
               K-12 Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2002   
File        : a0231147

Award Number: 0231147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1124689            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew A. Zucker Zucker@wdc.sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 7261      PROGRAM EVALUATION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To guide large investments of time, effort, and money, policymakers need more
              evidence about the impacts of educational technology, but little information
              useful to them has yet been derived from evaluations of ubiquitous computing
              initiatives.  SRI International is working with six partner organizations to
              develop a common framework for evaluating the impacts of ubiquitous computing
              on K-12 mathematics and science education.
The framework is based on existing
              frameworks developed for other purposes (e.g., the EnGauge model developed by
              North Central Regional Educational Laboratory and the Metiri Group) and on
              findings from a policy study conducted for this project designed to clarify
              policymakers information needs and their expectations about ubiquitous
              computing. Experienced evaluators from SRI International, the Metiri Group, the
              University of Virginia, the University of Minnesota, ROCKMAN ET AL, EDC's
              Center for Children and Technology, and Kent State University's Research Center
              for Educational Technology are also working as separate organizations
              conducting evaluations of many ubiquitous computing initiatives in several
              states.
The framework to be developed by the group will be used to strengthen
              the individual evaluations and make them more responsive to policymakers'
              needs. By using a framework in which a variety of important evaluation
              questions about the impacts of ubiquitous computing on mathematics and science
              education can be framed and understood, we greatly increase the chances that
              knowledge will accumulate.
The project team is posting the framework,
              evaluation findings, and syntheses of these findings on a project Web site. In
              addition, a number of new evaluation tools are being developed, and these, too,
              will be available through the Web. Information is also being disseminated
              through conference presentations and journal articles. Other evaluators,
              policy-makers, and practitioners are invited to make use of any of these
              products, which are intended to help strengthen evaluation work in the field of
              ubiquitous computing. A better understanding of ongoing ubiquitous computing
              initiatives, derived from evaluations, is expected to lead to improvements in
              mathematics and science education practices that use educational technology.

