Title       : EdGCM: A Global Climate Model for the Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0231400

Award Number: 0231400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80620              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Chandler mac59@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award funds a pilot project to adapt a Global Climate Model (GCM),
              currently run on large mainframe computers, for use as a full-scale,
              3-dimensional GCM capable of being run on inexpensive desktop computers common
              to most high school and university labs.  In addition, the research team will
              meet with educators in a series of interactive workshops to discuss how the
              climate model exercise can best be integrated with science curricula.  The
              overall goal is to provide upper level high school students and undergraduate
              students with an educational tool to investigate Earth's climate system.

The
              3-dimensional GCMs are one of the primary tools used in climate change
              research.   Most operational GCMs, however, still reside at institutions with
              large-scale computational resources such as national labs with supercomputers. 
              Thus, few students have exposure to GCMs prior to graduate school.  To some
              extent, the lack of familiarity with the most basic tools and concepts for
              studying climate breeds a distrust of important scientific findings that employ
              those methods. 

The researcher has already made some modifications to adapt
              the GCM and has worked with educators to determine how best to serve education.
               The original GCM was developed at the National Aeronautics and Space
              Administration (NASA) and is a fully operational model to study climates of the
              past, present, and future.  To operate the GCM in a classroom environment, the
              researcher has developed a user-friendly interface that includes a database
              that allows the teacher manage the model.  In addition, the initial software
              package permits the teacher to add instructional materials such as text,
              charts, graphics, and web links to fit specific lesson plans.

The proposed
              research has the potential for a tremendous impact across a wide swath of the
              general public and the wider education and research communities by providing
              easy access to user-friendly GCMs to study climate.  Climate change is likely
              to remain a topic of great public concern and scientific scrutiny in the
              foreseeable future since it impacts everything from the economy to the
              environment.  Potentially, this award would expand the understanding of climate
              and modeling beyond the realm of a relative small group of specialists.  As
              such, this may encourage others to develop new insights into the working of
              Earth's climate.
