Title       : Collaborative Research: Exploring the Value of Learning by Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0231771

Award Number: 0231771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899812             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy J. Vye vyenj@vuctravax  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gautam Biswas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Bransford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              It is a common intuition that one of the best ways to learn something is to
              attempt to teach it to others.  The research project is testing this intuition
              and its usefulness for educational practice.  Central to the work are web-based
              "teachable agents" that students teach as a way to learn themselves and that
              permit studies of the active ingredients of learning by teaching.  The project
              will use the agents to help students learn science and mathematics content and
              help teachers learn content-specific pedagogy.  The intellectual merit of the
              work is that the agents provide a method for developing and testing a learning
              theory that helps explain the motivational and cognitive benefits of learning
              by teaching. By manipulating a teachable agent's available features and use
              (something that is hard to do with actual pupils), it is possible to
              experimentally isolate different components of the learning by teaching
              interaction.  A primary measure used to evaluate whether students learn by
              teaching includes assessments of students' abilities to subsequently learn from
              resources once they have completed their teaching activities. The broader
              impacts include a new way of helping teachers understand the learning of their
              students, and the development of easily distributed, software that embodies new
              learning principles so that others in schools and industry can learn from those
              artifacts and create new ones of their own.
