Title       : SGER: Intelligent Adaptive Control of Flexible AC Transmission System (FACTS)
               Devices in a Distributed Power Network Containing Turbogenerators -
               Resubmission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0231632

Award Number: 0231632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69796              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mariesa L. Crow crow@ece.umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald C. Wunsch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Harley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ganesh K. Venayagamoorthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
"Flexible AC Transmission System" (FACTS) devices refer to rapidly switching
              power semiconductor devices, used in power systems to control the power flow
              and stabilize voltages. The decentralized nature of their actions may cause
              deleterious interactions between one FACTS device and another, as well as
              between FACTS devices and generators in the system. Currently there is a
              general lack of understanding as to how to systematically coordinate and
              stabilize system-wide dynamics via local modulation of the faster FACTS devices
              as well as the slower generators. Nonlinear neurocontrollers offer a
              solution.

This project will evaluate the initial application of
              neurocontrollers based on different adaptive critic designs to two different
              types of FACTS devices (one at a time) on a multi-machine power system. An SGER
              form of proposal is chosen because this is preliminary work based on novel
              ideas, and if successful, the results will be used to generate a regular
              proposal which will further investigate the interactions between conventionally
              controlled generators and multiple neurocontrolled FACTS devices.


The
              significance of this work lies in:

o	Research Benefits: Locally placed
              neurocontrolled FACTS devices can provide system wide improved voltage support
              and stability, thus allowing the entire power system to be operated more
              efficiently with a smaller stability margin.

o	Benefits to Society:
              Economically operated reliable and secure power systems are of national
              interest. When electricity demand exceeds available supply, it would be
              beneficial to produce more electrical power per installed Megawatt (and Dollar)
              of equipment, with the addition of relatively cheap intelligent
              neurocontrollers.

