Title       : Computational Neuroscience over the Access Grid Nodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0231173

Award Number: 0231173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Deerfield deerfield@psc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Hood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Kucera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Jakobsson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing and delivering a course in Computational Neuroscience
              originating at Carnegie Mellon University and offered for credit at remote
              universities.  The course is based on both research performed and workshops
              taught at the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center and has a strong computational
              aspect, with the lectures tied to computational examples. The course utilizes
              the Access Grid group-to-group communication technology to create a distributed
              classroom, and utilizes the computational resources of the Pittsburgh
              Supercomputing Center for computer-intensive student exercises. The problem
              addressed by this project is the national need to train students in
              computational biology in general, and computational neuroscience in particular.
              It is particularly difficult to meet this need for students in universities in
              the EPSCoR states. The project's objective is to test whether courses
              originating in universities affiliated with the National Supercomputing Centers
              can be disseminated via synchronous interaction with EPSCoR universities. In
              this particular project the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center is collaborating
              with faculty at the University of Montana, Carnegie Mellon University, and
              University of Edinburgh to provide a distributed course in computational
              neuroscience. The course addresses geographical diversity and integrates high
              performance networking and communication, and high performance computing, with
              education in a manner that would not have been possible until very recently due
              to limitations in communications technology and accessible computer power. 
              This project is jointly funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education in
              the Education and Human Resources Directorate and by the Division of
              Experimental and Integrative Activities in the Computer and Information Science
              and Engineering Directorate.

