Title       : GK-12: North Mississippi GK-8 Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0231751

Award Number: 0231751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1499832            (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. O'Haver johaver@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Rock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford A. Ochs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice R. Eftink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Fellows are familiarizing themselves with best-practices pedagogy as well as
              state and national standards for mathematics and science as they work with the
              local teachers to develop interdisciplinary mathematics and science materials
              for all classes at the K-8 level.  These modules are consistent with state and
              national standards and try, as far as is possible, to incorporate the theme of
              the Mississippi River basin in order to provide continuity through the
              curriculum and help to bring home the impact of math and science on the
              student's lives; an example of the project's intellectual merit.. The Fellows
              work with six schools: Bramlett, Oxford, and Central Elementary schools and
              Oxford Middle School (City of Oxford Schools) and Lafayette Elementary and
              Middle Schools (Lafayette County Schools). There are two key/contact teachers
              (one math, one science) at each of the middle schools and one key/contact
              teacher at each of the elementary schools.  The broader impacts of the
              activities reach a number of beneficiaries.  The Fellows are developing:
              improved communication skills; an understanding of good pedagogy; and an
              ability to effectively use  technology as a teaching / learning tool and to use
              inquiry-based teaching and  learning tools.  Participating teachers are
              increasing their understanding of STEM related subjects; are demonstrating an
              increased use of inquiry-based teaching and learning tools;  and are gaining
              access to a variety of professional development opportunities (ASTM, NSTA and 
              other conferences).  In addition there is an increasingly strong relationship
              developing between the University of Mississippi STEM-related departments  and
              local school systems.   Part of the support for this project comes from the
              Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences 

Title:     The North
              Mississippi GK-8 Project  
Institution:       The University of Mississippi 
              
PI/Co-PIs:      John O'Haver / Maurice Eftink, Cliff Ochs, David Rock 
              
Partner School Districts: Lafayette County, Oxford
Funding:
              $1,499.832
Number of Fellows / Year:  12  Graduate
Target Audience    K-8 
              
NSF Supported Disciplines:  Mathematics, chemistry, geology, biology,
              physics, engineering,  computer science, economics  

