Title       : Experiments for Integrating BME Concepts into the ECE Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0231350

Award Number: 0231350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74389              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robi Polikar polikar@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda M. Head  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria V. Tahamont  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ravi P. Ramachandran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biomedical engineering (BME) is one of the fastest growing fields, with an
              expected job growth rate that is twice that of the overall job growth rate in
              the US. However, there are only 22 schools offering accredited undergraduate
              degrees in BME, and most schools do not have the resources to offer new degree
              programs. The resulting gap between the demand for qualified BME professionals
              and the programs for educating them constitutes a significant, yet unmet,
              national need. Our goal has been to develop a new educational paradigm to help
              reduce this gap. Our paradigm is based on a general method for introducing
              novel multidisciplinary content into core engineering curriculum. Our
              methodology consists of the integration of content specific laboratory
              experiments into core courses to provide essential background, followed by an
              elective providing topical depth. BME is used as the novel content and
              electrical and/or computer engineering (ECE) as the core curriculum. The method
              is versatile, as it can be easily modified to integrate other novel
              multidisciplinary content into any engineering program to provide a
              better-rounded engineering education. The implementation of this method has two
              specific objectives: first to provide ECE students with fundamental and
              contemporary BME knowledge for future career and graduate study opportunities;
              and second to improve students' interest in and comprehension of ECE concepts
              by acquainting them with engineering solutions to real world problems in
              medicine. These objectives are being achieved by integrating a set of
              experiments - designed to demonstrate a wide spectrum of BME concepts - into
              core ECE courses, along with a new elective providing a comprehensive BME
              overview. A major outcome of our project is a learning paradigm, which can
              serve as a model for integrating novel content into core engineering
              curriculum. The full development of our approach will serve as a building block
              for future undergraduate minor / concentration programs in a variety of novel
              content areas, such as biomedical engineering.

