Title       : A Preliminary Evaluation of the Impact of CO2 Injection in Deep Rock on Flow
               Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0231593

Award Number: 0231593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66426              (Estimated)
Investigator: Satya Harpalani satya@engr.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0231593
PI:		Satya Harpalani
Institution:	Southern Illinois University at
              Carbondale
Title:	"A Preliminary Evaluation of the Impact of CO2 Injection in
              Deep Rock on Flow Behavior"

Abstract:

Injection of fluids in deep rock,
              and its flow, are important in the fields of petroleum, mining, natural gas and
              environmental engineering.  Flow of any fluid through rock is very dependent on
              the fracture network pattern in the rock mass and the effective stresses which
              are altered as the pore pressure in the rock changes.  With fluid injection,
              the effective stress in situ decreases causing geometric and volumetric changes
              in solid and pore/fracture space, and thus a significant increase in the
              permeability results.  Yet, when CO2 is injected in deep carbonaceous rock,
              reduction in permeability of as much as 150 times has been observed.  Injection
              of CO2, its movement in the fractures and entry in to the solid matrix where it
              gets stored in the micropores, therefore, results in a decrease in the fracture
              aperture.  However, there is no evidence in the literature that this phenomenon
              has been studied, or that a proper model available to represent and effectively
              simulate the flow of CO2 in rock.  The basis for this research is the
              hypothesis that the volume of solid coal/carbonaceous rock increases when
              exposed to high pressure CO2 and the negative effect of this volumetric strain
              on fracture aperture is more pronounced than the positive effect of decreased
              effective stress.   It is further hypothesized that these two effects are
              coupled.  
This research deals with determining the effect of injecting CO2,
              coupled with changes in effective stress, on solid volume/fracture
              compressibility and permeability of coal.  Experimental, theoretical and
              numerical procedures will be used to reach the following goals: (a) To
              determine the volumetric strain of solid and fractures as a result of
              inejction; (b) To further determine if the effects of volumetric strain and
              effective stress are coupled; and (c) To determine the impact of injection on
              the amount of CO2 that can be injected. 
	The experimental component of the
              research will include first measuring the volumetric strain for coal exposed to
              increasing amounts of CO2 to determine the effect of CO2 injection on solid and
              fracture volumes.  This will be followed by measuring the volumetric strain for
              increasing amounts of CO2 while the sample is held under triaxial state of
              stress.  The results will show whether external stress prohibits/inhibits, or
              induces, an additional change in solid volume in the presence of CO2, and the
              magnitude of the change.  The theoretical part will include using the measured
              volumetric changes to determine the corresponding changes in fracture volume,
              and hence, the fracture porosity and permeability for both cases using standard
              flow equations.  The numerical part will include utilizing the calculated
              permeability/porosity changes to model the impact of volumetric strain on flow
              of CO2 in deep coal/carbonaceous shale over the long-term.
	Upon successful
              completion of the proposed research, the results for the stressed and
              unstressed tests will be compared to determine the impact of stress on
              volumetric strain induced by CO2, that is, whether the two effects are coupled
              resulting in an overall reduction in the fracture aperture.  Also, a
              relationship between pressure and porosity/permeability will become available. 
              This will enable a preliminary and improved simulation of the CO2 injection
              scenario. One graduate student will work on this project and research findings
              will be published in a journal and/or conference proceedings in rock mechanics
              and petroleum engineering. 

