Title       : The UNC Charlotte and Phillip O Berry Academy of Technology Cooperative:
               Graduate Resources for a Technology Academy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0231833

Award Number: 0231833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1411841            (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Royster droyster@email.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Lyons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Baldaia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Ramsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of North Carolina at Charlotte and the Phillip O. Berry Academy
              of Technology, a new high school located within the Charlotte-Mecklenburg
              Schools, are jointly creating a series of activities that prepare science,
              engineering and computer science, and mathematics graduate students to act as
              resource persons in high school classrooms and the teachers in those classrooms
              to work effectively with them. UNC Charlotte faculty serve as the instructional
              staff for eight-day workshops each summer for the Fellows and cooperating high
              school teachers. Participating Berry Academy teachers and selected GK-12
              Fellows serve as workshop leaders each summer for new cohorts of Fellows and
              teachers.  These workshops focus on policy regulations for working in K-12
              schools, school safety, and pedagogy instruction, and include a
              curriculum-sequencing guide that is aligned with the North Carolina Standard
              Course of Study for the courses being taught the subsequent fall semester.
              During the academic year weekly seminars taught by UNC Charlotte faculty
              develop specific inquiry-based activities in science and mathematics for each
              course according to the sequencing guide.  Each high school mathematics and
              science course affected is organized thematically addressing four program
              strands: the nature of science, science as inquiry, science and technology, and
              science in social and personal perspectives. The Fellows receive special
              preparation in teaching science as inquiry, in the use of NSF supported,
              research-based mathematics materials, and in the integration of technology in
              instruction. There are numerous broad impacts. Over the three years of its
              action more than 4800 high school students (approximately 82% minority) and
              over 25 high school teachers will be directly or indirectly impacted.  In
              addition the activities encompass more than just classroom work.  A website is
              being provided as a conduit between university mathematics and science faculty,
              project staff and high school mathematics and science teachers and students.
              This site acts as a forum for posting questions and answers, as a source of
              information concerning scheduled project activities, and as a resource for
              database sharing.  A broad spectrum of teachers are benefiting as the
              cooperating high school teachers are serving as resource persons for other
              teachers at Berry Academy of Technology and, along with the Fellows, are
              developing and teaching two area-specific day long workshops during the school
              year. In addition, a grade-specific activity book is being developed for
              distribution to all Berry Academy teachers. Part of the support for this
              project comes from the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical Sciences. 
              

Project Title:  The UNC-Charlotte and Phillip O"Berry Academy of Technology
              Cooperative: Graduate Resources for a Technology Academy
Institution:  The
              University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNC)
PI/Co-PI:  David Royster,
              James Lyons (UNC), David Baldaia, Deborah Ramsey (Berry Academy of
              Technology)
Partner School Districts:  Philip O berry academy of Technology,
              Charlotte-Mecklenburg 
Funding: $1,411,841 total for 3 years 
Number of
              fellows/year: 10 graduate 
Setting: Urban  
Target audience: 9-12 
NSF
              supported disciplines involved: Mathematics, Biology, Chemistry, Engineering,
              Computer Science 


