Title       : Conceptual Statistics: Engaging Students in Statistical Discovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0231322

Award Number: 0231322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74976              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Robert Stephenson wrstephe@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy G. Froelich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Duckworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With the implementation of innovative hands-on activities, access to real world
              data sets and the increased ability to simulate statistical probability
              distribution and random phenomena, conceptual statistical thinking in
              introductory statistics courses has gone through significant development. Much
              of this development is due to the exposure of students to material that show
              how a statistician may think instead of the usual step-by-step procedural
              approach. "Conceptual Statistics: Engaging Students in Statistical Discovery"
              aims to advance the idea of conceptual statistical thinking by bridging the gap
              between statistical thinking and approaching a statistical problem as a
              statistician would.

The development of on-line self test items and
              laboratory activities offer significant intellectual merit to this project. 
              The self-test items are designed to engage students in applying and
              synthesizing lecture and text material. The laboratory activities build on the
              self-test items by presenting tasks that require innovative use of conceptual
              statistical thinking and methods. There is a broad range of real contexts used
              to illustrate the impact statisticians have in a wide variety of areas.
              Activities are linked together so that initial activities can be revisited
              easily later in the course.

 Although primarily at mathematically inclined
              students, students enrolled in secondary mathematics teacher preparation
              courses and teachers of advanced preparatory course can also benefit from this
              exposure.

