Title       : Watershed-Integrated Sciences Partnership (WISP) between UMassBoston and Local
               School Districts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0231638

Award Number: 0231638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1497458            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Chen bob.chen@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hannah Sevian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn Decker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. Shiaris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clara Jennings  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY 

Teacher-Fellow teams in seven Middle Schools (Harbor,
              McCormack, Woodrow Wilson, Lewis, and Gavin Middle Schools in the Boston Public
              Schools; Pierce Middle School in the Milton Public Schools; Dedham Middle
              School in the Dedham Public Schools) located within the Neponset River
              watershed are adapting existing instructional materials such as FOSS kits to
              use a study of the local watershed as a unifying theme for middle school
              science.  Data is being gathered from the school playground, the students'
              backyards and the larger community surrounding the participating schools. 
              Inter-school information exchange enables the students at each school to relate
              their situation to the larger picture and the community of schools can
              collaborate to gain a sense of conditions within the entire watershed. 
              Quantitative examples and activities are being emphasized in order to hone
              students' mathematics skills, reinforce the existing mathematics curriculum,
              and demonstrate mathematics' relevance to science and everyday life.  Fellows
              receive a Summer Teacher Training workshop in pedagogy, state and national
              frameworks, and effective classroom management. Each Fellow is then teamed with
              a middle school Teacher in a weeklong Summer Environmental Science Content
              Institute that uses specific examples and hands-on activities within the
              watershed to strengthen the Teachers' and Fellows' science content knowledge
              and concept understanding.  In addition to their classroom duties, Fellows are
              required to take a specially developed course, Teaching Environmental Sciences
              and Technology. (TEST), that provides continuing pedagogical and content
              training.  Five daylong workshops are held for all Fellows and Teachers during
              the school year to exchange information and experiences and provide additional
              content and pedagogical material.  A 1-credit spring seminar is used as a base
              to allow one cohort of Fellows to pass on their experiences and knowledge to
              the next.  Special events such as canoe trips, river cleanups, Boston Harbor
              cruises, and citizen science activities help foster a sense of connectedness
              across municipal boundaries. WISP will be evaluated internally by a science
              pedagogy faculty member and externally by the Educational Development Center,
              Inc. of Newton, MA.   The broader benefits of the program accrue to the
              Fellows, the teachers, the middle school students and the institutions
              involved.  The Fellows are developing the interest, skills, and commitment
              necessary to be actively engaged in K-12 education throughout their scientific
              careers.  Teachers are gaining environmental science content knowledge and
              enhancing their ability to teach science curricula and to reflect on their
              teaching practices.  Middle school students are gaining a deeper understanding
              and appreciation for science and mathematics.  A set of school districts
              diverse in size, ethnicity and socio-economics and the University of
              Massachusetts, Boston are developing a shared learning community focused on
              common needs and shared resources.  

Title:  A Watershed-Integrated Sciences
              Partnership (WISP) 
Institution: The University of Massachusetts--Boston
              
PI/co-PI: Robert F. Chen, William E. Robinson, Michael Shiaris, Clara
              Jennings, and Marilyn Decker, 
Partner School Districts: Boston Public, Milton
              Public, Dedham Public
Funding: $1,497,458 total for 3 years
Number of
              Fellows/year: 10 Graduate and 3-5 Undergraduate 
Grade Band: Middle School
              
Setting: Urban, suburban
Disciplines: Geosciences, Biology, Chemistry,
              Computer Sciences



