Title       : Development of Web-Based Real Time Virtual Model Based Simulation Laboratory for
               Soil-Structure Interaction Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0231404

Award Number: 0231404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74382              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Abolmaali abolmaali@ce.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anand J. Puppala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laureano R. Hoyos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathlyn Canaday  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project develops a Web-based virtual model-based simulation laboratory
              (VMBSL) module with graphical and animation capabilities using the techniques
              of finite element method (FEM) to study the behavior of steel building frames
              subjected to static loads (gravity, wind, etc.), including their respective
              concrete foundation and foundation soil models, for implementation in
              structural engineering courses. The objective is to couple structural and
              geotechnical courses in civil engineering curriculums by integrating
the true
              behavior of frame structures with soil and foundation properties that support
              them. It also addresses the issue of structural systems from grounds up to
              delineate the true behavior of the entire structure.

The Web-based VMBSL and
              animation modules are incorporated into two undergraduate courses, namely
              structural analysis and steel design. The VMBSL tools developed in this project
              provide examples to demonstrate how the three-dimensional model of actual
              beam-to-column and column-to-foundation connections, concrete foundation, and
              soil properties effect the lateral sway and member forces in the structural
              systems as compared with the idealized two-dimensional models. The modules
              promote an environment for interactive-learning, virtual environment,
              team-based projects, and lifelong learning experiences.

