Title       : CCLI:EMD: Matlab Antenna Toolbox
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0231312

Award Number: 0231312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergey N. Makarov makarov@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides the national educational community with an Antenna Toolbox
              that is used with the MATLAB package to illustrate complex phenomena related to
              the design of antennas, and with the physical features, the propagation
              characteristics of electromagnetic fields, and the important aspects of the
              physical layer for a wireless communication system. The educational material
              being developed is unique in that it provides full-wave electromagnetic
              solutions using a computing platform, MATLAB, which is the only universal
              computational language understood by the majority of electrical engineering
              students worldwide. Other computational educational materials provide software
              written in Fortran, and hence are not readily accessible to undergraduate
              students. Other available MATLAB-based software for antenna analysis and design
              utilize approximations and hence, they do not include all the physics
              associated with a particular design.  This MATLAB ANTENNA TOOLBOX represents a
              unique and valuable contribution to the educational cornucopia that is
              available to faculty who teach at the undergraduate student level. Furthermore,
              this toolbox is to be used in a complementary fashion with other analysis tool
              and codes that the students are familiar with. Therefore, by casting the
              difficult subject of antenna design and analysis in a familiar form (e.g. a
              MATLAB Toolbox) and to utilize the full capabilities of MATLAB to integrate
              graphical user interface, efficient computation, and graphical output, it is
              expected that the faculty will better respond to the different learning styles
              of all students taking antenna design and analysis courses. Hence, student
              retention in these courses should be better.  






