Title       : Supporting and Sustaining the Learning of Professional Teaching Communities in
               the Institutional Setting of the School and School District
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0231037

Award Number: 0231037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1475442            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Cobb paul.cobb@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kay J. McClain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a five-year longitudinal study of the process of supporting and
              sustaining the learning of professional teaching communities by building on a
              collaboration that has been established over the past two years with two groups
              of middle-school mathematics teachers who work in contrasting urban districts. 
              In one district, administrators have responded to high stakes accountability
              testing by attempting to monitor and regulate teachers' instructional practices
              whereas in the second district administrators have responded to accountability
              pressures by providing teachers with access to new tools and new forms of
              knowledge. 

The first goal of the proposed project is to develop an analytic
              framework designed to
situate mathematics teachers' instructional practices in
              the institutional setting of the
school, the school district, and the broader
              policy environment.  A major purpose of this framework will be to assist,
              within the institutional setting, in scaling up innovations.   

As second
              goal, the framework will be pilot tested and refined through ongoing
              collaboration with the teachers and administrators in the two districts by
              using it to guide the formulation of specific strategies for supporting
              substantial change in mathematics teaching in the two contrasting districts.  
              In doing so, strategies and conjectures will be tested and revised on an
              ongoing basis, thereby revising the framework in the context in which it is
              designed to be used. 

The third goal of the project will be to investigate
              the travel of an innovation by testing, modifying, and revising a conjectured
              trajectory for the development of professional teaching communities, in the
              process relating the actual learning trajectories of two professional teaching
              communities to the contrasting organizational contexts at the two sites.
              

The fourth goal will be to investigate the organizational conditions
              necessary for sustainability by documenting the development of the two
              professional teaching communities when the researchers' direct support is
              withdrawn in the final year of the proposed project.

The goal in analyzing
              these data will be to develop longitudinal accounts of the initial
emergence
              and subsequent development of the professional teaching communities over
              a
five-year period. In doing so, the two communities will be situated within
              the institutional
settings of respective districts, thereby locating the
              collaborating teachers' evolving
instructional practices in both the social
              contexts of the professional teaching
communities and the organizational
              settings of the districts. The student outcome data
will allow the researchers
              to document the consequences of changes in the teachers' instructional
              practices for the students' mathematical learning.

