Title       : Opening the Genetics Gateway with Automated Support for Student Thinking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0231219

Award Number: 0231219
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474655             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert T. Corbett corbett+@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth W. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth R. Koedinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Genetics is a fundamental unifying theme of biology. The Human Genome Project
              and
advances in genetics and biotechnology are revolutionizing biology,
              medicine and industry.
However, genetics is an intimidating challenge for
              college students across the full range of post-
secondary institutions and the
              growing demand for genetics education outstrips the supply of
qualified
              teachers.
We are developing a genetics cognitive tutor to support active
              problem-based
learning in undergraduate genetics courses and make genetics
              accessible to more students.
Cognitive tutors are an educational technology
              that speeds learning and yields large achievement
gains compared to
              conventional instruction by providing students "just-in-time"
              problem-solving
help. Cognitive Tutor mathematics courses are currently in use
              by more than 125,000 students in
over 700 middle and high schools. The
              genetics cognitive tutor is building on past successes in
tutoring
              quantitative reasoning and using the cognitive tutoring technology in novel
              realms of
scientific inference and experimental design.
We are pilot testing
              and evaluating cognitive tutor lessons in six universities representing
              a
diverse student population, and including large public universities, private
              research universities, a
small liberal arts university and an historically
              black university. Pilot testing includes formative
evaluations of tutor
              effectiveness and student learning rates. Summative evaluations of
achievement
              outcomes are being conducted by Carnegie Mellon's Office of Technology
              for
Education and Eberly Teaching Center. Cognitive tutor dissemination
              activities are focusing on
summer workshops and conference workshops, and are
              facilitated by a project advisory
board and Carnegie Mellon's Office of
              Innovation Transfer.
