Title       : A Lehigh Valley Partnership to Enhance STEM Education through G4-12 Teaching
               Fellows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0231768

Award Number: 0231768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1223068            (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Pottenger billp@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry U. Odi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn D. Blank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Schulte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Horace Moo-Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Lehigh University is partnering with middle and high schools in the Allentown
              and Bethlehem Area School Districts in the Lehigh Valley, industry experts from
              Air Products and Chemicals, Agere Systems, Insaco, Inc. and the Discovery
              Center for Science and Technology Pennsylvania on "A Lehigh Valley Partnership
              to Enhance STEM Education Through G4-12 Teaching Fellows."  The involvement of
              industry and the Discovery Center is novel and evidence of the project's 
              intellectual merit.  This project builds upon established outreach programs at
              Lehigh and will continue to enhance the educational experience of students in
              Lehigh Valley schools by placing graduate and advanced undergraduate Teaching
              Fellows in STEM classrooms and establishing STEM outreach teams.  Teaching
              Fellows are helping grade 4-12 teachers introduce inquiry-based learning and
              use multimedia, wireless and other innovative technologies in local classrooms.
              Outreach teams consisting of Fellows, Lehigh faculty and industry experts are
              training and exchanging ideas with STEM teachers and administrators from the
              two schools districts. The great diversity within the school districts served
              promise broad impacts from these activities.  This project is partially
              supported by funds from the Directorate for Engineering and from the
              Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering.

Title of
              Project: A Lehigh Valley Partnership to Enhance STEM Education through G4-12
              Teaching Fellows
Institution:  Lehigh University
PI/Co-PI: William M.
              Pottenger, Glenn D. Blank, Horace Moo-Young, Henry U. Odi, Michael J. Schulte
              (all from Lehigh University)
Partner School District: Allentown and Bethlehem
              Public School Districts
Funding: $1,223,068
# of Fellows/year: 6 Graduate
              Fellows and 6 Undergraduate Fellows
Target Audience: Middle and High School
              (grades vary based on discipline)
Setting:  Urban
Disciplines:   Computer
              Science, Information Technology, Physics, Chemistry, Earth Science and
              Mathematics

