Title       : GK-12 OCEANS: Ocean sCientist Educator pArtnerships eNhancing Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0231843

Award Number: 0231843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1497879            (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa M. Greely greely@marine.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paula G. Coble  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary 

Teacher-Fellow GK-12 teams are introducing, ocean based
              science into Pineallis County K-8 classrooms, aligning their efforts with the
              Earth Science, Life Science, and Physical Science content strands in the
              Florida state science standards. The teams collaborate to discover and then
              meet the expressed needs of school district administrators.  Through their work
              with the Fellows, the teachers, many of whom have little previous background in
              ocean science, are becoming adept at stimulating and elevating students'
              interest in a variety of science topics by capitalizing on the fact that
              Florida is surrounded on three sides by ocean.  Faculty collaborators from the
              College of Marine Science and the College of Education serve as mentors and
              educators to provide professional support in content and pedagogy for Fellows
              and teachers.  Recruiting strategies for student and faculty participation
              capitalize on the growing interest of College of Marine Science graduate
              students in education, outreach learning and teaching opportunities, and the
              initiation of expanded Ocean Science content based Science Education degree
              programs offered by the College of Education.  The broader impacts of the
              project are reflected in the benefits accruing to each of the participants. 
              The Fellows are becoming better prepared for the classroom environment and are
              developing improved communication skills in such areas as connecting with
              diverse audiences.   The participating teachers, many of whom have little
              academic background in ocean science, by working with content experts, are
              becoming adept at capitalizing on the fact that Florida is surrounded on three
              sides by ocean to stimulate and elevate students interest generally in a
              variety of science topics. Other teachers benefit from the resources the teams
              have developed and put on the web.  The K-8 students benefit from their
              interaction with real-life scientists who act as role models and content
              specialists, and who are a source of career information.  Schools benefit
              through 1) professional development for teachers which expands both their
              content knowledge and inquiry-based instructional skills, and 2) an improved
              science learning environment for students which incorporates the local ocean
              setting into real world science applications.  The higher education partners
              benefit because the project facilitates collaboration between scientists and
              educators, fosters development of innovative degree programs, and serves as a
              recruitment incentive for prospective graduate students in Marine Science and
              Education.   

Title of Project:  GK-12 OCEANS: Graduate Teaching Fellows in
              K-12 Education Institution:  University of South Florida  
PI/CoPI:  Teresa
              Greely and Paula Coble
Cooperating District and Schools:  Pinellas County,
              Canterbury School of Florida  
Number of Fellows per year:  10 graduates, 3
              undergraduates
Setting:  Urban, Suburban  
Target Audience of the project: 
              K-8  
NSF supported disciplines involved:  Geosciences/Ocean Science  

