Title       : Developing Subject Matter Knowledge in Mathematics Middle School Teachers: A
               Cross-National Study of Teacher Education as a Follow-Up of TIMSS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0231886

Award Number: 0231886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1397599            (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Schmidt bschmidt@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria T. Tatto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Proposal number: 	0231886	
PI: 	William Schmidt
Institution: 	
              Michigan State University
Title: 	 Developing Subject Matter Knowledge in
              Mathematics Middle School Teachers: A Cross-National Study of Teacher Education
              as a Follow-up of TIMSS

The project studies in countries how middle school
              mathematics teachers learn to teach subject matter content as a result of their
              preparation.  Specifically, the study will address: 
(1)	What is the general
              structure of teacher preparation in the countries selected? The study will
              select six countries using criteria such as high levels of achievement in
              TIMSS, challenging 8th grade curricula, distinctive teacher preparation
              approaches and "map" the structure of teacher preparation in each country.
              
(2)	What is the mathematical and pedagogical content those preparing to teach
              eighth graders have an opportunity to learn? The project will select a
              probability sample of teacher preparation institutions in each country and
              within it a sample of students in their last year of study to probe their
              curriculum experiences and mathematical and pedagogical knowledge. 
(3)	What
              is the cost-effectiveness of different approaches to teacher preparation?

It
              is anticipated that results from the study will provide a conceptual framework
              for comparative study of teacher preparation; help understand the greater
              diversity of approaches; provide a methodology, indicators and analytic tools
              to study the influence of teacher preparation on prospective candidates; and
              provide policy insight on how to improve the preparation of middle school
              mathematics teachers. 

