Title       : Teaching Discrete Mathematics via Original Historical Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0231113

Award Number: 0231113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74432              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald M. Lodder jlodder@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hing Leung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Desh Ranjan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Pengelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guram Bezhanishvili  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A team of mathematicians and computer scientists is developing curricular
              materials, based on original historical sources, for beginning to advanced
              undergraduate courses in discrete mathematics, courses which today draw a
              significant number of computer science majors.  The historical modules offer
              excerpts from original source material, together with a sequence of student
              exercises designed to illuminate the groundbreaking ideas introduced in the
              source. Pilot testing is also underway at a diverse set of institutions,
              including the University of the District of Columbia, Northern Kentucky
              University, Indiana University of Pennsylvania, the University of Southern
              Colorado, and the United States Military Academy. Other institutions are being
              added as the project progresses. In addition, the project provides graduate
              students at New Mexico State University an opportunity to perform apprentice
              teaching, which also generates additional feedback on the materials. 
              Particular advantages of the historical approach include providing context and
              direction for the subject matter, honing students' verbal and deductive skills
              through reading original works, and the rediscovery of conceptual roots common
              to both discrete mathematics and computer science.
