Title       : Process Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0231120

Award Number: 0231120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1512860            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Moog r_moog@fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Creegan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Spencer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrei R. Straumanis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      Office of the Provost
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Recent research into the learning process has begun to show how students learn
              and what environments are best to facilitate learning. There are many barriers
              that have prevented widespread adoption of these new teaching paradigms,
              including: the investment of time needed to make a change; lack of tested
              models and materials; and support systems to enable and encourage faculty to
              continue an innovation. To address these needs, collaborators at Franklin and
              Marshall College, SUNY Stony Brook, and Washington College have developed
              innovative and effective teaching methods and materials for General, Organic,
              and Physical Chemistry instruction. Constructivist and learning cycle
              principles are combined with an emphasis on essential learning processes and
              student-student interactions to create a new educational model called Process
              Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL). The practices and materials we have
              developed are applicable to large or small classrooms, recitation sections with
              or without technology, and laboratories. 
The approach and the new materials
              have all been nationally tested and are readily available. The project goals
              include faculty development, dissemination of new practices, and adoption of
              innovation through workshops, consultancies and on-site visits. An
              Innovation-Adoption Model is being used to assess the various components of
              dissemination that lead to innovation. A major objective of the project is to
              create an interconnected network of experts and adopters in order to increase
              the rate of adoption. A research team at The Catholic University of America is
              evaluating the effectiveness of this project.

