Title       : Statistical Physics on Groups and Determinantal Probabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0231224

Award Number: 0231224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61816              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell D. Lyons rdlyons@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI is investigating questions in several areas of discrete probability that
              often have surprising interconnections.  Most of these questions are set in a
              group-invariant context and the goal is to understand how geometric or
              algebraic properties of the group are reflected in probabilistic properties of
              the processes.  For example, in the random cluster model, there are 4 natural
              critical values of p for each value of q.  The PI is continuing his previous
              investigations of the relations among these values on planar Cayley graphs of
              groups.  Two other models under investigation concern random spanning forests
              in graphs.  One of these is obtained from limits of minimal spanning trees in
              finite graphs, while the other is from uniform spanning trees.  The former is
              connected to percolation, a special case of the random cluster model.  The
              latter, connected to random walks and potential theory, is much better
              understood.  The PI is working to bring the state of knowledge of the minimal
              spanning forest closer to that for the uniform spanning forest.  There are also
              many open questions related to the uniform spanning forest that the PI is
              investigating.  When one views uniform spanning forests as determinantal
              probability measures, there are a large number of new questions that open up. 
              For example, the PI is working to establish basic topological properties of
              higher-dimensional analogues of random forests and to establish conjectures
              that arise by analogy to percolation. Phase transitions and entropy of other
              determinantal dynamical systems are also under investigation.

The field of
              statistical physics is concerned to a great extent with mathematical models of
              phase transitions (e.g., water to ice).  Typically the model of space is a
              fixed lattice, for example, the square lattice in two dimensions or the cubic
              lattice in three dimensions.  This lattice is infinite and possesses the
              mathematical properties of what is called a group.  The simplest model, known
              as percolation, originated in the study of fluid flow in the ground and gas
              flow through a gas mask.  One asks how far fluid can flow, in particular,
              whether it can flow arbitrarily far.  This, of course, depends on the density
              of particles; there is a phase transition as the density increases, whereby
              after a certain point, with probability 1, fluid can no longer flow arbitrarily
              far.  One would like to know where that point is and how the probability
              changes as this critical point is approached.  About a decade ago, several
              researchers began investigating lattices that are quite different from the
              usual Euclidean ones that are most familiar and that most closely correspond to
              our physical world.  These new lattices, called nonamenable, are also usually
              based on groups. Such investigations began out of the usual scientific and
              mathematical curiosity that drives fundamental research.  Within the last 5
              years, this area of research, statistical physics on nonamenable groups, has
              seen an explosion of interest.  This area of research turns out to be quite
              rich and to contain a large number of important fundamental questions whose
              answers remain unknown.  Already, there have been applications to Euclidean
              lattices of some of the new ideas that have arisen in response to the need to
              develop new tools for nonamenable groups.

