Title       : Biochemistry and Functional Genomics of Methanococcus Jannaschii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0231319

Award Number: 0231319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $625000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. White rhwhite@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1144,1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The methanogenic archaea convert simple carbon compounds into methane gas.
              Because biologically produced methane is both a commercially attractive energy
              source and a greenhouse gas, it is desirable to find methods to regulate
              methanogenesis. This project uses comparative genomics, analytical
              biochemistry, enzyme purification, protein chemistry and molecular genetics to
              identify new genes that are required for growth and methane formation in the
              complete genome sequence of one of the best-studied methanogens, Methanococcus
              jannaschii. This autolithotrophic organism uses hydrogen to reduce carbon
              dioxide to methane and produces all the organic compounds that it requires for
              growth from gases and minerals released from mid-ocean hydrothermal vent
              fluids. To catalyze these reactions, M. jannaschii requires at least 19 organic
              coenzymes including seven coenzymes that are essential for methane formation.
              This project will identify and characterize enzymes from M. jannaschii that are
              required for the biosynthesis of coenzymes and amino acids, but have not yet
              been identified from that organism's complete genome sequence. These
              "invisible" enzymes are attractive targets for designing specific inhibitors of
              methanogenesis. Two coenzymes produced by M. jannaschii, riboflavin and the
              deaza-riboflavin coenzyme F420, are derived from a common precursor. Although
              both archaea and eukaryotes biosynthesize this precursor by the same pathway,
              the archaea use different enzymes to catalyze several reactions including the
              GTP cyclohydrolase and pyrimidine deaminase steps. In addition to studying
              these unique enzymes, this project will characterize proteins involved in
              subsequent steps of coenzyme F420 biosynthesis, including the CofC, CofD,CofE,
              CofG and CofH proteins. This research also studies novel enzymes required for
              the biosynthesis of 4-aminobenzoic acid (used to produce the methanopterin
              coenzyme). Finally, this project will identify "invisible" enzymes that
              catalyze proline, cysteine and methionine amino acid biosyntheses,
              3-dehydroquinate biosynthesis (a precursor of aromatic amino acids) and purine
              nucleotide biosynthesis.

The microorganism Methanococcus jannaschii grows in
              mid-ocean hydro thermal vents, using hydrogen and carbon dioxide to make
              methane gas. This project uses molecular genetic, biochemical and computational
              techniques to identify new genes in the complete genome sequence of M.
              jannaschii that are required for growth and methane formation. Results from
              this research will help explain how methanogenic organisms have evolved to
              produce methane and suggest molecular targets for the beneficial regulation of
              biological methane formation, useful to produce fuel or to reduce greenhouse
              gas emissions.

