Title       : Advanced Neutron Scattering Network for Education and Research with a Focus on
               Mechanical Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0231320

Award Number: 0231320
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Liaw pliaw@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hahn Choo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xun-Li Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Camden Hubbard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond A. Buchanan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 7222      OFFICE OF SPECIAL PROGRAMS-DMR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5946,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The International Materials Institute [IMI] at the University of Tennessee, in a
              strong partnership with the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, supports the
              international neutron-scattering community for innovative, multidisciplinary
              materials education and research in the area of mechanical behavior of advanced
              materials. The participants include 16 universities worldwide, 7 neutron user
              facilities worldwide, and 8 US industries.

The objectives of the IMI are to:
              [1] develop an international network of researchers and educators who are
              actively involved in neutron-scattering materials research; [2] facilitate the
              exchange of scientific and educational information through collaborative
              research and curriculum-development projects; [3] develop a world-class work
              force in neutron science by providing US students, scientists, and engineers
              the training and access to research programs and facilities worldwide; [4]
              identify and lead innovative materials-research efforts; and [5] establish an
              international Internet-based virtual institute. 

The core research thrust
              areas include [1] in-situ studies of mechanical behavior; [2] real-time
              measurements of internal stresses; [3] in-situ studies of microstructures; and
              [4] theoretical modeling that complements the experimental studies.

The
              broader impacts of the IMI activities are multi-faceted. Most importantly, IMI
              will train young scientists in the cutting-edge neutron research, instilling
              the ability and motivation to go beyond disciplinary and regional boundaries,
              and integrate knowledge from multiple areas to address global problems.
              Therefore, one of the major outcomes will be a world-class scientific work
              force in neutron science with a unique education and research background.
              
%%%
The International Materials Institute [IMI] at the University of
              Tennessee, in a strong partnership with the Oak Ridge National Laboratory
              [ORNL], supports an international neutron-scattering community for innovative,
              multidisciplinary materials education and research in the area of mechanical
              behavior of advanced materials. 

Neutron scattering is one of the most
              powerful characterization techniques available for materials research, and its
              proven capabilities and anticipated potential justify the 1.4 billion dollar
              construction of the Spallation Neutron Source [SNS] at ORNL as well as a number
              of multi-million dollar facility upgrades at the Los Alamos Neutron Science
              Center [LANSCE], New Mexico, Intense Pulsed Neutron Source [IPNS], Illinois,
              and High Flux Isotope Reactor [HFIR], Tennessee.  The international competition
              is fierce in the neutron-science arena, e.g., the European Union [EU], Japan,
              China, and Australia are also currently building or designing the
              next-generation neutron sources. 

Through the IMI, a group of the most
              active researchers in the neutron-scattering materials research field will form
              an international network to provide a synergistic effort in advancing the
              science, education, and training on the application of neutron scattering in
              materials research, specifically regarding the study of mechanical behavior of
              advanced materials. 

The main goals of the proposed IMI are to [1]
              accomplish the national agenda of advancing neutron science in the US to the
              leadership position in the world by providing international cooperative
              education and research opportunities to the neutron-scattering materials
              research community, and [2] train young scientists at the undergraduate,
              graduate, and postgraduate levels to fully utilize the neutron facilities
              worldwide for dramatically expanding the development of new materials, and
              thereby, establish a global leadership in the neutron-science arena.

 


