Title       : U.S./Africa Materials Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0231418

Award Number: 0231418
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2850000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Winston O. Soboyejo soboyejo@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhigang Suo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antoine Kahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Scherer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Srolovitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 7222      OFFICE OF SPECIAL PROGRAMS-DMR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5928,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed U.S./Africa Materials Institute will focus on the development of
              collaborations between materials scientists in Africa and the counterparts in
              the U.S.  The Virtual Materials Institute will provide a Princeton setting for
              research collaborations in the areas of materials design, synthesis and
              characterization.  However, the center will also coordinate interactions with
              other universities in the U.S.  These include: Harvard, Brown, Case Western
              University, The Ohio State University, the University of California at Santa
              Barbara (UCSB) and Concordia University.  A total of 8 African scientists and
              their students will be supported (per year) to spend between 3 months and 6
              months interacting with their counterparts in the U.S.  Half of these
              scientists will be based at Princeton University, while the other half will be
              based at participating U.S. universities.  The institute will focus on research
              and education in the area of materials design.  It will work on areas that can
              promote economic development in Africa and the U.S.  This will include:
              materials research on organic thin films for the next generation of
              light-emitting devices and solar cells; micro-electro-mechanical systems for
              switching and biomedical applications, and heterogeneous materials for
              affordable housing and materials production/synthesis.

The U.S./Africa
              Materials Institute will use web-based tools to provide access to materials
              journals, virtual laboratories and classrooms, and web-cast symposia and
              workshops.  Teaching modules will be developed to support the education of
              African and U.S. materials scientists and engineers in materials selection and
              design, structural materials, micro-electro-mechanical systems, and materials
              characterization.  The web-based teaching modules will be developed in
              conjunction with Internet 2, and made freely available on the
              world-wide-web.

In an effort to promote the interactions between U.S. and
              African scientists, the Institute will work closely with the African Materials
              Research Society and the Materials Research Society in the U.S. to organize
              joint symposia/workshops in Africa and the U.S.  One major workshop will be
              organized in the U.S. during each year of the program.  The Institute will also
              provide financial support for at least 10 U.S. materials researchers and
              graduate students to attend Africa MRS Meetings.  A similar number of visiting
              African collaborators will be supported to attend the Materials Research
              Society meetings in the U.S.  During these visits, the Institute will organize
              information sessions designed to expose a wider range of U.S. and African
              researchers to emerging U.S./Africa collaborations in materials research and
              education.

The Institute will be guided by an Advisory Board that will
              include representatives from Africa, South America, Europe, Canada and the U.S.
               The Advisory Board will meet once a year to evaluate the performance and
              future needs/directions of the Institute.  The Institute will be directed by
              Prof. Wole Soboyejo at Princeton University.  Prof. Soboyejo will be supported
              by an Administrative Manager and a secretary, who will help to coordinate the
              activities of the Institute.  The other participating collaborators at
              Princeton University include Prof. David Srolovitz, Prof. Zhigang Suo, Prof.
              George Scherer, Prof. Tim Baker and Prof. Antoine Kahn.  At other universities,
              the collaborators will include Prof. Arthur Heuer (Case Western), Prof. Anthony
              Evans (UCSB), Prof. Tianjin Lu (Cambridge), Prof. John Hutchinson (Harvard),
              Prof. Alan Needleman (Brown), Prof. Clyde Briant (Brown), Prof. Alfred Soboyejo
              (The Ohio State University) and Prof. Primus Mtenga (FAMU/FSU).

In an effort
              to expose more U.S. students to the process of international collaboration, the
              Institute will support 4 graduate students and 4 undergraduate students per
              year to work on various aspects of the proposed research.  The students will
              work closely with the African visitors during visits to their respective
              universities in the U.S.  They will also be funded to attend the symposia/
              workshops that will be organized by the Institute in Africa and the U.S.  The
              students will include minority and non-minority students from under-represented
              groups, as well as women under-graduate/graduate students.  All the U.S.
              collaborators will meet by teleconference once a month.  The meetings will
              provide a forum for discussions on emerging collaborations.  A center
              newsletter will also be issued once every six months to provide highlights of
              the activities of the Virtual Institute.  As usual, the outcomes of all the
              outreach and education activities will be recorded using the metrics provided
              by the NSF.
%%%
The U.S./Africa International Materials Institute will
              develop strong collaborations between materials scientists in Africa and the
              U.S.  The scientists will work on group projects that can impact global
              economic development.  These include: infrastructure materials for affordable
              housing; materials for lining the walls of furnaces and kilns that are used in
              the trillion-dollar metal melting industry; organic electronic materials for
              future light-emitting devices and solar cells, and reliable small structures
              that are relevant to microelectronics and micro-electro-mechanical devices. 
              Each year, 16 African scientists will spend 9 weeks working with their
              collaborators in the U.S.  The visiting scientists will include professors,
              research scientists and graduate students from African universities and
              research institutes.  

About half of the scientists will visit U.S.
              collaborators at Princeton University, while the other half will visit U.S.
              collaborators at Harvard University, Brown University, Northwestern University,
              The Ohio State University, the University of California-Santa Barbara, and
              Florida State University/Florida A&M University.  During the visits, the
              scientists will work on experimental or theoretical components of group
              projects.  They will also be trained in the use of modern materials
              characterization or computational facilities.  Following the visits, the
              scientists will return to Africa to continue with the aspects of the work that
              can be done in Africa.  Each scientist will return to the U.S. over a
              multi-year (2-5 year period) until a significant body of research is done and
              published in international journals.

The program will also integrate
              education and training of U.S. undergraduate/graduate students and
              post-doctoral researchers in the process of international collaboration.  Each,
              at least four U.S. graduate students, four U.S. undergraduate students and one
              post-doctoral research will be supported by the program at Princeton University
              and the Ohio State University.  These students will participate in future
              U.S./Africa workshops and conferences.  They will also be involved in
              international exchange visits, during which they will interact with
              collaborators and students at African universities.

In the area of materials
              education, the program will develop web-based modules on materials design and
              characterization.  These will include teaching modules on: materials selection
              and design; advanced structural materials; mechanical properties of engineered
              materials, and materials characterization.  The modules will be made widely
              available on the world-wide-web.  They will also be integrated into the
              teaching of undergraduate and graduate courses at Princeton University and
              collaborating African universities.  Finally, annual that will develop
              increased interactions between the U.S. and Africa in the areas of materials
              research and education.  The workshops will also provide an opportunity to
              disseminate the new knowledge and educational tools that will emerge from the
              program.


