Title       : National Dissemination of the National Engineering Projects in Community Service
               (EPICS) Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0231361

Award Number: 0231361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2499975            (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Oakes oakes@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Coyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Maller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leah H. Jamieson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
It has become widely recognized that engineering students need skills that go
              beyond their technical strengths:  skills in communication, project planning,
              awareness of the customer, of ethical and professional issues, and of the
              social and global context in which engineering is practiced. Together with
              start-to-finish design experience, these skills mark an increased emphasis on
              experiential education. Integration of these dimensions into engineering
              courses is critical to the quality of education. However, it has also been
              widely recognized that traditional engineering programs are not graduating
              students who fully possess these skills. There is also a growing sense that
              broadening the notion of an engineer's core competencies to include these
              skills may be critical to achieving a population of engineering professionals
              that is gender- and ethnically diverse. Engineering Projects in Community
              Service (EPICS) is an award-winning academic program that was initiated at
              Purdue to address the dual needs of teaching engineering design and meeting
              community needs for access to expertise in engineering and technology. Based on
              numerous measures of success, EPICS is effectively integrating highly mentored,
              long-term, large-scale, team-based, multidisciplinary design projects into the
              undergraduate engineering curriculum as well as being an exemplary program that
              is addressing a critical need in engineering design education. 

In
              partnership with Microsoft Research, this project is implementing a national
              dissemination of the EPICS model. The dissemination plan consists of five
              components: sharable software infrastructure, faculty development workshops,
              seed grants, partnerships for institutionalization, and content dissemination. 
              Dissemination to over 1000 faculty over a period of five years is proposed. 

