Title       : Pan-American Seminar and Workshop on the Interface Between Automobile Traffic
               Networks Under Dynamic Traffic Assignment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0231635

Award Number: 0231635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89906              (Estimated)
Investigator: Didier M. Valdes dvaldes@ce.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luis F. Pumarada  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jorge I. Velez-Arocho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 9001, Mayaguez,P.R.00681
	      Mayaguez, PR  00681    787/834-7620

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This award represents funding for a conference-workshop to assess the state of
              the art and the state of the practice and suggest research priorities in the
              integration of Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) and automobile traffic systems under
              Dynamic Traffic Assignment (DTA) in North, Central and South America.  This
              conference-workshop will provide an extraordinary opportunity to bring together
              leading researchers and practitioners from the Americas to exchange ideas and
              information concerning the integration of BRT and other transit systems and
              automobile traffic networks under DTA and other ITS systems. During this
              activity and in follow-up activities, the participants will present existing
              DTA modeling approaches and BRT systems operations, suggest ways of integrating
              them, prioritize needs for research, and create hemispheric awareness of local
              and regional needs.

This conference-workshop, which will take place in
              Puerto Rico, will be an example of international exchange and collaboration as
              well as the integration of BRT technology into the DTA modeling approach to
              produce improvements in urban mobility in the near future. Puerto Rico has
              unique comparative advantages for joint North-South research and technology
              transfer because of its understanding of Latin American and US transportation
              environments. 

This conference-workshop provides a special opportunity for
              hemispheric cooperation because it brings together countries with complementary
              knowledge, in a situation where sharing information will result in mutual
              benefits. This international conference-workshop will help identify the most
              advanced thinking and technologies from the US or other countries in the
              Americas; for example, modeling techniques developed in the US and successful
              implementation of BRT in major Latin American cities. In addition, this
              activity will foster the exchange of ideas in terms of future collaboration on
              cooperative research projects and international events.


