Title       : Louisiana Tech's Graduate K-12 Teaching Fellows Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0231728

Award Number: 0231728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1380997            (Estimated)
Investigator: David Mills mills@latech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jo Dauzat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie K. Guice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda L. Ramsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shirley Reagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Tech University
	      P O BOX 3168 TECH STATION
	      Ruston, LA  71272    318/257-0211

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Louisiana Tech University Graduate K-12 (GK-12) Teaching Fellows Program 
              partners the Colleges of Applied and Natural Science, Engineering and Science,
              and Education at  Louisiana Tech University with four nearby rural school
              systems and three informal science education  organizations .SciPort
              Interactive Science Center, The IDEA Place, and the NASA Outreach  Center,
              CATALyST (Center for Applied Teaching and Learning to Yield Scientific
              Thinking),  a regional science math education center housed at Louisiana Tech. 
              The Fellows work with their teacher partners to develop and deliver grade level
              appropriate modules that bring the Fellows research directly into the
              classroom.  The middle and high school students are developing realistic and
              positive ideas about what scientists and engineers do at the same time as they
              learn science content and concepts.  The Fellows are gaining an understanding
              of effective teaching methods in science.  The teachers and schools have been
              provided with needed technical assistance.  Each Teaching Fellow is partnered
              with a K-12 Partner Teacher.  A seminar course for Teaching Fellows and Partner
              Teachers  introduces  Teaching Fellows to teaching and learning in K-12 schools
              and introduces both teachers and fellows to nationally recognized curricular 
              materials.  Partnerships with local museums provide the partners with
              opportunities to introduce their students to local informal science education 
              programs. The broader impacts of the program are reflected in the enhanced and
              expanded  collaborative partnerships developed between Louisiana Tech
              University and surrounding school systems as exemplified by their participation
              in an electronic learning  community of Teaching Fellows, Partner Teachers, and
              University Faculty; and the opportunities they now have to  participation  in
              the publication of a new journal,  The Journal of K-12 Research in Science and
              Mathematics.  This project is partially supported by funds from the Directorate
              for Biological Sciences.

Title of Project:  The Louisiana Tech University
              GK-12 Teaching Fellows Program  
Institution:    Louisiana Tech University 
              
PI/CoPI:  David K. Mills, Linda L. Ramsey, Leslie K. Guice, Shirley P.
              Reagan, Jo Ann V. Dauzat
Partner School Districts: Lincoln. Ouachita, Jackson,
              Clairborne Parishes
Funding: $1,380,997 total for 3 years  
Fellows Per year:
              5 graduate, 5 undergraduate, yr 1; 9 graduate, 5 undergraduate, yr 2-3 
              
Target Audience:  grades 4-12
Setting: Rural 
NSF Disciplines:  Biology,
              Engineering, Chemistry, Computer Science, Physics, Math    

