Title       : The "Chemistry is in the News" Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0231354

Award Number: 0231354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333117             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rainer Glaser GlaserR@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In its 1996 report, Shaping the Future--New Expectations for Undergraduate
              Education in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology, the Advisory
              Committee to the National Science Foundation Directorate of Education and Human
              Resources charges college-level science educators to effectively use technology
              to enhance learning and communication, and to develop curricula that take full
              advantage of modern technology. Many of the key recommendations made to STEM
              faculty in Shaping the Future are addressed in the design of the Chemistry is
              in the News (CIITN) project. The overarching goal of CIITN project is to
              facilitate learning activities by connecting real world social, economic, and
              political issues to the teaching of organic chemistry. The activities consist
              in the study, creation, and peer-review of CIITN projects online. A CIITN
              project consists of (a link to) an electronically published news article from
              the popular press or any online media and includes a tutorial/editorial and
              questions. These activities are conducted in small collaborative groups, guided
              by peer-learning assistants, in the context of large lecture settings and they
              are aimed at undergraduate students majoring in science. The online tools and
              components of the Chemistry is in the News project are being developed in order
              to enable its nationwide implementation and adoption. We hold workshops at the
              University of Missouri-Columbia for faculty development and symposia at
              American Chemical Society meetings to disseminate the CIITN news projects. We
              hope that with the Chemistry is in the News project we bring about broader and
              deeper scientific literacy, a systemic change that is so desired by educators,
              administrators and politicians alike.
