Title       : Educational Materials Development for a General Education Course on Art and
               Geology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0231106

Award Number: 0231106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74968              (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise A. Battles   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane R. Hudak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga. Southern Univ. R&S Fdn
	      4 College Plaza
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              College courses that integrate the teaching of science and art are an
              increasingly popular approach to non-science majors' instruction. These
              interdisciplinary courses provide a rich environment for science teaching and
              learning, and one that is well-suited for applying science education "best
              practices" such as hands-on, in-context, and active learning. Recent conference
              sessions and journal publications have documented the utility of teaching
              geoscience with art; however, a major barrier to the concept's widespread
              dissemination is the lack of publicly available educational materials in
              support of geology and art courses. The goal of this proof-of-concept project
              is to develop as a prototype two chapters of an introductory-level college
              textbook on art and geology. The project team brings together faculty with
              expertise in geology, art, and educational research, as well as experience in
              the design, development, and teaching of a geology and art course and the
              development of commercially published multimedia educational materials. Project
              activities include: 1) the development of prototypical art and geology
              chapters, including external review, 2) pilot-testing of the materials in a
              core curriculum course team-taught by the PIs, 3) evaluation and subsequent
              refinements of the products, and 4) dissemination to the geology and art
              communities about the prototype and overall initiative, highlighted by a
              faculty workshop offered at a major professional meeting. These activities are
              establishing the foundation for progressing from the proof-of-concept stage to
              full-scale development, the goal of which is the production of a publicly
              available and widely adoptable art and geology textbook with supporting
              multimedia materials.

