Title       : STI: AMPATH Collaborative Research and Education Operational and Functional
               Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0231844

Award Number: 0231844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454031             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julio Ibarra julio@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi Alvarez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal provides staff support for the AMPATH project. This project in
              advanced networking infrastructure and an international exchange point for
              research and education is based in Miami, Florida at Florida International
              University (FIU).  The project will connect at least 10 countries' National or
              Regional Research and Education Networks (NRENS), and will provide advanced
              networking connectivity to US e-Science applications and major instrumentation
              interests in Latin America and the Caribbean.  The future work plan objectives
              proposed will assist information sharing between the region and US scientific
              researchers and educators, using Internet based computational grids and major
              research instrumentation.
 
The specific work plan includes objectives to:
              
(1) Enable and support strategic US-led projects in South and Central
              America, Mexico and the Caribbean 
(2) Connect the NRENs in the AMPATH Service
              Area to the global R&E networking community  
(3) Develop an outreach and
              dissemination program through conferences, workshops and other channels to
              increase awareness of AMPATH and its benefit to the global R&E networking
              community 
(4) Develop a technology plan that will enable the AMPATH network
              to support e-Science and experimental networks 

The proposal uses "The
              August, 2001 AMPATH Workshop Report" prepared by a committee of US researchers,
              as the foundation of its funding request.  To launch the AMPATH project, Global
              Crossing donated 10 DS3 (45 Mbps) circuits for three-year periods, staggered
              depending on the connection date of each NREN.  Cisco Systems, Lucent
              Technologies and Juniper Networks donated carrier-class network equipment; and
              Terremark Worldwide, Inc. donated collocation space in the NAP Of The Americas.
               Since June 2001, the AMPATH project has connected three National Research and
              Education Networks in South America: REUNA of Chile, RNP of Brazil, and RETINA
              of Argentina; the Academic Network of Sao Paolo, ANSP5, which is a State-funded
              network; the University of Puerto Rico; the Arecibo observatory; and the
              Gemini-South telescope.  The NRENs of Colombia, Mexico, Panama, Peru and
              Venezuela remain to be connected to the project.  The final DS3 is to connect
              the R&E network of the US Virgin Islands, primarily targeted to the distributed
              campuses of the University of the Virgin Islands.  

Until funding is
              received this work is done on a best-effort basis by the PI and Co-PI, the
              Chief Network Engineer and the International Coordinator for the AMPATH
              project.  NSF will establish a significant piece of international
              infrastructure by funding this project and connecting NRENS for the region.

