Title       : A Web-Based Writing and Peer Review Component in Introductory Earth Science
               Classes: Adaptation of the Calibrated Peer Review Tool Used in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0231246

Award Number: 0231246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39828              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cinzia Cervato cinzia@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proof-of-concept project is designing and evaluating three prototype
              Calibrated Peer Review (CPR) assignments for use in introductory Earth and
              environmental science classes. CPR is a technical writing tool established by a
              consortium of institutions in California and used by chemistry and biology
              departments at universities and colleges. This instructional assessment tool
              employs an interactive web-based approach that
allows a student to develop
              increased understanding by writing about timely, relevant topics. Students
              develop short essays and review their peers' essays in a manner that is both
              time-efficient and effective. This CPR project is implementing digital tools
              for three Earth science-based assignments providing managed review, analysis,
              assessment of student input, and preparation of reports for both student and
              instructor. Central to the identification of topics that are content-rich and,
              from a citizens' perspective, relevant, the Lexis-Nexis news database is being
              utilized. Using this searchable resource, three topics of particular relevance
              are being used: earthquake and plate boundaries, evidence for global warming,
              and flood hazards. Collaboration with a group of faculty involved in the CPR
              project is being established to facilitate the PIs use of available
              technological infrastructure and to help develop a medium appropriate for use
              by Earth science departments nationwide. The project is being evaluated at Iowa
              State University and by instructors at a community college,
              undergraduate-oriented state college, and a research university.

