Title       : Understanding and Fostering Model Based Learning In Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0231808

Award Number: 0231808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $956126             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Clement clement@educ.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will study learning and teaching processes in several exemplary
              science
curricula in different subject areas. All of them use new approaches
              to teaching that are
unique in the way that they foster active learning of
              conceptual models on the part of the
student. At present many of the general
              principles underlying the learning that occurs in
these lessons are poorly
              understood. However, advances in cognitive science have
produced a very
              promising new theory of model-based learning which can help to
analyze and
              describe these teaching techniques. The investigators will use a
combination
              of qualitative and quantitative methods to study these innovative units
              and
analyze them using these new cognitive science concepts. The overall goal
              is to find
principles of instruction for developing students'  visualizable
              models in science. Central
to the project will be case studies of skilled
              teachers who are adept at fostering model
construction by students. The
              problem is to identify the strategies by which teachers are
able to do this.
              The project will analyze teaching strategies and resulting student
              learning
processes in detail using protocol analysis techniques. Follow up
              studies will make
quantitative comparisons between groups that complement the
              qualitative case studies,
and pre and post testing will measure the size of
              learning gains in different areas.  In a second part of the project, key
              elements of model-based learning theory will be elaborated via the analysis of
              expert learning protocols.  Similarities and differences between expert and
              student processes will be examined that highlight new ways of understanding
              student learning processes that suggest new teaching strategies.
