Title       : SGER: An Integrated Approach to Prediction, Assessment and Inspection of Form
               Errors in Machined Parts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0231790

Award Number: 0231790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75134              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sundararaman Anand sam.anand@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher K. McCord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) is to
              characterize and correlate form errors in machined parts with machining process
              sequences and process variables used for generating the form. This information
              will be used to:  (a) Provide feedback and establish clear guidelines for
              reducing form errors by optimal selection of process sequences and process
              parameters, (b)	Develop methods for individualized optimal inspection plans for
              assessing the true value of each form error that are process sequence/ process
              variables specific, and (c) Develop form process capability indices for
              processes/machines.  For this research, two types of form errors, namely,
              Circularity and Cylindricity, will be considered. The domain of processes
              considered will be limited to form features generated by conventional hole
              making processes and turning processes. These form profiles/surfaces will be
              modeled using analytical Fourier Models and Generalized Cylinders.  Attributes
              of profiles/surfaces such as general shape, number of lobes, amplitude of
              lobes, eccentricity, evenness of lobe spacing, form errors, will be extracted
              by mapping profiles to a novel s-theta and psi-s domains. A Neural network
              based approach will be used for training the system to predict standardized
              profiles, ranges of standardized attributes (lobes, amplitude etc.) as well as
              range of form errors based on process sequence and parameters. For each family
              of standardized profiles, a Design of Experiments (DOE) based approach will be
              used for determining the optimum combination of sample size, sampling method,
              and evaluation algorithm (least square or minimum zone) for form inspection
              that is process specific for each profile family, and can estimate the true
              form error with a certain level of confidence. A novel combinatorial
              optimization formulation in conjunction with Genetic Algorithms (GA) will be
              used to calculate minimum zones of the form errors.  Finally, based on
              standardized profiles and form errors for each profile family, a form process
              capability index will be developed for each of the form errors. 

If
              successful, this research will provide a basis for predicting form profiles and
              errors based on process variables and sequence. This could result in selection
              of optimal process plans/variables for reducing form errors.  This research
              will also provide guidelines for optimal inspection plans for assessing form
              errors that are specific to the process creating the form. Finally, the form
              process capability indices developed can be used for optimal manufacturing
              tolerance allocation, design centering and machine selection. Such a plan can
              readily be used by designers as well as practitioners on the shop floor.
