Title       : Yale University Graduate Teaching Fellows in Biodiversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0231832

Award Number: 0231832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $879174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Donoghue michael.donoghue@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard E. Munstermann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              These activities build upon an existing collaboration between 1998, Yale
              University's Peabody Museum of Natural History and the New Haven Public School
              (NHPS) District, the Peabody Teachers Program, a professional development
              program.  Participating teachers produce inquiry-based science curricula that
              use Peabody Museum specimens in the mobile BioAction Lab for hands-on
              exploration of biological diversity and its impacts on human affairs.  This
              draws on the expertise and materials resident in Yale's Peabody Museum, and
              provides stimulating subject matter upon which basic science competencies can
              be developed.         The project proposed here is designed to build upon the
              already-existing strengths of the Peabody Teachers Program to enhance the
              professional development of middle school teachers and Yale graduate students,
              as well as to enrich the science-learning environment for New Haven middle
              school students.  The Fellows work closely with participating teachers
              throughout the year to provide technical assistance as they develop curriculum
              units, in part to help ensure the scientific accuracy of the content.  Working
              with the teachers and with children in their classrooms improves the science
              communication skills of the Graduate Fellows.      Training and on-site
              supervision of the Graduate Fellows is provided by the PIs, by the staff of the
              program, and by the Yale Teacher Preparation Program. In addition, Master
              Peabody Teachers serve as mentors for pedagogical and classroom management
              techniques.  All curriculum units designed in connection with this program are
              being incorporated into the middle school science curriculum and will also be
              disseminated broadly via the Peabody Museum's website.  All aspects of the
              program are overseen by an Advisory Council and a Working Committee, including
              evaluations of the efficacy of the program.  The broader impacts of the project
              affect a spectrum of beneficiaries.   Participating teachers are increasing
              their scientific knowledge and developing new content-rich curricula.  Their
              students (90% minority, 50% female, 75% on subsidized lunch programs) are
              benefiting from exposure to scientific subject matter and approaches of
              relevance to their daily lives, as well as to new role models.   Yale graduate
              students are directly exposed to educational issues at the middle school level,
              and to the challenges of communicating the wonder of nature and the excitement
              and importance of science.  This initiative strengthens Yale University's
              graduate programs and its commitment to providing resources for the enhancement
              of science education in the local school system. 

Title:  Yale University
              Graduate Teaching Fellows in Biodiversity  
Institution:  Yale University,
              Peabody Museum of Natural History  
School Partners:  New Haven Public
PI: 
              Michael J. Donoghue, Leonard E. Munstermann
Fellows/yr:  4 Graduate year 1, 6
              in years 2 and 3, 2 Undergraduate Target:  Middle School (grades 4-8)
Setting;
              Urban  
Disciplines:  Biological sciences     

