Title       : NSF/USDOT: A Non-Continuum Model of the Flow of Traffic Via Aggregation and its
               Application to Trip-Time Prediction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0231649

Award Number: 0231649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darbha Swaroop dswaroop@mengr.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Balke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              K. R. Rajagopal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              There is empirical evidence that information acquisition and utilization at the
              vehicular and highway level can be used to enhance the flow of traffic. 
              However, to realize the potential benefits of equipping vehicles and highways
              with information acquiring, processing and broadcasting devices, tools are
              needed that can model how information at the vehicular level affects the
              dynamics of traffic. 

This project seeks to develop new and innovative
              theories on how to model traffic flow as a finite dimensional aggregated
              dynamic system.  The concept of an aggregated dynamical system is as follows: 
              at any instant in time, traffic flow parameters can be describes as a set of
              aggregation parameters (mean, variance, mode, median, etc.) and that these
              parameters can be used as to define representative vehicles in the traffic
              stream.  This project will develop a spatially discrete model for traffic flow
              that will use such physical principles as conservation of vehicles and vehicle
              dynamics to model vehicle travel through a section of highway.  The project
              will also examine the issue of obtaining a Eulerian (macroscopic) description
              for a Lagrangian (microscopic) process.  The model will be used to examine how
              the dynamics of traffic change with the introduction of Intelligent
              Transportation Systems such as adaptive cruise control and dynamic message
              signs, both of which alter the behavior of some vehicles on the highway. 
              

The success of this research will lead to a better understanding of traffic
              flow and driver behavior, and will lead to more accurate predictions of the
              benefits of Intelligent Transportation Systems. Results of the project will be
              integrated into both undergraduate and graduate course.


