Title       : Collaborative Research: Education Materials to Bring Traditional Ecological
               Knowledge into Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0231139

Award Number: 0231139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin W. Kimmerer rkimmer@esf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) is increasingly recognized as a valid
              partner to ecological sciences.  Prototypes of course materials are being
              developed to achieve integration between TEK and the science of ecology. Such
              materials will be a valuable resource to educators at tribal colleges and at
              mainstream universities as we endeavor to support the development of increasing
              numbers of Native Americans in science disciplines. Education of mainstream
              scientists in the approaches of TEK increases cross-cultural competence,
              reduces barriers to participation by Native Americans, and enriches the
              perspectives available for environmental problem solving. Prototypes are being
              developed collaboratively between two institutions and two PIs with shared
              goals, but different audiences: a tribal college, Little Big Horn College
              (LBHC), and a mainstream university,  SUNY College of Environmental Science and
              Forestry (ESF). At LBHC the prototype is intended as a culturally responsive,
              place-based ecology course, which will integrate the science of ecology with
              TEK, primarily from Crow culture. At SUNY ESF, the prototype will be
              concept-based and span a wide diversity of cultures and ecosystems. The
              materials we develop will be incorporated into a course presently taught at
              both institutions, General Ecology. The scope of traditional knowledge has many
              parallels with the content of a typical ecology course, making it an excellent
              forum for introducing TEK. An Ecology course is also a nearly universal part of
              college biology curricula, and it thus provides an appropriate venue for wider
              dissemination of the materials developed.  




