Title       : GK-12 PRISM Problems & Research to Integrate Science & Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0231900

Award Number: 0231900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1493055            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph B. Justice jjustice@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Preetha Ram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Marsteller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Basing their work on their expertise in science and mathematics, teams composed
              of teachers, and graduate and undergraduate Fellows are developing new
              materials and adopting and adapting existing materials for problem- based
              learning (PBL) and interactive case based learning (ICBL) cases that integrate
              grade appropriate science  and math content into locally relevant classroom
              modules.  The Fellows are assisting teachers in introducing and testing these
              cases and problems in a variety of middle and high schools in the Atlanta area.
              In preparation for this work, the teams are participating in workshops on PBL
              and ICBL pedagogy, as well as teacher- designed introductions to urban
              education. Each team is collaborating on developing plans that  include a needs
              assessment, an action plan, an implementation plan and a communication plan. 
              The teams are also providing professional  development for other teachers in
              the school.   The broader impacts of these activities include benefits to the
              Fellows, the teachers and the K-12 students involved.  The Fellow are gaining
              the skills and knowledge necessary to: engage in active learning teaching
              pedagogies and reflective practice; practice the teamwork required for
              interdisciplinary science collaboration that leads to success in modern
              scientific research; communicate science effectively to a broader  audience;
              and to include outreach activities in their career goals when  they are
              practicing scientists.  The teachers are enhancing and updating their Math
              /Science content knowledge and are sharing this knowledge with other teachers. 
              They are benefiting as well from enhanced articulation and communication
              between middle school and high school  teachers and between teachers and
              college faculty and students.  The high school and middle school students
              involved are benefiting not only from the classroom modules being developed but
              are also interacting with role models to whom they can relate, leading to
              improved student interest in science and mathematics careers.  Part of the
              support for this project comes from the Directorate for Mathematics and
              Physical Sciences 

Title: Problems and Research to Integrate Science and
              Mathematics (PRISM) 
Institution: Emory University  
PI/Co-PI: Joseph B.
              Justice; Patricia Marsteller, Preetha Ram  
Partner School Districts: DeKalb
              County, City Schools of Decatur, Fulton County, Atlanta Public
Funding:
              $1,493,055
# of Fellows/yr:  10 Graduate, 10 Undergraduate
Setting:
              Urban
Grade Band:  middle-high school
Disciplines Affected: Science and
              Mathematics

