Title       : Exploration of a Social Capital Framework for Evaluative Studies of Technology
               Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0231981

Award Number: 0231981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1253373            (Estimated)
Investigator: William Penuel william.penuel@sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Means  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret M. Riel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This proposal aims to investigate an approach to measuring the success of
              school strategies for reform to be used by evaluators.  It tests whether a
              social network analysis of professional interactions among teachers can provide
              a useful indicator of school leaders effectiveness in supporting reform.  It
              will demonstrate techniques for measuring networks of professional
              interactions, changes in social networks as the innovation is initiated, and
              the relationship between both and previous capacity, and the criteria for
              representing capacity.  The study would use technology integration and describe
              how the capacity for technology influences classroom practice, such as the
              speed of the reforms in increasing use of the Internet.  Thus, the study is
              intended to show whether ties that form among teachers by talking about
              technology use creates enduring collegial ties within schools.  It will give
              information about the similarities and differences in formation of social
              networks on technology and other reforms supported by school leaders in the
              school.  The project is an exploratory study intended to explore ways of
              developing a fine-grained tool that measures interaction within a professional
              community, such as teachers. 
