Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: Field Fluctuations, Microstructure Evolution and
               Coupled Phenomena in Random Heterogeneous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0231867

Award Number: 0231867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro Ponte Castaneda ponte@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kaushik Bhattacharya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicolas Triantafyllidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0231867
Ponte Castaneda

This three-year award for US-France collaboration in
              materials engineering involves researchers at the University of Pennsylvania,
              California Institute of Technology, University of Michigan, the French National
              Center for Scientific Research, Ecole Polytechnique and Ecole Normale
              Superieure.  Pedro Ponte Castaneda in the US and Pierre Suquet in France lead a
              cooperative project on computation and measurement of nonlinear behavior of
              model composite materials. They will study problems of homogenization,
              including nonlinear properties, field fluctuations, microstructure evolution
              and coupled physical phenomena in different materials systems.  The research is
              motived by several applications of technological questions. These include creep
              and forming operations of metal polycrystal systems, studies of porous
              elastomers, high-temperature behavior of metal-matrix composites and
              smart/active materials (including shape-memory alloys and ferroelectrics). The
              goal is to predict the behavior of macroscopic composite materials by
              investigating the components. The US investigators have theoretical expertise. 
              This is complemented by the French investigators' experimental and numerical
              expertise.

This award represents the US side of parallel proposals to the
              NSF and the CNRS.  NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US
              investigator and his students. The CNRS will support visits by French
              researchers and students to the United States.

