Title       : ScienceTutor: On-Line Tutoring to Aid Retention in Gateway Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0231185

Award Number: 0231185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula A. Whitlock whitlock@sci.brooklyn.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Myra Kogen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Danny Kopec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing ScienceTutor, a new on-line tutoring model designed
              to improve student performance in gateway science courses. ScienceTutor offers
              urban commuter students access to much-needed tutoring support around the
              clock. The college is developing ScienceTutor resources for three gateway
              courses in biology, mathematics, and computer science. ScienceTutor includes
              interactive, graphics-oriented content, including summaries of key concepts,
              overviews, and solutions to problems, ScienceFAQ, answers to questions often
              asked by students, TutorTips, advice on how to handle assignments, and e-mail
              your tutor, real-time chat rooms where students can discuss issues.
              ScienceTutor differs from conventional distance learning in that it is designed
              to be used by students outside of class, it responds to students most pressing
              learning issues, and revised so that it truly serves the needs of users.
              Formative evaluation of the two-year project employs expert reviewers from
              Brooklyn College faculty knowledgeable in website design, student responses to
              questionnaires, focus groups, and field tests. Summative evaluation examines
              whether students continually choose to use ScienceTutor and whether it supports
              their performance. College support for the project includes the work of its
              three directors, experts in collaborative learning and computer science, who
              work with science faculty designing and perfecting the on-line program so that
              it serves students. Dissemination is taking place on the web and through
              presentations at conferences devoted to technology and science education. 


