Title       : SBIR Phase I: Relational Bayesian Modeling for Electronic Commerce
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  2002  
File        : a0231961

Award Number: 0231961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99763              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. D'Ambrosio dambrosi@cleverset.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CleverSet
	      800 NW Starker Ave.
	      Corvallis, OR  97330    541/758-6375

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project will advance
              Relational Bayesian Modeling (RBM) technology, with specific focus on
              Information-based Technology applications in electronic commerce, especially
              customer and application-system behavior modeling. Relational Bayesian modeling
              combines recent advances in graphical statistical modeling with modern
              relational and object-oriented data models. An RBM is compact, precise, and
              efficient. It is compact because structural information, represented
              graphically, identifies a minimal set of numeric information needed to complete
              the model. It is precise because any probabilistic model, of arbitrary
              complexity, can be represented. No global simplifying assumptions are made.
              Finally, the structural information can be exploited to support efficient
              computation with the model. Work under this SBIR will focus an open problem in
              RBMs: the representation and discovery of, and computation with, probabilistic
              dependencies in many-to-one relations. Preliminary research has shown that
              relational Bayesian models can effectively capture dynamic behavior, and can be
              applied to recognize behavioral profiles in real-time, of both users and
              systems. This will enable a new generation of adaptive web interfaces, improve
              the reliability and predictability of multi-tier system performance, and be an
              important element in realizing autonomic computing.
     The commercial
              application for this technology is electronic commerce which is in need of the
              improve reliability and predictability of multi-tier systems which this
              solution will provide.

