Title       : Development of a Pedagogical Computer Game Engine Library in Support of Computer
               Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0231325

Award Number: 0231325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74913              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Laird laird@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sugih Jamin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a proof of concept project in which software modules that support the
              development of a variety of computer game genres are developed. These software
              modules can be used to teach undergraduates computer game design and
              development. The software can also be used as a shell for explorations of many
              computer science disciplines for undergraduates where students can replace one
              of the modules with their own, thereby allowing them to concentrate on specific
              CS disciplines ranging from basic data structures and algorithms, to database
              management, issues in concurrent programming, design of network protocols,
              distributed systems and security, graphics programming, user interface design,
              and design of artificial intelligence algorithms; but still having the ability
              to create a computer game. The computer gaming context provides a very strong
              motivational construct to which most computer science students have a natural
              affinity. Placing these disciplines within the construct of a computer game
              helps students concretize and apply the concepts studied. The software is
              developed by University of Michigan undergraduate and graduate students. The
              results and software of this project are disseminated to the broader computer
              games and computer science community via appropriate conferences and the
              Internet. At the University of Michigan, the PI has been offering a Computer
              Games course since 1997 and the coPI has been teaching a Computer Networks
              course. Both PIs have developed pedagogical software packages in their
              respective fields that have been used by faculties in other universities
              nationwide.
