Title       : Materials Informatics and Combinatorial Materials Science: An Information Portal
               for Materials Discovery & Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0231291

Award Number: 0231291
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Carmen I. Huber                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3550000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna Rajan rajank@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7222      OFFICE OF SPECIAL PROGRAMS-DMR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5927,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The International Materials Institute (IMI) for Materials Informatics &
              Combinatorial Materials Science, which is based at Rensselaer Polytechnic
              Institute, is a joint effort with the University of Maryland and Florida
              International University (the largest Hispanic Serving Institution in the US).
              This International Materials Institute (IMI) will pursue two broad goals: i)
              enabling global access, sharing, and utilization of materials information and
              knowledge to solve critical problems; and ii) demonstrating and promoting new
              methods (combinatorial experimentation, informatics, modeling and
              databases)which dramatically enhance the performance of materials engineering
              locally and internationally. In addition, the IMI is in a unique position to
              meaningfully promote diversity in higher education at a national level and to
              provide a significant opportunity for the IMI to showcase the diversity of the
              American scientific community at the international level. The Institute will be
              initiated with a consortium of laboratories that are world leaders in materials
              science databases and combinatorial methodologies in materials science,
              representing ten countries spread across Europe, Japan, the Middle East, and
              the Americas. 

The IMI will foster and coordinate collaborations on
              materials issues, which strongly impact on technological progress and economic
              growth from globalization in fields such as information storage and energy
              technologies.  Illustrative examples include new chemistries for novel magnetic
              materials and combinatorial process design for functional and structural
              ceramics. These activities will be carried out as international collaboration
              platforms that advance the informatics/combinatorial methodology. The research
              themes will serve as platforms for enhancing the scope of informatics and
              combinatorial methods as well as serving to address materials related
              technologies that address pressing global social and economic concerns. To
              ensure the integration of research and education the IMI will interface the
              research efforts directly into an accessible information network that will
              serve as the information technology vehicle for education and information
              dissemination as part of an international materials network. 
The IMI will
              also serve as the hub for this information network, providing ready access
              through a web-based portal to support the training of a new scientific
              workforce well versed in the skills of both the materials sciences and the
              information sciences. A collaboratory infrastructure will be built around the
              networking capabilities of INTERNET 2 so as to take advantage of the backbone
              of the next generation of the information highway.  To further promote the
              integration of research and education, an avenue will be provided for the
              international materials community to effectively use an array of digital
              libraries, databases, experimental facilities and computational expertise
              distributed in laboratories around the world. Within this infrastructure,
              educational vehicles to exploit this rich IT environment will be built to
              deliver real time access to remote instrumentation, multimedia links between
              classrooms and laboratories, and simulation-based electronic learning systems
              which convey the concepts and benefits of combinatorial experimentation and
              materials informatics. 
 
%%%

The International Materials Institute (IMI)
              will introduce this new paradigm of research and education into the materials
              sciences, addressing important materials needs in the fields of energy,
              environment and communications. The synergism between informatics and
              combinatorial experimentation provides the key for accelerated development of
              materials science from "atoms to applications". The work of the IMI will also
              involve the development and integration of ultra large-scale databases and
              digital libraries in conjunction with new technologies permitting highly
              efficient and rapid experimentation. The Institute will exploit international
              materials collaborations through the use of information technology in order to
              rapidly develop and discover solutions to critical materials technologies
              relevant to global economic concerns.  By selectively working on topical
              materials science themes of global interest and interfacing them into an
              accessible information network, the IMI will serve as the hub for an
              internet-based international materials network. An international educational
              infrastructure that is readily accessible through a web-based portal will be
              established to support the training of a new scientific workforce well versed
              in the skills of both the materials sciences and the information sciences. 
              INTERNET 2 will serve as the physical infrastructure on which the IMI will
              build the International Materials Information Highway.



