Title       : LabWrite: A National Web-Based Initiative to Use the Lab Report to Improve the
               Way Students Write, Visualize, and Understand Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0231086

Award Number: 0231086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $489159             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Carter mpc@unity.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Wiebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alton J. Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Mickle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Beichner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hundreds of thousands of student and faculty hours are devoted annually in the
              U.S. to the undergraduate science lab report, an exercise reflecting and
              perpetuating many of the shortcomings in science education identified in such
              reports as the NRC's 1999 Transforming Undergraduate Education in SMET. With
              comparatively small development and dissemination costs, our project team (from
              science communication, scientific visualization, botany, chemistry, and
              physics) is attempting to harness this ubiquitous activity to improve the way
              students write, visualize, and understand science. Our first goal is to revise
              and disseminate for national use our online prototype, developed, piloted, and
              assessed through our one-year NSF-CCLI grant in 2000-01. LabWrite, a series of
              instructional and faculty development modules, encourages and enhances use of
              the lab report so that students and instructors can take advantage of the
              opportunities it offers to develop and expand students' scientific literacy.
              Our second goal is to build an instructional infrastructure for improving the
              teaching and learning experience of the laboratory nationwide. Materials and
              faculty workshops are being piloted within physics, chemistry, and biology
              courses at NC State and at a small liberal arts women's college, a historically
              black university, a community college, and a large, comprehensive university.
              Once fully tested and revised, we anticipate publishing LabWrite as a
              supplement to science textbooks as well as a comprehensive interactive package
              for a variety of lab classes. 

