Title       : NSF/USDOT: Innovative Feeder Transit Services: Mobility Allowance Shuttle
               Transit - MAST
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0231665

Award Number: 0231665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maged M. Dessouky maged@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt D. Palmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Satish T. S. Bukkapatnam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Demands on urban transit agencies for improved and extended services are
              increasing; yet, there is little public support for increases in fares or
              subsidies.  Therefore, transit agencies are currently seeking ways to improve
              service flexibility in a cost-efficient manner. Traditional fixed-route bus
              transit systems are cost effective; however, the general public considers the
              service to be inconvenient because of a lack of flexibility. Demand Responsive
              Transit (DRT) networks are flexible, but tend to be much more costly to deploy
              than fixed-route systems. 

To overcome these limitations, the PIs will
              explore and develop an innovative concept called Mobility Allowance Shuttle
              Transit (MAST) that merges the flexibility of DRT systems with the low cost
              operability of fixed-route bus systems. A MAST service has a fixed, base route
              that covers a specific geographic zone. The innovative twist is that MAST
              allows buses to deviate from the fixed path so that passengers wanting service
              in the vicinity of the path may be picked up or dropped off at their desired
              locations. Passengers contact the dispatch center to request a pick-up and
              receive service from the next available bus. The only restriction on
              flexibility is that the deviations must lie within a predetermined distance
              from the fixed, base route. The PIs' research objective is to recommend a
              viable MAST architecture, specifically providing (1) the route deviation
              distance, (2) the schedule slack time, and (3) the policies for real-time
              sequencing and assignment of pick-ups. This research will produce a
              regression-based demand model and a nonlinear dynamic bus headway distribution
              model. These models will be used to drive the design process as well as to
              synthesize operating policies.  The approach will be validated through an
              extensive simulation study.

This research will determine the demand and
              operating conditions that will allow MAST to be financially viable.  The
              successful implementation of MAST will improve the desirability of transit as
              an alternative to private automobiles, and could result in increased transit
              ridership.  An increase in transit ridership would likely lead to reduced
              roadway congestion and improved environmental conditions, such as reductions in
              greenhouse gas emissions. 



