Title       : Predictively Improving the Problem Solving of Science Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2003    
File        : a0231995

Award Number: 0231995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1487581            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald H. Stevens immex_ron@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposed three-year study will investigate how undergraduate and high
              school students make and use strategic choices as they engage in complex
              problem solving in chemistry.  The researchers will then use this to develop
              effective collaborative approaches for modifying unproductive
              strategies.

IMMEX software will sequentially capture the students' actions
              while they perform a series of related chemistry cases, and extract common
              strategies using artificial neural network technologies. These strategies will
              be aggregated into strategy types using evidence of the quality of student
              understanding, related to student ability, by Item Response Theory analysis.
              These analyses will suggest directed case delivery sequences  for audiences
              with different abilities and provide an organizing framework for linking
              ability, and preferred problem-solving approaches.

Steady state models of
              the development and persistent usage of particular strategies and strategy
              types within classrooms of students with different abilities (i.e. regular high
              school, AP, undergraduate) will then be developed through Hidden Markov
              Modeling.
Here, additional student performances are predicted to have little
              change on the distribution of strategies used previously within a particular
              classroom. These models will provide baseline probabilities that students will
              transit from one strategy type to another on a subsequent series of IMMEX
              cases. These models are baseline in the sense that no particular interventions
              will be suggested or tested.

Collaborative learning activities will then be
              constructed around these models to perturb these steady states. The most
              refined interventions will use the Intelligent Collaborative
Learning System
              that will relate the interaction sequence details of student's communication
              behaviors/skills with the effectiveness of these activities in modifying
              strategic approaches.

The research will be used to develop practical, yet
              effective classroom interventions that teachers can use in conjunction with
              IMMEX performance data to accelerate the acquisition of their students'
              problem-solving skills. While targeted to chemistry, the studies may be
              applicable to many scientific educational activities.

