Title       : Alliance for Enhancement of Science Education and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0231969

Award Number: 0231969
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1493700            (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia L. Shepherd shephev@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Melvin D. Joesten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria de Fatima Lima  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt U Med Ctr
	      Office of Biomedical Sciences
	      Nashville, TN  372322103    /   -

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Based on a prior GK-12 project that partnered 31 graduate teaching Fellows with
              36 teachers in 14 schools in the Metropolitan Nashville Public Schools, this
              current project pairs the Fellows with teams of teachers at select middle
              schools. These teams come together for three weeks during the summer to build
              their partnership relationship, review national and local standards, and select
              and design activities for the upcoming year. The Fellows enter their partner
              classroom in the fall, and spend 10 hours per week in the classroom presenting
              hands-on inquiry-based science activities in 7th and 8th grade classrooms. They
              also participate in a bimonthly seminar, and take a 3 hr science methods
              course. Each of the participants contributes a particular strength to the key
              activities.  Teachers provide ongoing feedback through meetings and focus
              groups, as well as act as mentor teachers within their school and during the
              summer workshops; the Fellows' research advisors attend two class periods per
              semester to observe their Fellow in action and to interact with the K-12
              students and teachers.  Mathematics is integrated into each activity and
              mathematics graduate students and master teachers are active participants. The
              summer partnership building includes a two week in-laboratory experience for
              the partner teachers. Broader impacts of these activities include the outreach
              to a wide number of schools and the model it provides of giving teachers a
              central role in planning and evaluation.  This project is receiving partial
              support from the Directorate for Biological Sciences

Project Title: Alliance
              for Enhancement of Science Education and Technology  
Institution:  Vanderbilt
              University, Meharry Medical College  (MMC)
PI/Co-PI:  Virginia Shepherd,
              Melvin Joesten, Maria de Fatima Lima (Meharry)
Partner School Districts: 
              Metropolitan Nashville  
Financing: $1,493,700 
Number of fellows/year: 10
              graduate, 2 undergraduate
Setting: middle school
Target Audience: Urban
NSF
              supported disciplines involved: mathematics


