Title       : Scalable Programmable Appliance-based Network Intrusion Detection Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0231535

Award Number: 0231535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lambert Schaelicke lambert@cse.nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph C. Freeland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9150,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Network Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) are one of several tools used by
              security professionals to detect and respond to security breaches.  Typically
              an IDS is implemented by tapping a network and diverting a copy of every
              network message to a sensor. Usually, the sensor is a general-purpose computer
              running software that examines every packet that it receives. This approach to
              IDS is easy to implement as it relies on off-the-shelf hardware and software.
              However, the overhead incurred by the general-purpose operating system and the
              limited I/O throughput of most PC and workstation architectures restrict such
              IDS to low and medium bandwidth networks. Special-purpose IDS platforms, on the
              other hand, can be optimized to handle high-bandwidth traffic, but the lack of
              flexibility and the high cost of custom hardware and software make this
              approach not viable in practice.

Recently, parallel and distributed IDS
              architectures exist that operate on high bandwidth traffic by distributing
              network packets over a number of general-purpose machines. This approach
              combines the flexibility of off-the-shelf hardware and software with the high
              performance of parallel processing. A systematic study of the scalability of
              this approach as well as an analysis of suitable packet distribution strategies
              has not been done. Because such clustered architectures pay a potential penalty
              in terms of space and power required as they are essentially a set of complete
              computer systems that occupy shelf or rack space, consume power, and require
              time consuming management and configuration they have space and power costs
              that are high.

The goal of this project is to develop a scalable parallel
              appliance-based architecture for network intrusion detection systems that is
              able to reliably monitor high-bandwidth network segments, yet is cost-efficient
              and retains the flexibility of general-purpose based IDS. High performance is
              achieved by distributing network traffic among an array of low-cost sensors in
              a way that does not impact the quality of intrusion detection, while maximizing
              the available concurrency and minimizing required communication among sensors.
              Utilizing off-the-shelf single-board computers leads to an inexpensive and
              compact design that requires less power than a comparable number of complete
              workstations or PCs.

The key component of a parallel intrusion detection
              platform architecture is the approach by which network packets are distributed
              across the sensors. As a result, the system design will by guided by a
              systematic analysis of network traffic characteristics which will provide input
              into high-level models and simulations. To verify and evaluate the performance
              and scalability of the resulting architecture, a prototype system will be
              implemented based primarily on low-cost off-the-shelf hardware and software. By
              addressing IDS issues using off the shelf components, a product to assist in
              security breaches may be quickly developed.  This could have large, immediate
              impact on an important network topic.
