Title       : SBIR Phase I: An Adaptive Remote-Data Access System For Wireless Handheld
               Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a0231708

Award Number: 0231708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaohui C. Song carolxsong@lstech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L. S. Technology
	      Business & Technology Center
	      West Lafayette, IN  47906    765/497-4972

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 5371,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project designs and develops an
              adaptive remote-data access system for wireless handheld devices. The key
              innovations in the project include adaptive data compression and adaptive
              partitioning techniques to save network bandwidth and battery consumption. The
              central concept is the ability to adapt to the changing wireless network
              environment and to different types of data. The proposed techniques go beyond
              existing bandwidth-saving techniques such as nonadaptive compression and
              "diff"-based data synchronization. A research prototype will be built for
              extensive experimentation in order to measure the effectiveness of the proposed
              technique for the saving of network bandwidth and battery consumption. This
              prototype will integrate heterogeneous systems, runtime systems, and compiler
              techniques. 
Commercial Applications of Research: The success of this research
              will lead to a software product which provides users of wireless handheld
              devices with secure, convenient, and cost-effective access to the data (and
              associated applications) located on their stationary computer systems, such as
              desktop machines and servers. This product can be used by both business and
              individual users for various functionalities which require to access data
              stored on the main computer systems in the form of text, graphics, photographs,
              data images, speeches, sound, and so on. The adaptive features of the system
              fulfill the need of remote-centric workforce to access host-based data and
              applications from anywhere at any time over wireless connections in a highly
              cost-effective way. 

