Title       : Fellows Enhancing Science and Technology Program (FEST 6-12)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0231536

Award Number: 0231536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1492509            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto L. Rivera-Rentas ac_alrivera@suagm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan Musa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Celia Perez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria Vilches  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Delma Valentin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Universidad Metropolitana
	      PO Box 21150
	      San Juan, PR  009281150    787/751-5235

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Teacher-Fellow teams are developing and delivering a  roster of hands on
              experiences and workshops at  the schools that promote student interest and
              awareness of  the
environmental sciences and current environmental issues in
              Puerto Rico. The Fellows are bringing environmental materials and tools to the
              classroom and helping teachers and K-6 students develop the ability to use
              these materials and tools.  The teams are also bringing the classroom to the
              site of experimental fieldwork. The participants are working with and learning
              from a variety of partners in addition to the resources provided by UMET: the
              Institute of Tropical Forestry, an NSF-funded Long-Term Ecological Research
              project site, and the doctoral program in marine sciences at the University of
              Puerto Rico, Mayaguez.  Faculty participating include the Dean of the School of
              Environmental Affairs and represent a wide array of disciplines at UMET that
              have the environment as the central  focus: marine sciences, oceanography,
              chemistry, toxicology,  forestry, ecology, botany,  geology, environmental
              education, coastal resources, natural resources, and environmental
              communication. These efforts to develop a comprehensive and cohesive effort in
              environmental sciences education for the island are enhanced by collaborating
              with the Mayaguez Campus of the University of Puerto Rico as  UMET focuses on
              the northeastern part of Puerto Rico and the Mayaguez Program focuses on the
              west coast of the Island.  The schools involved are in an area of the island
              that has a high degree of unemployment and only minimal access to basic
              services.  The broader impacts of this project include the model it provides of
              bringing environmental sciences content knowledge and technical skills to a set
              of students and teachers who previously had little access to either and the
              opportunity it provides for the university involved to broaden and enrich its
              own program through cooperation with neighboring institutions.  This project is
              receiving partial support from the Directorate for Biological
              Sciences

Project title:  Fellows Enhancing Science and Technology (FEST)
              
Institution:  Universidad Metropolitana (UMET) 
PI/Co-PI: Juan Musa, Alberto
              Rivera Rentas
Partner School Districts;  Carolina
Financing: $1,492,509
              
Number of fellows per year: 8 graduate, 8 undergraduate
Setting:  Rural
              
Target audience of the project: elementary 
NSF supported disciplines
              involved: Environmental Sciences and Technology

