Title       : Development and Validation of a Case Study Approach to Teaching Human-Computer
               Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0231111

Award Number: 0231111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299996             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Carroll carroll@cs.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Beth Rosson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A prior proof of concept project has developed a prototype set of usability
              engineering case studies, a case browsing tool, and several classroom
              activities based on the case studies. This work was coordinated with the
              development and publication of a new HCI undergraduate textbook (Morgan
              Kaufmann, 2002). The textbook differs dramatically from current offerings,
              interleaving the presentation of HCI content with a comprehensive
              scenario-based framework for the development of interactive systems. A key
              innovation of the new textbook is its use of a case study to introduce and
              exemplify the analysis, design, and evaluation framework. The proof of concept
              project enhanced the case study material presented in the book, by developing
              richer and more flexible online materials, and by building cases from three
              additional problem domains. This project, submitted to the CCLI-EMD track,
              further develops and validates the learning effectiveness of case studies as an
              element of teaching HCI. Using the marketing channels of Morgan Kaufmann, we
              recruit professors and students from 8-10 other universities interested in
              using the book, and participating in the evaluation of the case study
              materials. We work with these instructors and students to develop new
              activities, as well as packaging the prototype activities for convenient use.
              We also refine the browsing tool, responding to formative evaluation received
              during the prototype project, and add new functionality to support traceability
              of concerns throughout the life cycle, more flexible views and case study
              reporting schemes, and authoring by both experts and students. This project
              leverages our ongoing research on scenario-based development methods,
              incorporating the methodology concepts into undergraduate education. It also
              highlights the use of information technology in undergraduate education, for
              both content access and student project support. The graduate students who
              develop the case studies are becoming experts in presenting and illustrating
              the scenario-based framework, helping to prepare them for careers in HCI
              education.
