Title       : Enhancing Inquiry-Based Science and Math in Appalachian Middle Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0231738

Award Number: 0231738
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1341668            (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom Otieno Tom.Otieno@eku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brandon Hargis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melinda Wilder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Kentucky Univ
	      Division of Sponsored Programs
	      Richmond, KY  40475    606/622-3636

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


The goal of this project is to improve inquiry-based instruction
              of science, technology, and mathematics in Appalachian middle schools.  The
              program will provide fellowships for eight graduate and four undergraduate
              students per year to work with twelve science and mathematics middle school
              teachers from six different middle schools.  Each Fellow will team up with a
              middle school teacher and a university mentor to develop and implement
              inquiry-based activities, designed to meet Kentucky and national education
              standards.  Several training sessions, including an intensive one-week summer
              workshop, are planned for all participants.  Overall the project will have
              broad impact, as it is expected to lead to enriched learning by middle school
              students, provision of professional development opportunities for middle school
              teachers, improved communication and teaching skills for the Fellows, and
              strengthened partnerships between EKU and regional middles schools.  Part of
              the support for this project comes from the Directorate for Mathematics and
              Physical Sciences.

Title: Enhancing Inquiry-Based Science and Math in
              Appalachian Middle Schools
Institution: Eastern Kentucky University
PI:  Tom
              Otieno.  Co-PIs:  Melinda S. Wilder, Brandon Hargis, Jerry D. Cook, William W.
              Farrar, Malcolm P. Frisbie, Kirk E. Jones and Chongkye Rhee.
Funding; 
              $1,341,668 total for 3 years
Fellows per year:  Eight graduate and four
              undergraduate fellows 
Setting:  Rural
Target audience of the project: 
              Middle schools in Appalachian Kentucky
Disciplines involved:  Biological
              Sciences, Chemistry, Computer Science, Earth Sciences, Physics and Astronomy,
              and Mathematics and Statistics.  




