Title       : Collaborative Research: Moving Data Based Inquiry Learning to the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0231414

Award Number: 0231414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $427432             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Prothero prothero@magic.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory J. Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The over-arching goal of this project is to increase science literacy of general
              education learners who may not become scientists. The specific goal of this
              project is to create a well-researched oceanography course, live and online,
              widely disseminated, with a modern inquiry based pedagogy. The design focuses
              on science literacy using real earth data, collaboration between learners, and
              a strong connection to societal issues. The project is based on a successful
              NSF CCLI pilot project that supported the creation of software and course
              materials that enables online auto-graded homework assignments, scientific
              writing activities, on demand grade calculation, and peer interaction, with
              powerful instructor assessment capability. It has been tested, refined, and
              evaluated in two live oceanography classes at the University of California,
              Santa Barbara (UCSB). New capability is being created to support the fully
              online course with collaborative projects with strong peer to peer
              interactions. An instructor team consists of faculty from four California
              community colleges, two California state colleges, two large state universities
              (not including UCSB), and a small private college. Yearly workshops support
              team collaboration and dissemination of technology and pedagogy. Major themes
              include the integration of technology in education and faculty development.
              This project is having an impact on teacher education and diversity through the
              composition of the project team, some of whom have been active in teacher
              preparation and/or teach at campuses with a diverse student population.

