Title       : Theoretical Problems in Biophysics and Condensed Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0231631

Award Number: 0231631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daryl W. Hess                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Nelson nelson@cmt.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0231631
Nelson
This award supports fundamental theoretical research and
              education centered on problems in biophysics, soft condensed matter and the
              physics of vortices in Type II superconductors. The PI will study the
              architecture of virus shells in an effort to understand why small viruses are
              round and large ones are faceted. The faceting may be related to a buckling
              transition of the twelve 5-fold disclinations embedded in icosahedral arrays of
              protein capsomers. Theoretical advance could allow experimental determinations
              of elastic parameters from structural data. The PI will explore localization
              effects due to polynucleotide sequence variation on motor protein arrays such
              as RNA polymerases translating along a DNA strand. Sequential polymerization of
              single strand binding proteins such as Rec A and the maximum pull out force of
              DNA hybrids will be studied as well. In addition, problems in soft matter
              condensed matter physics will also be attacked, these include determining
              crystalline ground states on the torus and for colloids adsorbed onto
              negatively curved  "plumber's nightmare" phases. Finally, work will continue on
              vortex matter in superconductors by exploring the unusual response (related to
              the transverse Meissner effect) of an entangled flux liquid with a dilute
              concentration of columnar pins to a tilted magnetic field. 
Methods will
              include analytical approaches to statistical mechanics and dynamics, numerical
              diagonalization of evolution operators and computer simulations of model
              systems inspired by problems in biology, soft condensed matter and vortex
              physics.  Investigations of buckling in viral shells will exploit extensive
              experience with floating mesh discretizations of the nonlinear elastic
              equations which describe thin spherical shells. The PI will seek to benefit
              from close contact and vigorous interactions with the experimental community.
              
This award supports graduate and higher level training in condensed matter
              theory. The work may also impact fields other than condensed matter physics.
              Understanding deformations of viral shells could identify weaknesses (such as
              ridgelines or grain boundaries) which would allow attack on harmful infectious
              agents.   Explorations of how sequence randomness affects protein interactions
              with DNA and RNA might influence the design of artificial genetic circuits in
              bacteria.   A comprehensive theory of defect arrays on curved surfaces could
              guide the construction of new materials with bicontinuous lipid phases as
              templates.  Finally, understanding vortex interactions with columnar defects is
              useful for applications in high magnetic fields. 
%%%
This award supports
              fundamental theoretical research and education at the interface between
              condensed matter physics and biology. The research is centered on problems in
              biophysics, soft condensed matter and the physics of vortices in Type II
              superconductors. The work in the former area includes the study of virus
              structures and various problems on motion in a random potential that are
              inspired by experiments on the binding and motion of RNA polymerize along a DNA
              nucleotide sequence.  This award also supports graduate and higher level
              training in theoretical condensed matter physics with a bent toward problems at
              the interface with biology. The results of this work may have impact in other
              fields, notably in molecular and cellular biosciences.
***
 

