Title       : Integrative Metabolism: An Interactive Learning Tool for Biochemistry,
               Physiology and Nutrition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0231507

Award Number: 0231507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gale B. Carey gale.carey@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This "proof of concept" project is developing a computer-animated,
              pedagogically-based, interactive learning prototype called "Integrative
              Metabolism".  The purpose of this prototype is to enhance student exposure to
              and understanding of metabolism at two- and four-year undergraduate
              institutions comprised of diverse male and female students.  By integrating
              nutrition, physiology and biochemistry, the prototype overcomes barriers to
              student engagement and understanding of metabolism.  Two objectives are: (1) to
              produce a prototype that will allow self-paced learning of science terms and
              engage the user by framing nutrition, physiology, and biochemistry within
              everyday lifestyle choices, and (2) to overlay case-based, interactive learning
              onto the prototype to promote effective learning.  Female and male students and
              faculty from a 2- and 4-year school are collaborating to technically enrich and
              pedagogically enhance a sample of this prototype developed this past year. 
              Using a case-based and learner-centered design, students explore metabolism at
              the whole body, organ, cellular and enzyme levels.  The intellectual merit of
              this project lies in its ability to demystify metabolism and engage students in
              risk-free, engaging and interactive learning.  The broader impact resulting
              from this project is an infusion of enthusiasm and understanding of metabolism
              to our youth that could influence not only their choice of careers, but also
              their health.  Results from this "proof of concept" project will serve as a
              basis for full development and a commercial publisher.

