Title       : A Computerized Undergraduate Psychology Laboratory in Visual Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1994      
File        : a9496165

Award Number: 9496165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1                  (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Sparrow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The aim of the project is to introduce undergraduate students                  
              to the scientific study of visual perception.  Students                        
              enrolled in various psychology courses will serve as                           
              experimenters, subjects, and data analysts as they empirically                 
              investigate phenomena related to spatial, color, form, depth,                  
              and motion perception.  This project will affect a broad range                 
              of students as the new laboratories are targeted at freshmen-                  
              level courses for non-majors up through senior-level courses                   
              reserved for psychology majors.   While earlier vision-related                 
              coursework has relied on non-interactive, passive                              
              demonstrations of visual phenomena, the requested equipment                    
              allows the implementation of a hands-on, interactive student                   
              laboratory.  A comprehensive, flexible computerized system                     
              capable of handling many different visual perception                           
              experiments represents the specialized equipment needed to                     
              carry out the planned laboratories.  The set-up centers around                 
              a high-speed computerized display system that is capable of                    
              delivering well controlled, ultra-high resolution graphic                      
              stimuli.  Collectively, this system gives undergraduate                        
              students a chance to experience the scientific procedures                      
              involved in studying the human visual system.
