Title       : Phylogenetic Studies of DNA and Morphological Variation in the Subtribe
               Ecliptinae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1995    
File        : a9496174

Award Number: 9496174
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178052             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose L. Panero   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Systematic studies of the subtribe Ecliptinae of the tribe                     
              Heliantheae (Asteraceae), a group of about 500-600 species of the              
              Southern and Eastern USA, Mexico, Central and South America, Africa            
              and Asia are proposed.  The study will focus on four major                     
              problems:  elucidation of the major lineages and relationships                 
              within the subtribe; clarification of the infrageneric taxonomy of             
              Verbesina, which is the most complex and taxonomically difficult               
              genus of the subtribe and the largest genus of tribe Heliantheae;              
              resolution of generic relationships and subtribal placement of                 
              Verbesian; and examination of the patterns of evolution and                    
              radiation of Verbesina in South America.  These goals will be                  
              accomplished primarily be gathering chloroplast and nuclear                    
              ribosomal DNA restriction site data, as well as chromosomal and                
              morphological data.  Cladistic analysis of these diverse data sets             
              will produce a phylogeny for the subtribe and the largest genus in             
              tribe Heliantheae.  The results of these studies, combined with                
              recent cpDNA restriction site studies of the ÕHeliantheae (Kim et              
              al. 1990a) will help clarify subtribal limits and relationships in             
              one of the largest tribes of the Asteraceae.  Furthermore, at the              
              infrageneric level within Verbesina, the resulting phylogenies can             
              then be used to construct a modern infrageneric classification of              
              the genus, as well as provide a basis for resolving important                  
              biogeographical questions.
