Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Host-Guest Molecular Recognition in the Gas-Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9496150

Award Number: 9496150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David V. Dearden david_dearden@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This NSF Young Investigator Award from the Organic Dynamics Program            
              supports the work of Professor Dearden at the University of Texas at           
              Arlington. Intrinsic molecular recognition properties of crown ethers          
              and related ligands for metal and molecular ions will be investigated          
              in the gas phase using ion cyclotron resonance and tandem mass                 
              spectrometric techniques. Use will be made of the matrix-assisted laser        
              desorption and electrospray ionization techniques. The specific areas          
              concern (a) the identification of crown ether / alkali metal host-guest        
              systems, (b) singly-charged alkaline earth monohalides and ammonium            
              cations, (c) chiral host-guest systems, (d) biological ionophores,             
              enzyme / substrate systems, and cyclodextrins.                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              With this NYI award Professor David D. Dearden's will conduct gas phase        
              studies to determine both the intrinsic factors and the role of                
              solvation in governing molecular recognition. By eliminating the               
              effects arising from solvents and counterions, the interaction between         
              hosts and guests can be probed directly. This work will make use of            
              matrix-assisted laser desorption and electrospray ionization                   
              techniques, enabling a greatly extended range of masses detectable by          
              mass spectrometry. This work aims to develop chemical and spectroscopic        
              probes to determine 3-dimensional ion structures.
