Title       : AIT (U.S.)-CCNAA (Taiwan) Cooperative Research: The Biology of Gamete Activation
               and Interaction in the Free Spawning Shrimp (Dendrobranchiata)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9496340

Award Number: 9496340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52028              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallis H. Clark faa@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This is a three year cooperative study proposed                                
              by Dr. Wallis Clark, the University of                                         
              California, Davis and Professor Ching-Ming Kuo,                                
              National Taiwan University, and Professor C.J.                                 
              Chen, Tungkung Fisheries Research Laboratory.                                  
              The project is supported under the AIT                                         
              (U.S.)-CCNAA (Taiwan) Cooperative Science                                      
              Program.  This proposal plans to study the                                     
              biology of gamete interaction in penaeid                                       
              shrimp.  The proposed study is an extension of                                 
              early success with east Pacific shrimp,                                        
              Sicyonia ingentis, in understanding the species                                
              specific mechanism for the reproductive success                                
              of penaeid shrimp.  Dr. Clark is recognized as                                 
              the foremost scientist in shrimp gamete                                        
              research.  The Tungkung Fisheries Laboratory is                                
              a world renowned institute for studies of the                                  
              reproductive cycles of penaeid shrimp.  This                                   
              institute has excellent science, the facilities                                
              and the availability of the species of penaeid                                 
              shrimp needed for this research.  The success                                  
              of this study will have a major impact on the                                  
              very valuable shrimp culture industry and can                                  
              lead to a greater understanding of crustacean                                  
              reproduction.
