Title       : Mechanisms Mediating Motor Pattern Selection by Peptidergic Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9496264

Award Number: 9496264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300588             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Nusbaum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9309804  Nusbaum    The goal of this proposed work is to understand how
              peptidergic  neurons modulate the activity of rhythmically active neural 
              networks that mediate behaviors.  Rhythmically active neural  networks are
              strongly influenced by modulatory inputs from other  regions of the nervous
              system, in both vertebrates and  invertebrates.  The largest class of
              modulatory transmitters is the  neuropeptides, yet thus far most of our
              knowledge about how  neuropeptides modulate neural network activity has come
              from bath-  application studies.  Little information is available regarding the
               ways in which neural networks respond to individual peptidergic  neurons. 
              Moreover, there are several reasons why bath-application  and neural-release of
              a neuropeptide will not necessarily produce  the same response in a neural
              network.  These reasons include the  observations that (1) peptidergic neurons
              often co-release other  transmitters, (2) neuropeptides often reach more
              receptors when  bath-applied than when neurally-released, and (3) different 
              concentrations of a peptide can cause qualitatively different  neural network
              responses.    The specific goals of this proposal are to (1) provide a more 
              realistic assessment of the utility of bath-application studies as  a model for
              peptidergic neurotransmission, and (2) understand how  and why a set of neurons
              that have the same peptide transmitter  elicit different responses from the
              same rhythmically active neural  networks.  The specific aims of the proposal
              are to determine  whether these differences are the result of these proctolin
              neurons  having different co-transmitters, being differentially influenced  by
              extracellularly- located peptidases, releasing different amount  of proctolin,
              and/or releasing proctolin into different domains  within the neuropil.  These
              aims will be attained by using a  multidisciplinary approach, including intra-
              and extracellular  electrophysiology, HPLC- and bioassay-focussed biochemistry,
              and  laser scanning confocal mi croscopy, to study the ways that three 
              identified proctolin neurons influence the pyloric and gastric mill  neural
              networks.    This proposed study will provide novel physiological, biochemical 
              and anatomical information about the means by which neurally-  released
              peptides influence neural network activity.  This study  will also provide the
              first in-depth understanding of the  limitations of using bath-application of
              neuropeptides to study  neural network responses to neurally-released
              peptides.***
