Title       : Photoregulated Protein Kinases in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9496325

Award Number: 9496325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76900              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Watson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Protein kinases are ubiquitous enzymes that qare frequently                    
              involved in signal transduction processes.  The major focus of the             
              proposed work is to elucidate the roles that protein kinases may               
              play in photoregulated leaf development in plants.  A suite of                 
              partial cDNA clones from the garden pea have been sequenced and                
              found to encode protein serine/threonine kinase homologs.                      
              Messenger RNA levels corresponding to the five cDNA clones                     
              accumulate differentially when pea seedlings are exposed to white              
              light.  Experiments are proposed to understand the photoregulated              
              expression of these putative kinase genes at the RNA and protein               
              level.  Full-length cDNA clones will be isolated and sequenced in              
              order to understand more fully the structure of the putative                   
              kinases.  The photoreceptor system(s) controlling mRNA accumulation            
              and gene transcription will be determined.  The polypeptides                   
              encoded by the pea cDNA clones will be isolated after expression               
              in bacteria and used to generate antibodies.  The antibodies will              
              be used to study the accumulation, distribution, and biochemical               
              properties of the protein kinases.  Transgenic tobacco plants                  
              expressing the pea cDNAs will be produced in order to understand               
              the potential role these enzymes play in the transduction of light             
              signals.
