Title       : Particle Transformations in the "Regeneration Zone": The Biology and Chemistry
               of Mesopelagic Aggregates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1993   
File        : a9496077

Award Number: 9496077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 31,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia H. Pilskaln   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Most organic matter synthesized in surface waters of the sea is                
              returned to inorganic constituents within the upper 500 m, or                  
              "regeneration zone."  Oceanographers attribute these chemical                  
              transformations mostly to living organisms.  Yet surprisingly                  
              little is known about the biology of remineralization below the                
              euphotic zone: whether the responsible organisms are dominantly                
              metazoan or microbial and whether or not they occur on the larger              
              particles that deliver material to depth. Dr. Pilskaln, together               
              with Dr. Silver will conduct a 2-year study in Monterey Bay, and               
              accessible, comparatively deep water site, to study the role of                
              both microbes and zooplankton in the remineralization of                       
              particles >1mm.  Using a combination of in situ observations and               
              laboratory measurements, she will study both the abundant marine               
              snow particles and very large aggregates (m size) that can serve               
              as model systems for such studies. She plans to (1) measure the                
              size and abundance of the aggregates, (2) determine their                      
              chemical properties and associated living communities, (3)                     
              measure regeneration-related activities of the communities on the              
              particles, and (4) compare and particle-related remineralization               
              rates to those measured by sediment traps in the area.  For these              
              measurements, she will use field surveys with a Romotely Operated              
              Vehicle (ROV) and a Marine Snow Camera, a variety of sampling                  
              devices operated from the ROV, and a series of experiments on                  
              natural samples incubated on shipboard and in the laboratory.  In              
              year 2, Dr. Pilskaln transects the California Current to learn                 
              whether the very large aggregates, which are hypothesized to be                
              regeneration centers to Monterey Bay, occur in significant                     
              numbers further offshore.  These results will increase the                     
              understanding of the biology of midwater remineralization and the              
              role that particles can play in the process.
