Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1996      
File        : a9496279

Award Number: 9496279
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $363000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose F. Escobar escobar@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports mathematical research into problems                   
              related to linear and nonlinear partial differential equations                 
              arising in Riemannian geometry.  The work follows two main                     
              themes.  The first is concerned with the spectrum of the Laplace               
              operator on compact manifolds and boundary value problems for the              
              scalar curvature equation.  The main thrust of the research is                 
              the formulation and resolution of the Yamabe problem for                       
              manifolds with boundary.  The problem has been solved for                      
              manifolds without boundary; the presence of a boundary requires a              
              much more imaginative approach.  At this time, the formulation of              
              the correct questions is only being developed.  Good results in                
              3, 4 and 5 dimensions have been obtained in the case of                        
              Riemannian manifolds. Work with a more geometric flavor will be                
              done on                                                                        
              uniqueness questions for conformal deformation of metrics.  This               
              will extend a recent generalization of the theorem that any                    
              Riemannian manifold which supports a function whose Hessian is a               
              multiple of the metric and whose normal derivative vanishes on                 
              the boundary, must in fact be the upper hemisphere of the                      
              standard sphere.                                                               
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of modern                
              differential geometry.  Phenomena which involve continuous change              
              such as that seen in motion, curvature and higher dimensional                  
              analogues are known to obey certain general laws, expressible in               
              terms of the interactions and relationships between partial                    
              derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not to state the                  
              relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative and                          
              quantitative meaning from them and validate methods for                        
              expressing solutions.
