Title       : Dynamic Models of Heterogeneous Economics with Applications to Poverty and
               Business Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1995     
File        : a9496121

Award Number: 9496121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5171               (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Durlauf   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A large debate exists in public policy over the efficacy of anti-              
              poverty programs.  At the same time, research in sociology has                 
              concluded that an essential characteristic of inner city poverty               
              is its persistence.  Most of the recent analyses of poverty                    
              suffer from several weaknesses due to the lack of emphasis on                  
              poverty as a dynamic process.  In particular, these studies                    
              generally do not attempt to explain how nonpoor families ever                  
              become poor, not do they attempt to explore how some poor                      
              families can escape poverty.  Further, little attention has been               
              given to the dynamics of neighborhood formation, which is                      
              essential to understanding how policy initiatives, such as public              
              housing, school finance equalization or busing can reverse                     
              poverty.  The contribution of this project comes from studying                 
              the emergence of poverty and inequality as outcomes of a dynamic               
              process.  The project constructs an explicitly dynamic and                     
              stochastic model of neighborhood formation, human capital                      
              formation and occupational achievement.  The goal of this                      
              research is to understand how community influences on human                    
              capital formation can interact with endogenous community                       
              formation to produce rich and poor communities within the same                 
              economy.  The large sample of parents and offspring from the                   
              Panel Study on Income Dynamics is combined with per pupil                      
              expenditure data available from states' Boards of Education in                 
              order to test the substantive and policy implications of the                   
              theoretical research.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This project has three overall goals.  First, it continues to the              
              development of stochastic process methods of modelling                         
              heterogenous economies.  These methods should be generally useful              
              in developing dynamic models of incomplete markets and                         
              coordination failure.  Second, this work is applied to the study               
              of the dynamics of poverty and ghetto formation.  Third, a class               
              of coordination-based business cycle models are analyzed in order              
              to better understand the role of incomplete markets in aggregate               
              fluctuations.
