Title       : US-Czechoslovak Research on Oriented Protein Immobilization:Chemical and
               Biological Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1994  
File        : a9496151

Award Number: 9496151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22900              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Scouten wscouten@utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 5930      U.S.-CZECHOSLOVAKIA PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this U.S.-Czechoslovakia                              
              research project between Dr. William H. Scouten                                
              of Baylor University and Drs. Jaroslava Turkova                                
              and Milan Benes of institutes in the Czechoslovak                              
              Academy of Sciences is to investigate the                                      
              immobilization of various proteins in a sight-                                 
              directed and/or oriented fashion.  The approaches                              
              taken by the American and Czechoslovak                                         
              researchers, while distinct, are complementary.                                
              The American researchers have been attempting to                               
              create a broad and general type of orientation                                 
              using chemical features of the matrix, the                                     
              activating agent, and of the enzyme itself.  The                               
              Czechoslovak researchers have been using                                       
              biological interactions between an immobilized                                 
              protein, or other biomolecule, and the protein to                              
              be immobilized.  Results are expected to                                       
              facilitate the exchange of technical methods                                   
              between the groups.                                                            
                                                                                             
              This project in biochemistry fulfills the program                              
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by                                 
              enabling leading experts in the United States and                              
              Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents                                
              and pool resources in areas of strong mutual                                   
              interest and competence.
