Title       : Synthesis and Study of Transition-Metal Complexes of Reactive Silicon
               Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1994      
File        : a9496217

Award Number: 9496217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6800               (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Don Tilley tilley@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and                            
              Organometallic Program, Dr. T. Don Tilley of the University of                 
              California at San Diego will prepare transition metal complexes                
              containing reactive silicon species.  Transition metal                         
              complexes are known to act as catalysts for reactions of                       
              silicon compounds and may serve as catalysts for the                           
              preparation of silicon-containing polymers.  These polymers                    
              could have structural and electronic properties useful in                      
              diverse applications.  By analogy to studies of carbenes                       
              (important in polymer formation in hydrocarbons), Tilley will                  
              prepare complexes to help eludicate the chemical properties of                 
              silicon-containing fragments in the coordination sphere of                     
              transition metals.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Complexes of silylenes, silenes, and disilenes which could                     
              serve as intermediates in new synthetic methods for monomeric                  
              and polymeric silicon compounds will be prepared.  For example,                
              silylene complexes may be intermediates in metal-catalyzed                     
              Si-Si bond formation in polysilane polymers.  Modes of silicon                 
              activation by transition metals will be studied by acquiring                   
              mechanistic information on formation of eta-2-silane complexes,                
              migration of silyl groups to a metal center, and dehyrogenative                
              silane coupling.  Among the metals used will be Ru, Pt, Rh, Ir,                
              W, Os, and Mo.
