Title       : Computational Modeling of Transport Phenomena and Electro- mechanical Dynamics
               in Microscales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1994     
File        : a9496180

Award Number: 9496180
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George Lea                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208761             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Karniadakis gk@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Phase I                                                                        
              1) Transport Phenomena in Microchannels -                                      
              Development of Spectral Element Method for the                                 
              coupled Navier-Stokes and Energy Equation with                                 
              slip boundary conditions for transition flows, and                             
              Direct Simulation Monte Carlo Method for low                                   
              Knudsen number flows in microchannels will be                                  
              performed.  Non-rectangular geometries, such as                                
              trapezoidal cross sections, will be investigated.                              
              2) Electrostatic Force Calculations for Micromotors                            
              - Perturbation Method will be extended to solve                                
              three-dimensional electrostatic force field                                    
              calculations.  The effects of resistivity in the                               
              materials will also be included.  The calculations                             
              will be performed for various micromotor                                       
              geometries to optimize device designs.                                         
              3) Squeeze Film Damping in Microdynamical                                      
              Devices - Reynold's Equation will be solved to                                 
              understand fluid dynamics of squeeze film between                              
              microplates at various gap distances.  The results                             
              will be integrated with the results of (2) and                                 
              compared to our unique experimental data obtained                              
              using electrostatic levitation microplates.  The                               
              effective damping characteristics will be                                      
              determined.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Phase II                                                                       
              1) Transport Phenomena in Microchannels -                                      
              Results from (I.I) will be extended to include the                             
              imperfections of channel geometries, which are                                 
              unavoidable in micromachining.  Hybrid                                         
              Spectral/Finite Difference Discretization Method                               
              will be used. The results of (I.I) and this task will                          
              be summarized to provide a comprehensive data                                  
              base for microchannel flows.                                                   
              2) Electrostatic Force Calculations for Micromotors                            
              - The results of (1.3) will be extended to perform                             
              electrostatic force calculations on the Macintosh II                           
              family of computers.  The code will be extended                                
              such that electrostatic force calculations will be                             
              performed on drawings imported from CAD                                        
              programs.                                                                      
              3) Hydrodynamic Drag and Lift in Micromotors                                   
              and Other Microstructures - Spectral Element                                   
              Method will be applied to study the detailed flow                              
              field of micromotors with uniform cross section                                
              rotors.  The results will be combined with the                                 
              results of (I.2) and (II.2) and compared to the                                
              recently reported stroboscopic experimental work                               
              measuring the transient dynamics of a micromotor.                              
              Phase III                                                                      
              1) Hydrodynamic Bearings for Microdynamical                                    
              Devices - The comprehensive results of (I.1-3) and                             
              (II.1-3) will be applied to investigate the methods of                         
              reducing drag and increasing lift of microdynamical                            
              devices.  The use of hydrodynamic forces to center                             
              the rotor of micromotors under the applied                                     
              electrostatic field will also be investigated.                                 
              2) Reduced Order Model Development - The                                       
              comprehensive results of (I.1-3) and (II.1-3) will be                          
              carefully tabulated to develop a scientific data base                          
              for microdynamical devices and systems.  Simplified                            
              sets of equations will be developed for both                                   
              transport phenomena and electromechanical                                      
              dynamics, and their relative accuracy will be                                  
              determined by comparing the results to those from                              
              (I.1-3) and (II.1-3).  The reduced order models will                           
              be useful for developing means to conduct design                               
              optimization studies before hardware fabrication, as                           
              well as closed loop control strategies for                                     
              microdynamical devices and systems.
