Title       : Structure and Evolution of Southern Ocean Mesocyclones Using Multiple Satellite
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9496248

Award Number: 9496248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew M. Carleton OckerMate@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed project is a study to determine the meteorological                
              characteristics of Southern Ocean mesocyclones by combining Special            
              Sensor Microwave/Imager (SSM/I) data, TIROS Operational Vertical               
              Sounder (TOVS) data, and satellite-based radar altimeter data for              
              selected case studies of mesoscale cyclone occurrences, and                    
              validating these characteristics with European Center for                      
              Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) analyses.  It is a joint                
              project of Indiana University and the University of Washington.                
                                                                                             
              The project will use retrieved satellite observations of winds,                
              atmospheric moisture, and thermal parameters that will be applied              
              to mesocyclones previously identified and catalogued from satellite            
              image analyses.  Included in the analyses will be an evaluation of             
              the performance of SSM/I algorithms in retrieving surface winds and            
              moisture parameters.  For the austral winter of 1992 wind vector               
              information obtained from the European Remote Sensing satellite                
              (ERS-1) scatterometer will be included.  The large-scale                       
              environment in which these mesocyclones occur will be studied by               
              comparison with fields of diagnostic variables taken from the ECMWF            
              synoptic analyses.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The expected result of this project is the development of a                    
              conceptual and statistical model of Southern Ocean mesocyclone                 
              evolution.  This is a necessary first step toward the inclusion of             
              polar low processes in operational numerical analysis and                      
              prediction schemes, and the determination of their role in the                 
              general circulation of the atmosphere.
