Title       : Acetylated Tubulin and Brain Microtubule Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1994   
File        : a9496339

Award Number: 9496339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen Kim   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lester I. Binder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Molecular Geriatrics Corp
	      101 Waukegan Road
	      Lake Bluff, IL  60044    708/234-5711

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Microtubules, a complex network of protein filaments found in the              
              cytoplasm of the cell, are important in the maintenance of form                
              and function in nerve cells.  Developing nerve cells require the               
              capacity to stabilize certain microtubule populations, as well as              
              the ability to make new microtubules.  Abnormalities observed in               
              the aging brain may result from abnormal modulation of                         
              microtubule stability.  Understanding the regulation of neuronal               
              form and function will depend on knowing the mechanisms that                   
              regulate microtubule assembly and stability.  Microtubules,                    
              comprised of the protein tubulin that has been acetylated, have                
              been shown to be more stable.  The investigator will study                     
              whether tubulin acetylation regulates microtubule stability in                 
              neurons by purifying an enzyme from brain tissue that acetylates               
              tubulin.  The enzyme preparation will be used to acetylate brain               
              microtubules in vitro, to determine whether the microtubules cold              
              stability is altered due to the effects of the binding of                      
              microtubule-associated proteins.  These studies will provide                   
              information on acetylated tubulin enzyme regulation during                     
              postnatal brain development, maturation and aging.
