Title       : The Hydroclimatology of the Continental-US Boundary Outflow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1994      
File        : a9496235

Award Number: 9496235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantine P. Georgakakos kgeorgakakos@hrc-lab.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hydrologic Research Center
	      12780 High Bluff Drive
	      San Diego, CA  92130    /   -

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              19316288  Georgakakos    One of the most important problems in hydroclimatology
              is to  understand the linkage between short period climate variability and 
              surface hydrologic variability on regional to continental scales.   We propose
              to study the relation between regional to continental  scales.  We propose to
              study the relation between regional-  continental scales hydrologic processes
              and monthly-decade  atmospheric variations using observed data, large-scale
              watershed  budgets and conceptual models to test hypothesized physical 
              mechanisms.  While data availability precludes a comprehensive  study over all
              of North America, the conterminous United States  domain includes a
              well-observed and important segment of the  spatial and temporal variability
              contained by the continent.  Fifty  years of daily outflows through  the
              boundaries of the continental  United States have been determined based on
              observations recorded  by U.S.G.S. stations.  By integrating over monthly,
              seasonal and  annual totals, effects of storage and diversion are minimized.  
              This newly created database will be used together with existing  climatic
              databases that span several decades.  Primary goals of the  study include: (a)
              determination of the spatio-temporal scales of  the continental-United States
              outflow:  (b) study sub-continental  and regional hydrologic budgets of the
              conterminous United States;  (c) identification of forcing/feedback mechanisms
              active on those  scales in the atmosphere-land system.  The proposed research
              is a  two year interdisciplinary effort involving the hydrology Research  group
              of the University of Iowa and the climate research group of  the Scripps
              Institutional of Oceanography.  The proposed research  is in line with the
              stated research areas of the NRC report on  Opportunities in the Hydrologic
              Sciences (NRC, 1991, see also  Georgakakos, 1992), as it tackles the issues of
              continental and  regional scale   hydrology and atmosphere/land surface
              interaction.   Also, the proposed study is hig hly relevant to the GEWEX 
              (Continental Energy and Water Cycle Experiment) Continental-Scale  
              International Project (GCIP).
