Title       : New Macromolecular Architectures: Models for Condensed-Phase Microstructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1994      
File        : a9496225

Award Number: 9496225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183639             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Moore moore@scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The phase behavior of small-molecule amphiphiles in solution and               
              well-defined block copolymers in the strong segregation limit is               
              strikingly similar.  However, a unified molecular-based                        
              understanding of this phenomenon is not well developed.  Since                 
              constraints defined by the molecular architecture dramatically                 
              influence phase behavior, a molecular-based description of ordered             
              fluid microstructures is clearly required.  The research is                    
              intended to further the understanding of the crucial molecular                 
              parameters that govern condensed-phase microstructure.  This                   
              involves the design, synthesis, and characterization of two                    
              new families of macromolecular architectures.  These architectures             
              will be constructed by covalently linking stiff-dendritic                      
              macromolecules with linear flexible chains.  The design of these               
              architectures relies upon considerations taken from both small-                
              molecule amphiphiles and block copolymers.  One of the unique                  
              features is that the architectures incorporate a stiff-dendritic               
              segment whose geometry is precisely defined.                                   
                                                                                             
              The insight gained from these studies will enhance the discovery of            
              new polymeric materials with bicontinuous phases.  Since                       
              bicontinuous phases have potential for controlling transport                   
              phenomena, the research also has technological significance.
