Title       : Infrared Laser Spectroscopy of Jahn-Teller Active Radicals in a Supersonic Jet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1995  
File        : a9496194

Award Number: 9496194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Foster scf2@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Prof. S.C. Foster of the Chemistry Department of Florida State   University
              will conduct a series of investigations in the high resolution   infrared
              spectroscopy of Jahn-Teller active molecules.  A novel high   frequency
              modulated corona- excited supersonic jet discharge will be used   to produce
              the species of interest. The methoxy, thiomethoxy, and methyl   nitrene
              radicals will be investigated.    While there have been many investigations of
              the   rotation-vibration-electronic spectra of polyatomic molecules, there have
                been relatively few which deal with the radicals of such molecules.  This  
              paucity of such investigations is generally due to the great reactivity   of
              these species and thus the difficulties encountered in producing   sufficient
              amounts of them suitable for experimental study.  In radical   species which
              are expected to possess axial symmetry this is often not   the case.  The
              radicals are distorted away from their expected symmetry   due to a special
              interaction between the electronic motions and some of   the vibrational modes.
               This is known as the Jahn-Teller effect.  This   research is devoted to the
              study of Jahn-Teller active molecules with the   aim to establish a data base
              suitable for the development of appropriate   theoretical models.
