Title       : Climate and Plant Water-Use Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1998   
File        : a9496093

Award Number: 9496093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431478             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Comstock jpc8@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9307196  Comstock    Transpiration is the unavoidable water loss from a plant
              incurred  during photosynthesis. Several methods are employed in this study  to
              better understand the ways in which very high rates of  transpiration limit
              plant performance, and what specializations  can enable plants to endure them.
              The study focuses on the  performance of arid-land plants, and examines both
              physiological  mechanisms and population-level adaptation. A new climatic index
               is proposed, which ranks sites in terms of the evaporative demand  of the
              environment  during growing season. Preliminary evidence  suggests that this
              index explains population-level genetic  differentiation in key water-use
              characteristics of warm-desert  shrubs. Special attention is given to the
              importance of the  capacity for water transport between root and shoot. It is 
              suggested that this is often a key limiting factor constraining  maximum
              tolerable transpiration rate, and therefore limits  photosynthetic activity
              under conditions of high temperature and  low humidity. Specific mechanistic
              models of how transpiration  rate is sensed and controlled will be tested.
              Water-use  characters under study include leaf gas-exchange with the 
              atmosphere, functional measures of liquid water transport  capacity, transport
              tissue anatomy, and humidity treatments  during growth, drought studies, and
              pressurization of the soil  volume to control leaf water status. These
              experiments will  contribute directly to understanding the environmental
              physiology  of arid-land plants i particular, but the principles under study 
              are general constraints experienced by all terrestrial plants.  The results
              will be pertinent to all environmental biologists  interested in either natural
              or cultivated plant systems  ***
