Title       : Electrochemical and Chemical Studies on Manganese-Dioxygen Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1994      
File        : a9496236

Award Number: 9496236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69615              (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin P. Horwitz horwitz@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program supports research by Dr. Colin P. Horwitz of the                       
              Chemistry Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, on                     
              manganese(II) complexes of Schiff bases.  These compounds                      
              promote 4-electron reduction of molecular oxygen and form metal                
              complexes which often incorporate one or more of the oxygen                    
              atoms.  The goal of the research is to investigate the                         
              mechanism of reactions of this type, and test the validity of a                
              proposed reaction pathway involving a Mn(III)-molecular oxygen                 
              Schiff-base anion.  Spectroscopic and electrochemical methods                  
              will be used to detect the intermediates and examine the effect                
              of structure on the reactivity of the complexes.  The Schiff                   
              bases will be modified to provide electronic and structural                    
              changes in the metal complex which will help to stabilize the                  
              intermediates.                                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              A number of mechanisms have been proposed for these reactions,                 
              and this study will help to clarify how molecular oxygen binds                 
              to manganese and how manganese promotes the cleavage of the O-O                
              bond.  The results will increase understanding of the behavior                 
              of oxygenase enzymes which contain manganese and assist in the                 
              design of Mn-based catalyts capable of partial oxygenation                     
              reactions with molecular oxygen.
