Title       : Production of Polyhydroxybutyrate in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1995        
File        : a9496097

Award Number: 9496097
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Somerville crs@andrew2.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9305269   Somerville  The main goal of the proposed experiments is to understand
              the  factors influencing the flux of carbon towards poly- -  hydroxybutyrate
              (PHB) biosynthesis and to investigate strategies  aimed at increasing the
              amount of PHB produced in transgenic  plants.  Using a suspension culture of
              Arabidopsis cells expressing  the PHB biosynthetic pathway, the flux of
              acetyl-CoA towards  lipids, sterols, and PHB, will be measured.  Manipulation
              of the  growth media by the addition of various carbon sources (eg acetate  and
              citrate), as well as inhibitors of lipid and sterol  biosynthesis, will be used
              to manipulate the flux of acetyl-CoA  towards the various sinks and to increase
              PHB production.   Furthermore, the influence of the addition of the bacterial
              3-  ketothiolase on the production of PHB in transgenic plants will be 
              examined.  A major effort will be directed towards targeting the  enzymes of
              the PHB biosynthetic pathway into the plastids.  The  rationale is that higher
              amounts of PHB and minimal disruption of  plant growth may be accomplished by
              diverting the high flux of  acetyl-CoA away from seed storage lipid synthesis
              towards PHB  synthesis.  The bacterial PHB biosynthetic genes will be modified 
              to introduce a plastid targeting sequence and to direct their  expression under
              the control of the constitutive CaMV 35s and a  seed specific promoter.  Each
              of the three PHB genes will be  introduced separately into tobacco and
              Arabidopsis.  The efficiency  of protein targeting and signal sequences
              cleavage, as well as the  activity of the bacterial enzymes in  the plastid,
              will be  determined.  Cross-pollination between the various transgenic lines 
              will produce hybrids containing all genes required for PHB  synthesis in the
              plastid.  PHB production in different tissues of  the hybrid transgenic plants
              will be measured.  Finally, the  influence of a reduction in starch
              biosynthesis on the production  of PHB in the plastid will be examined by
              backcrossing in  Arabidopsis transg enics to the starches mutants.  A secondary
              goal  is to purify sufficient amounts of plant PHB granules for the  initial
              analysis of their physical and chemical properties, in  comparison to the
              properties of bacterial PHB.  This will be  accomplished using the suspension
              culture of transgenic Arabidopsis  cells grown under conditions maximizing PHB
              production, as  determined by the experiments on the manipulation of the flux
              of  acetyl-CoA into various sinks.  %%%  A significant breakthrough in the
              production of biodegradable  plastic in plants has been accomplished from
              previous work.  The  continuation of this work involves increasing the amount
              of plastic  production per plant.  Instead of a slow selection method which 
              would take many generations of plants, molecular biology and  metabolic
              inhibitors will be tried to divert the biosynthetic  apparatus of the plant
              toward the synthesis of plastic.  It is  important that the major amount of the
              energy of the plant be used  for growth; the biosynthetic enzymes for the
              plastic will be  directed into a specific compartment in the cell.  By
              introducing  a bacterial enzyme responsible for this component into the plant
              it  is hoped that greater amounts of the plastic end product will  result. 
              These studies if successful will pioneer the efforts to  produce useful
              biomaterials in plants.  ***
