Title       : Numerical Control Structures for the Computation of Large Eigenvalue and
               Singular Value Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1994    
File        : a9496115

Award Number: 9496115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 16,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilse C.F. Ipsen ipsen@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Among the components of a numerical program that have the greatest             
              influence on accuracy are what can be called numerical control                 
              structures: convergence tests, stopping criteria, deflation criteria,          
              and identification of problem instances that require special                   
              treatment.  In order to guarantee high accuracy in computations with           
              large matrices these control structures must be algebraically sound            
              and perform well in finite precision arithmetic.                               
                                                                                             
              This project will exploit the structure and geometry of a problem for          
              the purpose of designing numerical control structures.  The structure          
              of the singular value decomposition will be used to determine the              
              directions of errors and develop a perturbation theory; and the                
              geometry of subspaces and angles between them will be used to design           
              numerical control structures.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The resulting perturbation theory and control structures are expected          
              to lead to highly accurate implementations for the computation of              
              eigenvectors of symmetric matrices and singular vectors by inverse             
              iteration, for the computation of singular values by the (extended)            
              Golub-Reinsch algorithm, and for the computation of eigenvalues by the         
              QL algorithm.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              By design, the numerical control structures of the (extended) Golub-           
              Reinsch algorithm are invariant under column scaling.  Since recent            
              error bounds for linear system solution, singular value                        
              decompositions, and eigendecompositions exhibit the same invariance,           
              the numerical control structures will be employed to explain the               
              significance and particular form of these error bounds.  The goal is           
              to produce more realistic assessments of problem conditioning and              
              algorithm stability, which is especially important for highly accurate         
              solution of large problems.
