Title       : Quantitation of Cathepsins B, S, and L in Cells and Organelles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9496260

Award Number: 9496260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Mason rmason@nemours.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alfred I. Dupont Inst
	      1600 Rockland Road
	      Wilmington, DE  19899    302/651-6802

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The lysosomal cysteine proteinases, cathepsins B, S, and L, have               
              been purified from a number of mammalian species and are known to              
              exist in multiple forms.  Quantitation of these enzymes is                     
              difficult due to their instability and inhibition by naturally                 
              occurring inhibitors.  The objectives of this proposal are to                  
              quantitate the relative concentrations of the different molecular              
              forms of cathepsins in cells and to determine which ones are                   
              involved in the degradation of endocytosed proteins such a albumin             
              and .2-macroglobulin.  Experimental procedures will employ a                   
              specific radio-labeled inhibitor in either a free membrane-permeant            
              form or conjugated to proteins in cell culture systems.  A pure                
              form of Z-?125iodine!Tyr-Ala-CHN2 will be used in conjunction with             
              specific antibodies and SDS/polyacrylamide gel                                 
              electrophoresis/autoradiography to quantitate different molecular              
              forms of each enzyme in living cells.  These procedures circumvent             
              the problems of inactivation or inhibition during isolation and                
              have the added advantage of being able to quantitate different                 
              molecular forms of each of the enzymes.  The relative                          
              concentrations of each enzyme will indicate the relative importance            
              of these enzymes in protein turnover in a given cell.                          
              ?125iodine!Tyr-Ala-CHN2 conjugated to a range of proteins will be              
              used as a unique tool for the identification of the enzymes that               
              first meet endocytosed proteins.  the types of enzymes that first              
              react with such reagents in intact cells will indicate which are               
              involved in the degradation of endocytosed proteins.  It is known              
              that lysosomal proteinases are synthesized as precursors in the                
              endoplasmic reticulum and processed to intermediate forms as they              
              enter the lysosome and finally are processed to lower M, mature                
              forms in the mature lysosome.  the molecular forms of the enzymes              
              that react with ?125iodine!Tyr-Ala-CHN2 conjugated to proteins will            
              permit the differentiation between fusion of endosomes with early              
              lysosomes and fusion of endosomes with late (mature) lysosomes.                
              Such a direct method of identifying the enzymes in endosomes is                
              required to unequivocally determine which enzymes are involved in              
              endocytic proteolysis, and by which route the enzymes are packaged             
              into the endocytic compartment.                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              This project is aimed at determining the quantities of a number of             
              important proteinases in cells using a novel technique with a                  
              membrane permeant radio-labeled inhibitor.  Results from this study            
              will identify which of the four lysosomal cysteine proteases                   
              predominate in which cells and enable us to determine the                      
              significance of these enzymes in cell function.  A second aim is to            
              determine the molecular forms of the enzymes that are involved in              
              the degradation of endocytosed proteins.  Results from this part of            
              the study will show which enzymes are involved in the degradation              
              of proteins taken up into the cell, and will also indicate the site            
              at which endocytosed proteins first meet with lysosomal enzymes                
              during their biosynthesis.  The procedures to be developed provide             
              a series of new techniques to study the biological roles of                    
              lysosomal proteases.
