Title       : Nonrigid Swept Surfaces for Solid Modeling and Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9496252

Award Number: 9496252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59110              (Estimated)
Investigator: John K. Johnstone jj@cis.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is the full incorporation of a larger                 
              class of swept surfaces for machining, robot motion, and other                 
              applications.  The full incorporation of swept surfaces into                   
              solid models requires concentration on surface intersection                    
              and Boolean operations on solids involving swept surfaces.                     
              The development of a powerful tool for the analysis of swept                   
              surfaces for machining and other applications demands related                  
              work on interference detection, volume, representational                       
              issues, and sweep generation.                                                  
                                                                                             
              One of the fundamental primitives in solid modeling is the                     
              swept surface.  A swept surface is characterized by the type                   
              of sweep (i.e., the way the position and orientation of the                    
              cross-section changes), the cross-section that is being swept,                 
              and the ability of this cross-section to change shape.  The                    
              literature and solid modeling systems are dominated by the                     
              consideration of sweep surfaces generated by translational or                  
              revolute sweeps, and rigid sweeps (the cross-section does not                  
              change shape).  This project will investigate arbitrary                        
              sweeping of nonrigid objects, about which there is less                        
              literature and little algorithmic development.  In order to                    
              make the problem tractable, the study will be restricted to                    
              simple cross-sections.  Thus, the project will concentrate on                  
              the sweeping of lines and circles, although much of the theory                 
              applies to other simple cross-sections as well.  The                           
              superellipse cross-section will also be studied.
