Title       : Molecular Recognition in the Gas Phase: Rates, Structures, and Energetics
               Without Solvents or Counterions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1995     
File        : a9496141

Award Number: 9496141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85030              (Estimated)
Investigator: David V. Dearden david_dearden@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work of              
              Professor Dearden at the University of Texas at Arlington. The                 
              study will investigate the intrinsic molecular recognition                     
              properties of crown ethers and related ligands for metal and                   
              molecular ions in the gas phase using ion cyclotron resonance and              
              tandem mass spectrometric techniques. The specific areas concern               
              (a) the identification of chemical systems which exhibit                       
              recognition effects, (b) the measurement of host-guest affinities,             
              and (c) the investigation of the rates and mechanisms of gas phase             
              recognition reactions. Subtopics that will be studied are (a) the              
              effects of varying the cavity size and the number and types of                 
              ligand donor atoms, (b) intrinsic reactivity of naturally occurring            
              ionophores, and (c) chiral recognition in ion-molecule reactions.              
              %%%                                                                            
              The results from Professor David D. Dearden's gas phase study on               
              the interaction between crown ethers and metal/molecular ions will             
              complement data available on molecular recognition in solution and             
              will thereby enable the differentiation between intrinsic and                  
              solvent effects. The study also addresses chiral recognition and               
              includes naturally-occurring, biologically-active ionophores                   
              (molecules facilitating ion transport through membranes). The                  
              outcome of this research will enable an identification and                     
              characterization of cage-type reagents which react selectively on              
              the basis of size and shape.
