Title       : RIA: Control Sliding and Dextrous Manipulation for Roboticsand Automation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  1994   
File        : a9496333

Award Number: 9496333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Imin Kao kao@mal.eng.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9309823     Kao     The goal of this research is to investigate and apply
              dextrous  manipulation in sliding and rolling using compliant end-effectors, 
              and to control sliding.  The results are important for assembly of  compliant
              parts, fixturing, and tasks involving pushing and  sliding.  Dextrous sliding
              manipulation is useful in motion  planning, slip prediction and recovery,
              object re-orienting, and  regrasping in robotics.  Recent work in dextrous
              sliding  manipulation has either focused on planar, quasistatic motions or 
              employed simplified contact models such as point contact.  To  accomplish this
              goal, the first step is to develop three-  dimensional dynamic dextrous
              manipulation with various contact  models.  The second step is to incorporate
              the results of this  research with existing research in the areas of rolling
              and  nonholonomic manipulation.  Finally, the control algorithms will be 
              implemented using compliant hands with sliding and dextrous  manipulation.  The
              results of this proposed research can be used to  control fingers to follow
              prescribed motion trajectories via  sliding manipulation involving external and
              internal forces,  stiffness, and motion control.  The outcome, when it is 
              incorporated with nonholonomic manipulation, can formulate a  complete solution
              to dextrous robotic manipulation that involves  shifting of contact locations. 
              The control schemes developed using  the theoretical foundation of sliding and
              dextrous manipulation can  be applied in autonomous tele-manipulation and
              manufacturing  automation such as fixturing planning, tasks involving pushing
              and  sliding, and assembly.
