Title       : RUI: Nuclear Magnetic Moment Measurements Using On-Line B-NMR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9496322

Award Number: 9496322
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53030              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren F. Rogers rogers@westmont.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Westmont College
	      955 La Paz Road
	      Santa Barbara, CA  931081023    805/969-5051

NSF Program : 1234      LOW ENERGY NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Nuclear ground state magnetic moments of short-lived B-unstable                
              nuclei are measured using B radiation-detected nuclear magnetic                
              resonance (B-NMR) spectroscopy in conjunction with recoil mass                 
              separation and tilted foil polarization.  After separation from                
              the beam and other reaction products, recoil nuclei are polarized              
              by passage through an array of tilted carbon foils, after which                
              they are implanted in a crystal host immersed in a strong                      
              magnetic field whose direction coincides with the polarization                 
              axis.  Angular distribution of the B-decay is asymmetric parallel              
              and anti-parallel to the polarization axis owing to the parity-                
              violating nature of B-decay.  Search for the NMR involves                      
              applying a weak RF magnetic field oriented perpendicular to the                
              polarization axis, and finding the frequency at which decay                    
              asymmetry disappears.  Knowledge of this frequency and of the                  
              magnetic field in which the nucleus precesses allows simple                    
              extraction of the nuclear magnetic moment.  The current focus of               
              this project is 23Mg, the last T = 1/2 mirror nucleus in the sd-               
              shell whose magnetic moment is unknown.  Successful measurement                
              of its moment will supply an important nuclear datum to the study              
              of mirror nuclei in the sd-shell, and will contribute to the                   
              understanding of the shell model structure of the nucleus.                     
              Similar measurements are planned for other nuclei, both in the                 
              sd- and fp-shells.
