Title       : Novel Proteins of the Pollen Extracellular Matrix
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1996     
File        : a9496338

Award Number: 9496338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Bedinger bedinger@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                      9305165  Bedinger    Plant cell walls are dynamic structures that both
              determine  morphological structure and mediate cell-cell interactions in plant 
              development. Cell wall proteins are likely to participate actively  in both
              roles. The relatively simple structure of pollen and the  known pollen
              "recognition partners" for cell-cell interactions  (stigma and stylar canal)
              make pollen an ideal system for the study  of plant cell wall proteins and
              cell-cell recognition. Dr. Bedinger  has identified two novel classes of
              extracellular matrix proteins  specific to pollen. One class of proteins is
              tightly associated  with the outer pollen wall, or exine, and may be involved
              with  establishing the species specific pattern of exine ornamentation,  or in
              pollen-pistil recognition. The second class of protein(s) may  be structural
              components of the pollen tube wall, or may act as  sexual agglutinins to
              mediate the interaction of the pollen tube  with female tissues. Dr. Bedinger
              proposes to isolate full length  genes encoding these proteins, localize the
              proteins within the  pollen or pollen tube, and investigate the role of the
              proteins in  male-female recognition. The data obtained from the proposed 
              studies will enable us to propose testable models for the functions  of these
              proteins in plant reproduction.  ***
