Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Investigation into the ContinuumHypotheses and also
               Set-Theoretic Aspects of Group Actions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1994  
File        : a9496286

Award Number: 9496286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew D. Foreman mforeman@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator will continue work on the existence of                   
              definable counterexamples to the continuum hypothesis in the                   
              presence of strong axioms, the aim being to prove their non-                   
              existence.  This has already yielded rich dividends in both                    
              combinatorial and descriptive set theory.  He will also continue               
              work connecting amenable and non-amenable group actions with set               
              theory.  Furthermore, he will try to extend his previous solution              
              to the famous "Marczewski Problem" about Banach-Tarski paradoxes to            
              arbitrary non-amenable groups of homeomorphisms of Polish spaces.              
              This will provide an exact characterization of paradoxical                     
              decompositions of Polish spaces using sets with the property of                
              Baire.  He will also investigate newly discovered connections                  
              between logic and set theory on the one hand and topological                   
              dynamics and ergodic theory on the other.                                      
                   A famous paradox of measure theory, the Banach-Tarski paradox,            
              shows that ordinary intuition about volumes of sets in three-                  
              dimensional space is unreliable.  In particular, if the sets are               
              allowed to be sufficiently bizarre, certainly not anything that can            
              be drawn or easily imagined, then a solid ball in 3-space can be               
              dissected into a finite number of sets, and these sets can be                  
              rearranged and reassembled to form two solid balls, each congruent             
              to the original one.  An old question that had resisted numerous               
              attempts was whether the sets involved in such a paradoxical                   
              decomposition of the ball could have at least a minimal degree of              
              regularity known as the property of Baire.  Although not easy to               
              draw or imagine, non-measurable sets with the property of Baire do             
              arise in classical analysis and so are not considered so remote                
              from reality as to be easy to ignore altogether.  The investigator             
              and a co-worker have defied widely held suspicions that such                   
              decompositions are impossible, developed some technical machinery              
              for treating this and related questions, and shown that such                   
              decompositions do indeed exist.  Other topics in pure set theory               
              and its applications will be considered.
