Title       : Analysis of Microbial Community Structure and Function Alonga Detrital Particle
               Size Gradient
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1993   
File        : a9496054

Award Number: 9496054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Collins, Capital Systems         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Sinsabaugh Robert.Sinsabaugh@utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In most streams, community production is sustained by the                 
              decomposition of imported plant litter.  The early stages of                   
              plant litter decomposition have received much study; but little                
              work has focused on the fate of fine organic particles (FPOM),                 
              the form in which most particulate detritus moves through stream               
              ecosystems.  Utilizing recently developed biochemical techniques,              
              I propose to investigate the structure and activity of FPOM-                   
              associated microbial communities in two concurrent field                       
              experiments.  The first is intended to evaluate a series of basic              
              hypotheses about microbial production, extracellular enzyme                    
              activity and community structure over a broad range of                         
              conditions.  The second is focused specifically on the                         
              relationship between FPOM degradation rates and the activity of                
              lignocellulose-degrading enzymes.                                              
              %%%                                                                            
                   This work will contribute to our basic understanding of the               
              operation of attached microbial communities, a topic of broad                  
              interest.  In addition, it may lead to the formulation of models               
              that relate FPOM mass loss, currently difficult to determine in                
              situ, to the activity of lignocellulose-degrading enzymes, a                   
              readily quantified measure.  Such a model would permit routine                 
              monitoring of FPOM degradation rates, an application that could                
              contribute to future studies of ecosystem processes and                        
              management.
