Title       : Ecological and Evolutionary Dynamics of Reproductive Diapause in Drosophila
               Melanogaster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0236577

Award Number: 0236577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Schmidt schmidtp@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter F. Eanes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to understand the population dynamics of diapause
              (reproductive quiescence) in Drosophila melanogaster.  This trait is central to
              organismal fitness and population dynamics of insects in seasonal environments,
              and has been recently shown to be highly variable in this species.  The
              specific aims are to examine: 1) how the expression of and ability to diapause
              influence other aspects of phenotype such as metabolism and physiology,
              fitness, and aging; and 2) the genetic architecture of diapause, including
              potential identification of those genes responsible for the observed variation
              in diapause expression.  This research would involve experimentation in the
              field and laboratory as well as detailed molecular and genetic analyses. 
              

Diapause in D. melanogaster is an excellent system for investigating how
              organisms adapt to environmental variation.  Diapause has wide-ranging effects
              on other traits including aging, and this research would contribute to the
              identification of pathways regulating lifespan.  Many agricultural pests
              diapause, and information from a model organism could be directly applied and
              provide insights into means for population control of pest insects.  In
              addition, these investigations have bearing on understanding evolution in novel
              environments, evolutionary response to climate change, and lipid-mediated life
              history tradeoffs in other organisms.


