Title       : High Performance Fiber Reinforced Cement Composites - International Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0236859

Award Number: 0236859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Mccabe                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Antoine E. Naaman naaman@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Summary:  Fiber reinforced cement composites (FRCs or FRCCs) have made striking
              advances in recent years, due, on one hand, to several technological
              developments (involving the matrix, the fiber, the interface, and the composite
              production process) and, on the other hand, to a better understanding of the
              fundamental mechanisms controlling their particular behavior.  The definition
              of "high performance" fiber reinforced cement composites (HPFRCC) is now well
              understood by researchers and implies a stress-strain response in tension that
              exhibits strain hardening accompanied by multiple cracking.  High performance
              behavior at low fiber content, that is, lower cost is one of the objective of
              many research studies; it opens the way to large scale structural applications
              not only in evident areas such as seismic and impact resistant structures, but
              also in helping conceive innovative structural systems with strain hardening
              cement-based composites.

	The main objective of the proposed workshop is to
              lay out the latest developments in the field, provide a forum for discussion
              and exchange of information among top specialists, record up-to-date advances
              in the state of knowledge, set a reference benchmark to surpass in the future,
              and inspire directions to follow in near-future research.  Special topics
              selected for this workshop include: 1) characterization and modeling; 2)
              interface properties; 3) impact resistance; 4) fire resistance; 5) scale
              effects; 6) self-compacting properties; 7) properties and modeling under
              reverse cyclic loading; and 8) hybrid composites. 

Broader Impact

The
              proposed workshop will: 1) provide ideas and solutions at the forefront of
              research in the field; 2)  foster a better understanding of the behavior,
              mechanics and applications of  cement-based composites; 3) help strengthen the
              technical background of participants allowing them to address more challenging
              technical issues in the future; 4) engage and train younger researchers; 5)
              help in knowledge transfer to the classroom; 6) set a reference benchmark to
              surpass; 7) inspire directions to follow in near-future research; and 8)
              nurture international cooperation.

The applications of HPFRCC in thin sheet
              products such as cladding, pipes, poles, and housing, as well as in seismic and
              blast resistant structures, will have an immense impact on the serviceability
              and durability of the infrastructure leading to broad benefits to
              society.



