Title       : Forest Response to the Decline of a Dominant Species: Ecosystem to Regional
               Analyses of the Impact of the Hemlock Woolly Adelgid on Northeastern Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0236897

Award Number: 0236897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The introduction of exotic pathogens and pests to forest ecosystems represents
              a
powerful agent of ecological change that may selectively remove dominant
              tree species and
simultaneously stimulate widespread human disturbance in the
              form of pre-emptive and salvage
logging. Due to the increasing global movement
              of organisms and materials, the selective
decline and elimination of tree
              species is an increasingly important ecosystem disturbance that
warrants
              intensive study at stand to regional scales.
The recent unimpeded infestation
              of the hemlock woolly adelgid (HWA) across the
northeastern U.S. provides an
              unusual opportunity and critical imperative to examine the
ecological
              consequences of the removal of a keystone tree species, eastern hemlock, on
              forest
composition, structure, and function. HWA is generating widespread
              mortality and initiating
intensive logging of hemlock from North Carolina to
              Massachusetts and threatens to produce a
range-wide decline or elimination of
              this ecologically, culturally, and economically important
species.
              Specifically, mortality of hemlock stands with sparse understories may lead
              to
a lengthy period of forest ecosystem reorganization resulting in new,
              distinct forest types and
major changes in ecosystem function including
              disruption of decomposition, nitrogen cycling and
nitrate leaching.
Broader
              impacts from this study include: 1) incorporation of new ecological findings
              into
scientific publications, presentations, and public outreach; 2) informing
              the public and land
managers by distributing findings to the HWA working group
              and other web-based products; 3)
integration of data into existing
              collaborative efforts with regional experts and professionals; and
4) strong
              educational training in research design, field techniques, and data and
              laboratory
analyses for students in the graduate and Research Experience for
              Undergraduate (REU)
programs at the Harvard Forest.

