Title       : Doctoral Research Capacity Building for Sensor Science Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0236425

Award Number: 0236425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret W. Curtis                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravindra B. Lal rlal@aamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              B. R. Reddy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anup Sharma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew E. Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manmohan D. Aggarwal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alabama A&M University
	      P O BOX 285
	      Normal, AL  357620285    205/859-7011

NSF Program : 1797      Doctoral HBCU Rsrch Capacity
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University (AAMU) is submitting a proposal
              for HBCU Doctoral Capacity Building Grant with a unified research focus on
              Sensor Science and Technology (SST) in response to the NSF Dear Colleague
              Letter of June 17, 2002. AAMU initiated the Ph.D. program in physics in 1986.
              AAMU is one of the first HBCUs to start the Ph.D. program. The proposed
              projects have a unified focus on Sensor Science and Technology. This fully
              supports the mission of the university and
meets the national standards of
              research in the area of sensors. Industrial partners and scientists from
              federal laboratories have endorsed this proposal. To ensure that each critical
              area based on AAMU strength and the national need is represented, three
              subproject areas are carefully chosen: Smart Optical Sensors, Fiber Optic
              Sensors, and Infrared (IR) Sensors.

Development of the novel materials and
              their adaptation in the state-of-the-art sensors is our major scientific goal
              of the proposal. This will increase the overall capacity and infrastructure of
              the department and will help in attracting quality faculty, undergraduate and
              graduate students. 

A one-week summer workshop and a short course for
              faculty and UG students from HBCU's and other institutions will be organized
              every year on sensor science and technology. Eight to ten faculty and students
              will be invited from local and other universities and colleges. This in turn
              will motivate and better prepare UG students towards entering graduate schools
              in the areas of science and engineering. The short course will be later
              recommended for a graduate course with 3 credit/semester.

Alabama A&M
              University is strategically located in the city of Huntsville amongst major
              industrial companies, NASA/Marshall Space Flight Center, US Army Missile and
              Aviation Command, and US Army Strategic Missile and Defense Command. Several of
              these have a focus on sensor technology. This NSF grant will help in (a)
              improving the infrastructure of the department of physics at AAMU and (b)
              expanding the scientific research being conducted as a result of the previous
              CREST-Center for Nonlinear Optics and Optical Materials (1988-1998). The
              proposed grant will strengthen the position of AAMU as a doctoral degree
              awarding institution among HBCUs and other institutions. The grant will also
              help in attracting quality faculty and students. The existing external
              departmental advisory committee will review the impact of this grant on the
              infrastructure of the department. The committee will report the findings to the
              PD/PI and to the department chair.

The AAMU administration is committed to
              support the proposal by contributing 31% cost-sharing and a reduction of
              indirect cost to 25% from a normal 35.5%. The PI/PD and investigators of the
              proposed grant have many years of scientific and management experience, strong
              scientific track record and are well recognized in the field of sensor
              materials and devices.

