Title       : Environmental Variation, Dormancy, and Rare Plant Persistence in Invaded
               Habitats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0236070

Award Number: 0236070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500232             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan M. Levine j.levine@ic.ac.uk  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Rees  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A K. McEachern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Growing concerns over the persistence of threatened and endangered species have
              rekindled interest in one of the classic problems in ecology: how do rare
              species persist? Without large populations distributed across heterogeneous
              environments, rare species are traditionally regarded as susceptible to
              extinction from environmental variability. By contrast, numerous coexistence
              models suggest that for species with dormancy, environmental fluctuations may
              be
essential for persistence in competitive communities. Variable germination
              and dormancy allow species to exploit temporal variation to avoid both
              unfavorable environments and intense competition. Despite acceptance among
              community ecologists that environmental fluctuations may favor coexistence via
              these "storage effect" mechanisms, their implications for understanding how
              rare plants persist are only beginning to be explored. Better understanding how
              dormancy, surrounding community dynamics, and environmental variation influence
              persistence is essential to successfully managing threatened populations. This
              proposal outlines research to examine how rare annual plants persist in the
              highly variable, exotic grass dominated habitats of the California Channel
              Islands. With tenfold annual variation in rainfall, and over 15 rare and
              endangered annual plants, the island system provides a unique opportunity to
              examine how germination biology, environmental variation, and surrounding
              community dynamics influence persistence. The research team brings together a
              theoretical ecologist specializing in annual plant population models, a field
              ecologist with experience studying biological invasions in California
              herbaceous systems, and a conservation practitioner working in the Channel
              Islands National Park. The intellectual merit of the proposed research is that
              it will clarify how dormancy, environmental variation and surrounding community
              dynamics influence the persistence of rare annual plants. This is particularly
              important considering the increased environmental variation forecasted with
              climate change, and the continuing invasion of exotic species. The broader
              implications include the training of postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
              students to work at the interface of models and experiments, and the generation
              of data necessary for successfully managing the rare annual plants of the
              Channel Islands. Through collaborations with the National Park Service and
              Nature Conservancy, the results of this project will be communicated to the
              general public and those directly responsible for managing the unique island
              flora.

