Title       : Structural Properties of Initial States in Protein Folding from NMR Alignment
               Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0236316

Award Number: 0236316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $575803             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei T. Alexandrescu andrei@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1164,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Recent work has shown that proteins under extreme denaturing conditions retain a
              net alignment with respect to an NMR magnetic field when immersed in the
              asymmetric environment of liquid crystals or gels.  The asymmetric shapes of
              these matrices impose weak steric restrictions on the molecular reorientation
              of solutes.  The resulting time- and ensemble-averaged alignment leads to
              incomplete cancellation of NMR dipolar couplings.  Dipolar couplings report on
              the orientation of individual bond vectors with respect to the molecular
              alignment frame.  The objectives of this project are to further the
              understanding of the structural basis for net alignment in denatured proteins
              and to use the alignment information encoded in dipolar couplings towards a
              structural characterization of denatured states.  The objectives will be
              addressed with two model systems.  The first consists of the two proteins CspA
              and LysN, which share a native five-stranded beta-barrel structural motif but
              no detectable sequence similarity.  Dipolar couplings will be used to
              investigate the extent to which native-like structure is conserved between the
              denatured states of the two proteins.   The second model system is comprised of
              two polypeptides that adopt regular extended alpha-helical structures: the
              S-peptide, which corresponds to the first alpha-helix of the protein
              ribonuclease A; and the GCN4-p  alpha-helical coiled-coil dimer.  Dipolar
              couplings will be used to determine the persistence length of alpha-helical
              conformations in the denatured forms of the two polypeptides.

The principal
              motivation of this work is to obtain an improved understanding of the
              structural basis of protein folding.  Protein folding remains one of the most
              difficult and intriguing problems in biology today, and is essential for
              progress in structural genomics. The new experimental window on structure in
              denatured states afforded by NMR alignment data, will allow more accurate
              modeling of protein folding and of the factors responsible for the stability of
              proteins to unfolding. Modeling of protein folding requires information on
              denatured states in as much as structure in these initial states can favor or
              oppose folding to the functional native state.  The structural characterization
              of denatured states additionally impacts mechanisms for denatured protein
              aggregation reactions, which can occur through illegitimate recombination of
              incompletely formed nascent structures.  The delineation of structural building
              blocks that persist in denatured proteins provides insights into the mechanisms
              by which protein structures evolve, information that in turn could be useful in
              protein design. This project offers the opportunity for students to train in a
              rich, multidisciplinary approach to protein folding that combines protein
              chemistry, state of the art NMR experiments, and structure modeling.  

