Title       : Silk Protein Evolution and Spider Phylogenetics: an EST Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0236020

Award Number: 0236020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl Y. Hayashi chayashi@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Cheryl Hayashi at the University of California, Riverside has received a
              grant to study the evolution of spiders and their silk proteins.  The dragline
              silks of orb-weaving spiders are highly prized as biomaterials because these
              protein-based fibers have remarkable combinations of strength and toughness. 
              Most knowledge of dragline silks comes from studies done on two species.  With
              over 34,000 described species, and with most species spinning multiple types of
              silks in addition to the dragline, spider silks are incredibly diverse.  Very
              little is actually known about the mechanical properties and genetics of spider
              silks.  Dr. Hayashi's first goal is to document the extensive molecular and
              biomechanic variation of spider silks.  To do this, she will perform tensile
              tests of silk fibers spun by different species of spiders, and will then clone
              the gene transcripts that are expressed in silk gland tissue.  The second goal
              of her study is to trace how silk gene sequences have changed as spiders
              evolved.  This work involves reconstructing the phylogenetic history of spiders
              from DNA sequences.

To accomplish her research objectives, Dr. Hayashi will
              train a postdoctoral scientist and a graduate student.  In addition,
              undergraduate students at the University of California, Riverside will
              participate through small, independent projects that are designed to be
              completed within one or two academic quarters.  The results of Dr. Hayashi's
              studies will advance the state of knowledge of silk proteins and spider
              evolution, and will significantly enlarge the international database of spider
              DNA sequences.  The work is also relevant to commercial technologies that are
              being developed to mass-produce artificial spider silk.  Correlational data
              that link performance of silk fibers to specific silk gene sequences are
              critical for the design of novel biomaterials.


