Title       : Evolution of Neurotoxin Resistance in Pufferfishes and Relatives: A Comparative
               Genomic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0236147

Award Number: 0236147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold H. Zakon h.zakon@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Manda C. Jost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Hillis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1116,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

One of the deadliest neurotoxins known is tetrodotoxin (TTX). TTX binds
              tightly to and blocks sodium channels in muscles, heart, and nerve causing
              paralysis and death.  TTX is of biological origin and is produced by a striking
              variety of animals such as the blue-ringed octopus, the ghost crab, the
              California newt, and the pufferfish. In some species TTX is used to capture
              prey, in others for defense against predation. Because TTX circulates freely in
              the body of the animals that make it, these animals must evolve insensitivity
              to their own toxin. Some species of pufferfishes are more toxic than others,
              and that higher degree of toxicity is matched, obviously, with lower
              sensitivity of the tissues of those species to the toxin. One hypothesis is
              that the varying sensitivity of tissues to TTX among these species of
              pufferfishes likely resides in variation in the amino acid sequences of the
              proteins associated with the sodium channels. This project focuses on evolution
              of TTX sensitivity among pufferfishes by way of a mechanistic  examination of
              the evolution of sodium channel proteins. 

In order to reconstruct the
              evolutionary history of the sodium channel genes, the sequences of these genes
              will be examined from the pufferfish genome database. Next, the genes for three
              of the six sodium channels will be cloned and sequenced from a variety of
              related species exhibiting varying degrees of TTX sensitivity. Phylogenetic
              relationships among the pufferfishes are known. In addition, some related fish
              with varying degrees of TTX sensitivity, and some unrelated fish that are very
              sensitive to TTX will be examined. Sensitivity to TTX will be determined by
              measuring the amount of TTX that binds to tissue samples of brain, muscle and
              heart. A comparison of the sequences of these sodium channel genes will be made
              to identify particular amino acids in the sodium channel proteins that are
              different in those species that are highly insensitive to the toxin versus
              those that are not.  From these data inferences may be drawn to reconstruct how
              particular mutations accumulated in the 3 genes during the evolutionary history
              of these species.  Thus an understanding of how these genetic mutations
              influence TTX binding will be gained in the context of current thinking about
              how the toxin interacts with amino acids in the pore of the sodium
              channel.

This work on the evolution of pufferfish insensitivity to their own
              TTX is important for a number of reasons. First, TTX is classified as a
              weapons-grade toxin.  Understanding how animals protect themselves against it
              may help in designing defense strategies against it.  Second, TTX and related
              compounds are released by marine algae and cause the "red tide" which has a
              serious impact on fisheries industries and the marine environment.  This
              project will help gain understanding about how some animals can protect
              themselves against this devastation.  Third, because they have small genomes,
              the genome of the Pufferfish has been cloned and sequenced so there is a wealth
              of molecular data on this species.  The present study will take advantage of
              that information. Finally, from a theoretical point of view, this is an
              intriguing question.  Fish are known to have six different genes for sodium
              channels, so TTX sensitivity must have evolved more or less simultaneously in
              six genes. Understanding how toxin insensitivity evolved in pufferfish will be
              a model for how animals respond adaptively on a molecular level to
              environmental challenges. Very few studies have developed the mechanistic links
              between molecular variation, differential organismal performance, and relative
              fitness. The present study has great potential to forge those important
              links.

