Title       : SGER: Explore Feasibility of a Novel Nano Mechanical Machining System-on-a-Chip
               (SOAC) for Nano Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0236465

Award Number: 0236465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62683              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ajay P. Malshe apm2@engr.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,1788,9146,9150,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) is to explore
              feasibility to design, fabricate and test a nano mechanical machining
              (mechanism) system-on-a-chip (tool, tool holder and their actuation), a dynamic
              scanning probe machining tool, with intention of performing operations such as
              drilling, milling, deburring, etc. This novel system-on-a-chip (SOAC) will be
              adaptable to scanning probe microscope (SPM) operation platform. Another unique
              feature of this innovation is that it will allow rotational motion to the nano
              tool tip, unlike mechanisms demonstrated by others, to realize new boundaries
              of traditional macro mechanical machine in nano paradigm. In this exploratory
              phase, this mechanism will be fabricated using well-established micro electro
              mechanical system (MEMS) platform through silicon multilayer fabrication. This
              project covers the research and education theme on "Manufacturing processes at
              Nanoscale".

One of the most important areas which will impact all sections
              of nano technology, is the design and development of "tools" for nano
              fabrication, machining and manufacturing. The tools for nano machining can be
              classified in various ways, but predominantly one can classify them as (1)
              tools for wet versus dry process, (2) natural versus intentional organization,
              and (3) bottom-up or top-down fabrication. In the proposed project, we intend
              to pursue dry processing for intentional organization in top-down fabrication
              approach.  Based upon today's direction of the field the findings will
              immediately impact semiconductor, optical, bio, pharmaceutical, etc.
              applications. This project will involve ethnic as well as gender minority
              undergraduate and graduate students in leading research projects through
              programs such as Carver Project, REU, etc. The PI would continue the proactive
              involvement through this project for bigger and better success by retaining and
              training minority students for higher education in this exciting and emerging
              area. Further, through the education task the PI will provide training to
              student on the project, introduce a new interdisciplinary class on
              Nanomanufacturing Processes at graduate level, and reach out through lab tours
              and creating an informative website "Nanotechnology for Dummies" for
              non-technical community and high school students. Moreover, nano science and
              engineering, particularly "nano manufacturing" is one of the major areas of
              emphasis for the state of Arkansas. The fields of biotechnology, electronics
              along with the traditional manufacturing are the major growing sectors in the
              state. On this background, the proposed subject area of research is of urgent
              academic and technological importance to many small hi-tech industries. The
              success of this seed project will enable PI to further establish a complete
              research and education program in the field of nanomanufacturing.
