Title       : Laser Flash Studies of Bacterial Photosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0236149

Award Number: 0236149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395478             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Parson parsonb@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1164,1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this study is to improve understanding of the roles of
              vibrational motions and relaxations in the initial steps of energy transfer and
              charge separation in photosynthetic bacterial antenna complexes and reaction
              centers. The work will involve a combination of experimental and computational
              approaches.  Fluctuations of the fluorescence amplitude, emission spectrum and
              anisotropy will be measured over a broad range of temperatures to study the
              dynamics of structural transitions of the proteins.  Coherent nuclear
              oscillations of the stimulated emission spectrum will be measured following
              excitation of reaction centers and antenna complexes with femtosecond flashes
              in order to explore the flow of energy from one vibrational mode to another.
              Reaction centers with mutations of ionizable residues will be studied to probe
              how changes in protein vibrations and electrostatic interactions affect the
              spectroscopic properties of the bacteriochlorophyll molecules that serve as
              electron carriers. In the computational work, molecular dynamics simulations
              will be used to study vibrational relaxations in the reaction center and to
              identify protein vibrational modes that are coupled to electron transfer.  The
              vibrational coupling and relaxation dynamics visualized in these simulations
              will be used to develop a realistic, density-matrix model of photosynthetic
              electron transfer. These studies will increase our understanding of the early
              steps of photosynthesis, which are fundamental to virtually all life on earth.
              In addition, the results may help to clarify the importance of vibrational
              motions and relaxations in other electron-transfer systems such as the
              mitochondrial respiratory chain.

Broader Impact: The project will contribute
              to the education of graduate students in Biochemistry and the Interdisciplinary
              Program in Biomolecular Structure and Design (BMSD). A broader group of
              graduate students will be exposed to results from the research in a course on
              "Optical Spectroscopy in Molecular Biophysics". Undergraduate Biochemistry,
              Biology and Chemistry students as well as promising high school students from
              underrepresented minorities will participate directly in the research.
              Instrumentation constructed as part of the project will be available to the
              interested researchers.  
