Title       : Phase IV: Improvement of the Academic Research Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0236913

Award Number: 0236913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas N. Taylor tntaylor@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Kansas EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Award focuses on living
              systems to leverage existing research strengths in ecology, genetics, and
              biochemistry.  Two new thrust areas are targeted: one at the interface of
              ecology and genetics and the other in the emerging field of lipid profiling
              (lipidomics).  The University of Kansas (KU), Kansas State University (KSU),
              and Wichita State University (WSU) will participate.  The first new area
              focuses on functional genomic approaches to study organismal response to
              environmental change, and builds on the new emphasis on developmental genetics
              and genomics at KU and KSU.  Kansas EPSCoR will expand existing and launch new
              interdisciplinary projects, recruit new faculty members focusing on ecological
              genomics, hire bioinformatics specialists to develop methods to mesh gene
              expression and ecological data, and develop a training program in ecological
              genomics.  The second new area involves the establishment of a lipidomics
              research center for systematic studies of the role of lipids and lipid
              composition of membranes in living systems.  Researchers in plant, animal, and
              microbial sciences at KSU, KU, WSU, and other institutions will use the
              center's capability.  Enhancements in the bioinformatics infrastructure will
              assist in the development of the two thrust areas.    

Faculty hires in
              ecological genomics will complement existing expertise in the state.  In
              conjunction with the research infrastructure enhancement, Kansas EPSCoR plans a
              range of education and outreach activities, from elementary school to
              postdoctoral and early career faculty training.  In collaboration with Emporia
              State University, Kansas EPSCoR will help to plan and implement conferences and
              workshops for young women considering careers in science, technology,
              engineering, or math (STEM).  Haskell Indian Nations University will place
              students in summer research programs at KSU, KU, and WSU, with the support of
              Kansas EPSCoR.  Additional collaborations are planned with community colleges
              and the McNair program.  Kansas EPSCoR will support graduate research
              assistants, post-doctoral fellows, and early career faculty in living systems
              research.  Finally, a series of symposia, seminars, and workshops will build an
              integrated education and research program in ecological genomics and
              lipidomics.

