Title       : Direct Compositionality: A Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0236462

Award Number: 0236462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25583              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pauline I. Jacobson pauline_jacobson@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The National Science Foundation supports the Workshop on Direct
              Compositionality, to be held at Brown University, June 19-22, 2003. The
              workshop will feature 13 invited speakers. There will also be slots for papers
              submitted by anonymously reviewed abstracts. The workshop will be open to the
              public. Each speaker will be the discussant for one other paper, encouraging a
              full debate on the issues. The results of the workshop will be published as a
              book or special issue of a journal. The focus of the workshop is the
              interaction of the syntactic and semantic systems. The syntactic system is a
              system of rules regarding the well-formedness of various linguistic
              expressions; the semantic system must relate each such expression to some
              meaning. Two main hypotheses regarding this interaction have been studied in
              recent years. One is "direct compositionality", which posits that the two
              systems work together. Each syntactic rule (sometimes stated in a very
              generalized and schematic form) is paired with a syntactic semantic rule. On
              this view, larger expressions are based on smaller ones in the syntax, and the
              meaning of the larger expression is simultaneously composed from the meanings
              of its constituent parts. A competing hypothesis is that semantic
              interpretation follows syntactic representation. In the 1970's and 1980's, the
              former view dominated formal semantic theory, but the latter view has become
              increasingly accepted. Many of the reasons for abandoning the earlier (and
              arguably simpler) view depend on a particular set of analytic tools. The
              development of new tools of compositional semantics makes it time to reopen the
              question of the feasibility of direct compositionality. The relevant tools
              include techniques from logic and techniques borrowed from the semantics of
              programming languages. This workshop will bring together researchers who
              approach direct compositionality from multiple perspectives and researchers
              with expertise in a variety of analytic techniques. 

The speakers include
              senior faculty, junior faculty, and advanced graduate students. This is
              designed to foster in junior scholars and graduate students a sense of full
              participation in the scientific community. Undergraduates will participate in
              the conference and help with its organization, enabling them to experience
              first-hand the excitement of scientific research. The question of how syntax
              and semantics interact has implications both for models of how humans compute
              meanings of sentences as they process them and for the design of efficient
              systems of natural language understanding.

