Title       : SBIR Phase II: Analytic Simulation Method for Oil/Gas Field Management and
               Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0236569

Award Number: 0236569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy D. Hazlett rdhazlett@integrity.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Potential Research Solns
	      1818 Shelmire Drive
	      Dallas, TX  75224    214/941-3907

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              0510604   Analytic Tools                          
Program Ref : 1266,9139,9186,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase II project provides the
              foundational R&D for new oil and gas reservoir management tools to optimize
              hydrocarbon recovery. It proposes extension of state-of-the-art analytic
              solution methods for potential flow in porous media from 2-D to 3-D. It
              incorporates 3-D analytic fluid flow simulation technology into large-scale
              optimization routines where reservoir recovery performance is required, such as
              in the optimum placement of new wells or the optimum operation of existing
              wells. Unlike previous analytic solution methods, complex heterogeneous
              reservoir architecture can be managed without a loss of accuracy.  This project
              will provide a new class of reservoir management tools capable of rapidly and
              accurately screening what-if scenarios for field development. Phase II will: i)
              generalize analytic solution boundary element methodology to three dimensions,
              ii) build a prototype, 3-D, well optimization tool, iii) develop analytic
              stream-function technology for optimization of improved recovery operations,
              and iv) extend algorithms to additional geometric shapes for enhanced
              flexibility.

Powerful analytic solution technology has been developed that
              allows robust solution of fluid flow problems with complex, heterogeneous rock
              properties. This general analytic solution methodology is an industry first,
              providing the ability to generate a brand new line of desktop hydrocarbon
              reservoir management tools. In particular, the results of this project will
              provide software and services to optimally locate new wells within existing
              hydrocarbon reservoirs. While reservoir simulation and well planning software
              both exist in the marketplace, no current commercial product offers the ability
              to rigorously compute well productivity within a feedback loop of a powerful
              gradient search optimization method to automatically select the best drilling
              location for new wells. This technology also addresses the optimum performance
              of existing wells in improved recovery operations. Using analytic
              stream-function optimization, well configurations in mature fields can be
              optimized for maximum productivity and ultimate recovery, thus minimizing
              unrecoverable natural resources.

