Title       : IRCEB: A Cross-Disciplinary Study of the Evolutionary Processes that Sustain
               Rainforest Biodiversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a0236165

Award Number: 0236165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $682557             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Smith tbsmith@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1356,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project explores the evolutionary processes that generate and maintain
              diversity and counteract the effects of extinction.  Alternative models for
              rainforest speciation will be examined through a parallel series of integrated
              studies of rainforests worldwide.  Within a multidisciplinary collaborative
              framework, these investigators will increase our understanding of how
              rainforest biodiversity is generated by achieving three goals.  First, they
              will identify general evolutionary processes that promote speciation and
              phenotypic diversity.  Second,  they will identify landscape configurations
              essential to speciation.  Third, they will test alternative speciation
              hypotheses across diverse vertebrate groups on three continents.   The study
              will involve four vertebrate groups (mammals, birds, reptiles and amphibians)
              in tropical rainforests in Australia, West Africa and South America.

 In
              addition to the scientific goals of this research there are also
              conservation-related goals.  The investigators will develop conservation
              strategies that protect key evolutionary processes and develop conservation
              plans that preserve evolutionary processes as well as current patterns of
              diversity.   The loss of rainforest biodiversity is one of the most critical
              issues facing humankind.  This research will build an understanding of the
              evolutionary processes underlying rainforest diversity and develop concrete
              plans to preserve them.

