Title       : Genetic Basis of Morphological Evolution in Stickleback
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0236239

Award Number: 0236239
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $659948             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Postlethwait jpostle@uoneuro.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles B. Kimmel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick C. Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. LeBlanc (North Carolina State University) to
              elucidate the basic endocrine control of sexual differentiation in a snail
              species (mud snail: Ilyanassa obsoleta) and to determine the mechanism by which
              the biocide tributyltin causes sexual ambiguity in marine snails.  Tributyltin
              is an antifoulant used in marine paints.  The material is ubiquitous in the
              marine environment and has been causally associated with the global occurrence
              of reproductive system abnormalities in marine snails.  Studies will be
              performed to identify the hormones that are responsible for the development of
              the snail reproductive system.  Initially, field surveys will be performed to
              establish relationships between hormone or hormone receptor levels and
              development of the snail reproductive system over the seasonal reproductive
              cycle.  These investigations will be followed by laboratory experiments where
              levels of tentatively important hormones will be manipulated and consequences
              to reproductive system development will be established. Once the relevant
              hormones have been conclusively identified, the effect of tributyltin on those
              hormone levels and activity will be established. Results from this study will
              significantly advance our understanding of basic molluscan endocrinology. Many
              Asian and South American countries are developing snail culture as a
              sustainable food source for local consumption as well as export.  Understanding
              the regulation of the reproductive cycle of snails would greatly enhance the
              economic feasibility of such operations.  In addition, the International
              Maritime Organization has implemented a phase-out of tributyltin in marine
              paints owing to its adverse effects on marine ecosystems. The economic
              incentive to minimize drag on ocean-going vessels through the use of
              antifoulants will necessitate the development and use of tributyltin
              alternatives.  Elucidation of the mechanism by which tributyltin interferes
              with sexual development of snails will help ensure that alternative
              antifoulants do not share this insidious property.
