Title       : CAREER: Mining Archived Intelligent Transportation Systems Data: A Validation
               Framework for Improved Performance Assessment and Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0236567

Award Number: 0236567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis Wenger                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2009        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Bertini bertini@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
CAREER: Mining Archived Intelligent Transportation Systems Data: A
              Validation Framework For Improved Performance Assessment And Modeling
Robert
              L. Bertini, Portland State University

The performance of our transportation
              infrastructure critically affects our nation's economy, security, environment
              and quality of life. Intelligent transportation systems (ITS) are one means for
              improving the efficiency, safety and sustainability of our transportation
              system. The mission of this career proposal is to develop and evaluate methods
              to archive, mine and analyze real-time ITS data, using infrastructure-based
              sensors, video and dynamic floating probes. Using these resources, we will
              develop partnerships with local transportation agencies to develop a data
              archive; implement and test an improved performance measurement platform;
              expand our understanding of basic traffic flow principles underlying models of
              traffic flow through systematic assessment of freeway bottleneck behavior; and
              develop improved traffic flow models and model components. In turn, we will
              enhance these tools with a greater understanding of model uncertainty
              propagation. The research agenda will guide the enhancement of required and
              elective undergraduate transportation courses, incorporating information
              technology and projects using real transportation data. Further, we will
              develop new graduate courses focused on the use of real transportation data,
              involve undergraduates in multidisciplinary research teams and expand our
              undergraduate civil engineering profession seminar and campus-wide seminar
              series. These activities will support the proposed outreach program which
              includes a summer transportation academy for underrepresented high school
              students, partnership with the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry including
              construction of a bilingual transportation data exhibit in the new Technology
              Hall and outreach to attract more Portland/Oregon high school students to
              science and engineering. 

The results of these integrated activities will
              play a pivotal role in improving our capabilities for monitoring, modeling and
              evaluating our transportation system.  This is significant because over the
              past decade, we have deployed traffic surveillance and management systems, but
              have not included systematic archiving or mining of the remotely sensed data
              that continuously stream into traffic management centers. In fact, some
              agencies discard these rich resources. This project aims to exploit the
              still-untapped data for accurate assessment of system operation by developing
              and testing performance measures. It is hoped that this will lead to a better
              understanding of fundamental traffic flow phenomena, leading to improved
              traffic flow modeling. This is necessary for forecasting the future system
              state so true control measures can be applied and evaluated. The research
              agenda will provide guidance and tools for enhancing existing courses,
              developing new courses and course modules to support the education and training
              of new and current members of the transportation workforce, both practitioners
              and researchers. This is significant given the current challenges in meeting
              workforce needs and developing engineers and planners who have
              multi-disciplinary backgrounds. The research and education activities will
              support and enhance the proposed outreach activities, which are aimed toward
              increasing enrollment, quality and diversity in the transportation program, and
              attracting and retaining students from diverse backgrounds and with diverse
              learning styles to science and engineering.  

