Title       : Coping with Academic Difficulty: An Examination of Conversations Between Friends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0236678

Award Number: 0236678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen R. Altermatt ealterma@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Ellen Altermatt will conduct two
              years of research on children's ability to cope with academic difficulties.
              Given that children spend a substantial amount of time with friends and view
              friends as an important source of support and guidance, it is expected that
              children's interactions with friends will play a critical role in their coping.
              This research has as its primary goals (a) to observe children's conversations
              with friends after they encounter academic difficulty, and (b) to predict
              changes in children's responses to difficulty from the features of these
              conversations. Coping strategies, friendship support processes, and
              achievement-related beliefs will be assessed by questionnaires and videotaped
              observations. The project's long-term goal is to better understand the role
              that peers play in socializing positive self-evaluative and motivational
              beliefs, particularly in academic contexts.      

This research will improve
              understanding of the processes by which social interactions between friends
              contribute to changes in children's achievement-related behaviors and beliefs.
              It answers calls from the coping and friendship literatures to supplement
              self-reports of children's coping behaviors and friendship experiences with
              observations of actual social interactions between close friends. Given
              evidence that unsuccessful coping with daily stressors can lead to negative,
              long-term interpersonal, psychological, and achievement-related outcomes, this
              research has important practical implications for improving the social and
              emotional well-being of children and for promoting school success.

