Title       : The Regional Development of African American Vernacular English
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0236838

Award Number: 0236838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217480             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter A. Wolfram walt_wolfram@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Walt Wolfram will conduct three
              years of research on the regional development of African American Vernacular
              English (AAVE). This research addresses the issues of persistent substrate
              influence, regional accommodation, and language change in earlier and
              present-day AAVE by comparing language variation in three remote African
              American communities in regionally distinct areas of North Carolina: Roanoke
              Island, a coastal community located between the mainland and the Outer Banks;
              Texana, a mountain community located in Southern Appalachia; and Princeville, a
              Coastal Plain community located in the rural region of the eastern third of the
              state. Each community has been the site of a stable and continuous African
              American population dating from the antebellum South, though the three
              communities represent different regional settings, disparate sociohistorical
              circumstances, and varied sociocultural and sociolinguistic contact situations.
              Sociolinguistic interviews will be conducted with at least three generations of
              speakers in each community. Both qualitative and quantitative analyses will be
              used to describe phonological, morphosyntactic, and syntactic variables that
              represent regional features as well as structures associated more generally
              with AAVE.

The project is significant on descriptive, theoretical, and
              practical levels. Descriptively, the project provides a sociolinguistic account
              of African American speech in different communities in the rural South to
              determine the balance between the regional and the supra-regional dynamics.
              Theoretically, the research furthers the understanding of the fundamental
              principles that underlie language contact, language innovation, and language
              variation in time and space. Practically, the study contributes to public
              understanding of language diversity and offers a new perspective on national
              debate associated with AAVE. The project also provides educators with important
              data on the use of AAVE in different settings.


