Title       : Evolutionary Biology of Insect Mating Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0236029

Award Number: 0236029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guiyun Yan GYAN@ACSU.BUFFALO.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY 
NSF IBN 0236029
Evolutionary Biology of Insect Mating
              Behavior


Female mating with multiple males within a single fertile period
              (polyandry) is a common phenomenon in animal kingdom. Conventional wisdom
              assumes that males are selected to maximize their paternity, females are choosy
              for the best possible sire. However, some female insects are particularly
              promiscuous. Behavioral scientists and evolutionary biologists have long been
              puzzled by why females mate with multiple males despite potential costs such as
              expenditure of time and energy, reduced life span, risk of predation and
              contracting sexually-transmitted diseases. In the red flour beetle (Tribolium
              castaneum), a major pest of stored grain products, females usually obtain
              sufficient sperm to retain fertility for several months from a single
              insemination, but they copulate repeatedly even within minutes the after first
              mating. Previous studies have demonstrated that polyandry in this species does
              not confer direct fitness benefits to the females, but enhance F1 male fitness
              and reduces F1 female fitness with laboratory inbred strains.  This project
              will examine the genetic benefits/costs associated with polyandry and
              post-copulatory mechanisms that lead to enhanced offspring fitness in T.
              castaneum.  Specific questions to be addressed are: 1) is the fitness tradeoff
              between sons and daughters of polyandrous females observed in laboratory inbred
              strains a general phenomenon for field outbred populations, and 2) are the
              superior sons and inferior daughters sired by the same males or different
              males? 

This study will advance our knowledge on inter-sexual conflict and
              its consequences for species evolution. This research will significantly
              enhance our understanding of the evolution of mating systems and reproductive
              strategies. Because the red flour beetle is an important pest of stored grain
              products, the results help to develop new strategies for pest control through
              better understanding of its mating behavior and factors regulating population
              dynamics.


