Title       : CAREER: Innovative (U-Th)/He Chronometry and Integration with Student Teaching
               and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0236965

Award Number: 0236965
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas P. Wagner                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412228             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Reiners reiners@geology.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Reiners
EAR-0236965 

Recent developments in methods and interpretational
              bases of (U-Th)/He chronometry have demonstrated that this technique poses
              significant potential for advancing understanding of a wide variety of
              processes, many of which have been difficult to address with other
              geochronometric approaches. This project will integrate (U-Th)/He chronometric
              research in technique development, innovative applications, and undergraduate
              student research. Work will focus in particular on development of
              single-crystal He-Pb dating, geomorphologic investigations using ancient
              coal-fires, tectonic applications that constrain timing, rate, and styles of
              exhumation and landscape development, and analytical and methodological
              improvements. To facilitate integration of (U-Th)/He chronometry in
              undergraduate research, a series of summer workshops for students outside of
              Yale will be conducted. Students will perform a suite of (U-Th)/He chronometric
              measurements with modeling and interpretation, over three weeks at Yale, to
              complement their individual senior theses or other types of projects; faculty
              mentors will also participate in the latter stages of the workshops. The
              topical and regional diversity of projects will serve as an introduction to a
              wide range of research (and the general importance of chronometric constraints)
              for the students, as well as to test and broaden the range of geologic problems
              that can be addressed by He dating. This work will facilitate broader impacts
              in research, learning, and infrastructure by: 1) providing access to, and
              training and experience in (U-Th)/He chronometry for a wide range of
              investigators both at Yale and beyond, 2) emphasizing integration of innovative
              (U-Th)/He chronometric approaches into a wide range of studies besides typical
              tectonogeomorphic applications, 3) integrating He dating into student research
              and teaching efforts at Yale, 4) establishing structured annual summer
              workshops for research by undergraduates and faculty mentors, and helping
              faculty at primarily undergraduate institutions get plugged-in to analytical
              facilities for future projects, and 5) creating an opportunity to involve
              students (including members of underrepresented groups) in a positive
              research-oriented experience at critical junctures in their educations. 

