Title       : Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Patterning Mechanisms Within Arthropod
               Limbs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0236193

Award Number: 0236193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa M. Nagy lnagy@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0236193
Nagy

Arthropods can be found in virtually every habitat on earth - a
              radiation driven in large part by the diverse specializations of their limbs.
              In spite of the enormous variability in limb structures, the initial
              comparative studies of genes that pattern limbs have emphasized conserved
              patterns of gene expression. Perhaps this is because similarities to the model
              system (Drosophila) are more easily explicable than differences. However, Drs.
              Nagy and Williams seek to understand the morphological diversification of
              arthropod limbs. To this end, they propose a series of experiments to dissect
              the function of both genes whose expression varies from the known Drosophila
              pattern and ones whose expression is conserved.  They use the insect-
              crustacean clade for this analysis since crustaceans have extremely diverse
              limb morphologies, while insects have the best studied molecular mechanisms of
              limb formation. Their goal is to uncover mechanisms underlying the generation
              of morphological diversity among insect-crustacean limbs. They approach this
              goal using both descriptive, genetic and experimental studies on a variety of
              species. Because these studies involve a number of both insect and crustacean
              species, they provide a framework for inferences as to the ancestral patterning
              circuitry for the insect/crustacean lineage. In addition, because they evaluate
              function in both conserved and varying genes, these studies will be informative
              about how a similar set of genes has been redeployed throughout
              evolution.

Broader impact:  This project promotes education at multiple
              levels of inquiry.  Some of the proposed work forms the basis of graduate
              training; other aspects will form undergraduate research projects.  Continued
              analysis of results from the previously funded project will become an online
              lesson plan in genetics and development, created in a high school teacher
              education program.  The results of our research will be published in scientific
              journals and regularly presented at local, national and international meetings
              and discussed in undergraduate classes, seminars, and online discussion
              sections.  The arthropods maintained in laboratory culture provide a much
              needed resource to local pre- and elementary schools and high school science
              classes.



