Title       : Research Starter Grant: Contribution of Indirect Genetic Effects to Genetic
               Architecture and Evolution of Complex Phenotypes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0236956

Award Number: 0236956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  2002   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason B. Wolf jbwolf@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1398,7185,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the genetics and evolutionary potential of traits that
              are influenced by the environment provided by conspecifics.  These social
              environments (e.g., the competitive environment) are particularly important
              because, since they originate from features of individuals, they can have a
              genetic basis.  Theoretical models have demonstrated that these genetically
              based environmental influences, or indirect genetic effects (IGEs), can have
              important impacts on genetic architecture (GA) and evolution, but empirical
              studies of IGEs are lacking (with the exception of studies of IGEs arising from
              the influence of parents on their offspring).  This project will provide
              valuable insights into the role of IGEs in GA, contributing to a better
              understanding of the genetic basis of complex phenotypes.     

To analyze
              the contribution of IGEs to variation in trait expression the proposed research
              will use empirical methods developed by the PI. This approach applies a
              theoretical model of trait expression to interpret components of trait
              variation in a population of interacting individuals.  Using this approach it
              is possible to separate direct and indirect effects of genes, which are often
              confounded or, in the case of IGEs, hidden to traditional methods. The
              theoretical models can also be used to analyze the dynamics of phenotypic
              evolution based on observed GA, generating predictions that can be tested by
              artificial selection experiments or can be used to predict response to
              selection for improvement in agricultural systems.     

These methods will
              be used to analyze the contribution of IGEs to the development of complex
              traits (e.g., seed number and total biomass) in a rapid-cycling variety of
              Brassica rapa. Data on the quantitative genetics of these traits will provide
              the foundation for a future proposal that will examine experimental evolution
              in the presence of IGEs and analyze molecular mapping of IGE loci to trait
              expression.  In this future project phenotypically divergent lines will be
              derived by artificial selection to test model predictions. These divergent
              lines will be inbred and used to examine the genotype-to-phenotype map and
              evolutionary dynamics of IGE loci. Thus, a major goal of this starter grant is
              to provide the critical data needed to develop a much larger and more
              comprehensive proposal in the future.  This will contribute significantly to
              the development of the career of the PI as a research scientist and will help
              establish the PIs new research lab.    

The ultimate goal of this research
              program, to examine the molecular mapping of IGE loci, builds on the work from
              Dr. Wolf's NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Biological Informatics, where methods
              to analyze the genotype to phenotype mapping of maternal effect loci were
              developed. Molecular analysis of GA is particularly complex when IGEs are
              present because the phenotype becomes the property of, and thus can map to, the
              genotypes of multiple individuals. This novel aspect of GA has been poorly
              explored but previous work by the PI demonstrates that it can play an important
              role in mapping from genotype to phenotype for some types of traits. To achieve
              this goal the previous advances made in theoretical and empirical methods will
              be combined with the development of new theoretical models to ultimately
              understand all of the pathways through which genotypes make phenotypes.   

