Title       : CAREER: The Evolution of Transportation Networks: Empirical Research and
               Agent-Based Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0236396

Award Number: 0236396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Levinson levin031@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1076,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract -  CAREER:  The Evolution of  Transportation Networks: Empirical
              Research and Agent-Based Models

This research endeavors to understand the
              evolutionary growth process of transportation networks at a theoretical and
              empirical level, recognizing the inter-dependence of supply and demand.  Key
              questions to be examined include:
Why do networks expand and contract?
Do
              networks self-organize into hierarchies?
Are roads (routes) an emergent
              property of networks?
What investment rules predict the sequence and location
              of network improvements?  
When are already existing facilities expanded (more
              lanes on the same link) as opposed to new facilities being provided (a new
              link)?
How can transportation planning be improved to take advantage of a new
              understanding of network evolution?

It is hypothesized that simple,
              measurable factors (such as traffic growth rates, volume to capacity ratios,
              and comparison with adjacent upstream and downstream links) explain many of the
              resulting decisions.  This investigation will examine a time series of capital
              improvement projects and decisions for the Twin Cities of Minneapolis and St.
              Paul, relating them to network structure characteristics. These empirical
              models will be embedded in agent based models to replicate the process of
              network growth.

This research specifies and estimates component models
              explaining travel behavior, network costs and revenue, and investment
              decisions.  Then the components will be integrated into the simulation model
              and tested.  Both the estimation of individual component models and their
              integration into a simulation of network growth (and decline) will increase our
              limited understanding of network evolution processes.  This new understanding
              will have broader impacts on transportation planning practice, and ultimately
              on the shape of cities and regions. Incorporating explicit measures of network
              externalities in decision making will lead to better plans, network routing
              decisions, and implementation strategies.  Understanding and illustrating how
              decisions in one point of time affect future choices should help guide planners
              and decision-makers desiring to shape the future.  The long-term consequences
              of incremental changes will be assessed.  This will help decision-makers assess
              the effects of expanding existing facilities or routes, or building in new
              rights-of-way or offering new services. This improved understanding of long
              term network dynamics would lead to better planning and design of road networks
              to exploit network externalities and maximize future choice for decision
              makers.  The knowledge of how current decisions foreclose or create future
              opportunities should improve decision-making.



