Title       : Sufficient Evidence? Building Certifiably Dependable Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0236725

Award Number: 0236725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjory S. Blumenthal mblument@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Blumenthal, Marjory
CCR-0236725
Systems on which the safety or security of
              individuals may depend are frequently subject to certification: a formal
              assurance that the system has met relevant technical standards designed to
              assure it will not unduly endanger the public.  Today, certification of the
              dependability of a computer-based system frequently relies at least as heavily
              on assessments of the process used to develop it or of the qualifications of
              those who produced it, as it does on the system's observable properties.  While
              these assessments can be useful, few would dispute that direct observation of
              the artifact ought to provide a stronger kind of assurance than the credentials
              of its production methods or producers could hope to do.  Yet the complexity of
              software systems, as well as their discrete nature, renders them extremely
              difficult to analyze unless great care has been taken with their structure and
              maintenance.  Indeed, where extremely high assurance of specific functions is
              required, simple but inflexible hardware components are sometimes used to limit
              the damage that essential, but less predictable, software may cause.

A
              committee will be formed through National Research Council nomination and
              approval processes to examine challenges in producing dependable software
              systems in contexts involving certification.  The goal of this study is to
              identify the kinds of system properties for which certification is desired, how
              that certification is obtained today, and, most important, what design and
              development methods, including methods for establishing evidence of
              trustworthiness, could lead to future systems structures that are more easily
              certified.  Where these methods cannot be identified, the study would identify
              a research agenda that would lead to their discovery.  

