Title       : Collaborative Research: Tree Species Effects on Ecosystem Processes in Lowland
               Costa Rica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0236502

Award Number: 0236502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Raich jraich@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann E. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract.
Research at La Selva Biological Station in lowland Costa Rica 
              addresses several topical questions related to the importance of species in
              modifying or controlling the accumulation and cycling of carbon in lowland
              tropical rain forest. First, how variable are different tree species in their
              total productivity, aboveground:belowground allocation patterns, and biomass
              accumulation rates? Second, how do variations among species in tissue chemical
              composition alter the accumulation and decomposition of surface litter and fine
              roots. Third, how do differences in detritus production, tissue quality, and
              decay rates alter the accumulation and dynamics of soil organic matter? To
              address these questions, the Peje Plots at La Selva, which are 14-year-old,
              single-species tree plantations established will be utilized. Research findings
              will be integrated into current understanding of tropical rain forest carbon
              dynamics by applying the Century model.
Broader Impacts. This collaborative
              research among four scientists at two Institutions will include substantial
              involvement of Latin American scientists and students, in addition to
              supporting a full-time graduate student and numerous undergraduate assistants
              at Iowa State University. Preparing the next generation of scientists, both
              Costa Rican and American, is a fundamental goal of this research. The
              revitalized Peje Plots will provide a valuable long-term research facility for
              other investigators at La Selva, one of the world's preeminent tropical field
              stations, and will promote the long-range plan of La Selva.  Altogether, the
              results of this proposed research will enhance our mechanistic understanding of
              how individual species influence organic matter dynamics in tropical systems,
              will provide a demonstration of a sustainable land use alternative to pasture
              in the lowland tropics, and will allow for an improved capacity to model the 
              biogeochemistry of tropical lands in response to land use and environmental
              change.

