Title       : High-Resolution Crystallographic Studies Using Synchrotron Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0236317

Award Number: 0236317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Coppens coppens@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division supports Professor Philip Coppens, Chemistry Department,
              State University of New York at Buffalo, for high-resolution crystallographic
              studies using synchrotron radiation. The geometry of light-induced metastable
              states and highly reactive transient species will be probed using both
              steady-state and time-resolved crystallography. The work will contribute to the
              understanding of the nature of photoinduced molecular excited states and to
              elucidating geometry changes that occur during electron transfer in transition
              metal complexes. A second component of the research is the experimental mapping
              of charge density distribution in solids and the interpretation of these data
              in terms of chemical bonding within and between molecules. The high-brightness
              of the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne National Laboratory will be combined
              with area detectors to allow rapid X-ray data collection on small crystallites
              of dimensions of 50 micron and less. Very low-temperature single crystal
              techniques are to be applied for data collection in each stage of the project.
              The experimental work is to be complemented by extensive theoretical
              calculations on both molecules and solids, using supercomputer facilities
              available to the project, and by spectroscopic measurement of the absorption
              and emission spectra of the systems under investigation.

X-ray diffraction
              is well-known as the sine qua non of structure-determining tools, capable of
              measuring extremely small changes in molecular geometry.  However, this
              technique only measures stable structures. This work exploits innovations that
              allow x-ray crystallography to determine structural changes in molecules that
              occur on fast timescales.  Knowledge that is gained about the interaction of
              radiation with matter in the solid state will underpin future applications in
              materials science and technology. This work involves much collaboration and
              provides a unique training ground for young scientists. An international
              collaboration with the Slovak University of Technology will benefit the efforts
              of both countries to advance research in this area. To aid in the utilization
              of the techniques used in this study, software will be developed and made
              available to the wider scientific community.

