Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Constraints on Structural Borrowing in a
               Multilingual Contact Situation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0236758

Award Number: 0236758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gillian Sankoff gillian@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Gillian Sankoff, Ms. Tara Sanchez will conduct
              fieldwork for her doctoral dissertation. She will interview residents of the
              Caribbean islands of Aruba, Bonaire, and Curacao in the creole language
              Papiamentu. Most residents also speak Dutch, English, and Spanish. These
              interviews, along with written texts dating from 1776 to the present, will be
              used in research on "borrowing" from one language to another. The most familiar
              kind of borrowing is the borrowing of words. Another kind is the borrowing of
              linguistic structure, such as word order patterns or verb inflections. This
              project emphasizes the latter. Ms. Sanchez will use quantitative methods (e.g.,
              multivariate analysis) to interpret influences on the usage patterns of
              borrowed inflections ("-ndo" from Spanish and influenced by English, "he-" from
              Dutch, passive verbs "ser," "wordu," and "keda" from Spanish and Dutch). She
              will also examine word order patterns used for various pragmatic effects, and
              how these may also reflect influences from the other languages spoken on the
              islands.

This project will make two significant contributions. The first is
              theoretical: The research will clarify how language structure and social
              factors affect borrowing. The second is empirical: The research team will make
              databases of the written texts and oral interviews available to the public.
              These will be published through the Linguistic Data Consortium of the
              University of Pennsylvania. This publication will provide access to otherwise
              hard-to-come-by data, benefiting both islanders interested in language and
              various scholars. The research bears on Caribbean social science and history as
              well as theoretical and applied linguistics particularly in sociolinguistics
              and creole studies.

