Title       : SGER: Combinatorial Screening of Materials for Cesium Sensing and Separation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0236608

Award Number: 0236608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66733              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel T. Schwartz dts@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Combinatorial Screening of Materials for Cesium Sensing and Separation

      
              Electrodes coated with nickel hexacyanoferrate (NiHCF) are known to absorb, or
              intercalate, cesium selectively and in preference over all other alkali, rare
              earth, and transition metal cations.  This affinity for cesium gives rise to an
              electrochemical signature that can be used to detect cesium even in the
              presence of large excesses of interfering cations.  When synthesized as a bulk
              powder, NiHCF is known to possess a wide range of vacancy defect structures,
              resulting in changes to its ion intercalation properties.  No comparable
              research has established the ability to grow structural variants of NiHCF on
              electrodes, nor is it known what influence these variants will have on sensor
              performance.  This exploratory research projecct seeks to develop an
              inkjet-printer-based combinatorial synthesis strategy for the growth of NiHCF
              variants on electrodes, to assess the role of structure on the performance of
              cesium sensors, and to identify conditions that will optimize the cesium
              sensitivity.   
       Cesium is one of the most likely radiological agents to
              be used in a terrorist "dirty" bomb, owing to its common use in modern society
              (for medicine, test instruments, and remote generators).   This research
              program is aimed at developing high-performance, low-cost cesium sensors.  Such
              sensors could be widely deployed in the urban environment in an effort to
              detect anomalous cesium levels prior to the detonation of a dirty bomb, giving
              public officials an opportunity to intercede.   Should a cesium dirty bomb
              scenario play out, this sensor technology would permit widespread deployment of
              instruments around the contaminated site to help ensure containment.



