Title       : A Proposal for the Network Office of the U.S. Long Term Ecological Research
               Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0236154

Award Number: 0236154
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2009   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4617409            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Waide rwaide@lternet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Brunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Michener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Vande Castle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The LTER Network Office (NET) was transferred to the University of New Mexico in
              1997. NET objectives have been to provide basic services to LTER, facilitate
              communication among LTER sites and between LTER and the broader environmental
              sciences community, promote new technologies, and provide leadership in data
              and information management. Since NET moved to Albuquerque, LTER has grown from
              18 to 24 sites and the number of associated scientists has expanded from 894 to
              more than 1500. This proposal represents a request to renew the LTER Network
              Office for the next six years. Five essential NET Service functions that are
              central to the operation of LTER would be continued and enhanced to better meet
              community needs. Funding is also requested to expand four other focal areas
              that are key to broadening the impact of LTER on science and society.

The
              five essential NET functions supported through this project include: (1)
              service to the LTER community (e.g., proposal preparation, accounting, meeting
              coordination); (2) computational and communication infrastructure (e.g.,
              e-mail, database backups, web access); (3) information management and methods
              development (e.g., data and metadata standardization, curation and expansion of
              LTER Network databases); (4) network development, community outreach and
              training (e.g., coordination of the Partnership for Biodiversity Informatics,
              OBFS training and database development); and (5) publications and public
              outreach (e.g., newsletters, web site, synthesis volumes). Two expanded and
              related NET functions are essential to enabling LTER to reach new levels of
              understanding of long-term ecological patterns and processes: (6) Synthesis
              (e.g., integration and synthesis via working groups, creation of value-added
              databases) and (7) Information System Design and Development (e.g., distributed
              data networking, data
integration tools). Funding is also requested to
              continue and broaden the impacts that LTER has on the international scientific
              community and environmental education in the United States via: (8)
              International LTER (e.g., coordination of ILTER meetings, ILTER publications,
              informatics training) and (9) Education (e.g., facilitation of site-based
              education programs, workshops). A tenth activity, the implementation of a 21 st
              Century Strategic Plan for the LTER Network, would be completed within the
              first two years of the NET renewal.

During the next six years, the LTER
              Network office will continue to facilitate knowledge advances and understanding
              within ecology by (1) promoting LTER communication among sites and throughout
              the ecological sciences and (2) disseminating data, information, and knowledge
              via the web, synthesis and publications, training, and community and public
              outreach. New efforts and resources devoted to synthesis and information system
              development, international LTER, and education will significantly broaden the
              impact of LTER science by enabling us to better provide integrated and
              synthetic data and information to the broader scientific community, students,
              and policy-makers. In addition, we will greatly increase our efforts to expand
              LTER into a global scientific enterprise via ILTER and expand the reach of LTER
              education beyond
the schoolyard (i.e., from K-12 to policy-makers to the
              general public). We will further expand our efforts to reach underserved
              groups, incorporating an enhanced focus on Chicanos and Native
              Americans.

The revised SOW comprises the ten following sections, arranged to
              reflect the organization of DEB-0236154. A revised budget and budget
              justification accompany this document. Strategic planning documents will be
              submitted separately. Each section of the SOW details activities which will and
              will not take place under the revised budget. The requested budget is tied to
              specific activities, which in turn are linked to the personnel time needed to
              complete the activity. The revised SOW specifically identifies
activities that
              will benefit the LTER Network, the International LTER Network, the general
              scientific community, the education community, the University of New Mexico
              (UNM), or NSF.
