Title       : SGER: Gene Enrichment Sequencing of the Maize Genome with Hypomethylated Partial
               Restriction Libraries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0236505

Award Number: 0236505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Bennetzen maize@bilbo.bio.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9107,9109,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research project is to
              test a new approach to sequencing the gene-rich portions of higher plant
              genomes, using maize as the model species. 

Like many other higher plant
              genomes, the nuclear DNA of maize is primarily composed of repetitive
              sequences. Most of these repeated sequences are transposable elements of
              various types, with over 60% of the nuclear DNA composed of retrotransposons.
              Many of the retrotransposons in maize are large in size and highly similar in
              sequence, making it very difficult to distinguish between individual elements
              of the same family when trying to assemble a shotgun genome sequence. In order
              to avoid the inefficiency of sequencing retrotransposons and other repeats that
              cannot be assembled, various gene-enrichment technologies have been proposed to
              improve the efficacy of a shotgun sequence approach. 

This project will test
              a new technology that relies on the fact that most maize retrotransposons are
              modified (methylated) at cytosines in the sequences 5'-CG-3' and 5'- CNG-3' in
              most or all tissues. This technique will use partial digestion with restriction
              enzymes that are sensitive to 5'-CG-3' methylation to create hypomethylated
              partial restriction (HMPR) libraries that will permit high efficiency shotgun
              sequencing of the maize genome, and of any other plant, animal or microbial
              genome that has a large component of repetitive DNA that is 5-methylated at
              5'-CG-3' sequences.

Six libraries each will be produced using two different
              restriction enzymes (HpaII and HpyCH4IV) that recognize and cut specific sites
              in a methylation-dependent manner. A total of 3600 sequences will be generated
              using clones from these libraries. Sequences will be compared against the full
              plant genome databases to see the frequency of genes, transposable elements,
              and organellar DNA. These comparisons will determine the degree to which the
              enrichment technology has been successful. The clones and information generated
              will be available to all interested parties, providing a valuable resource and
              tool for the future study of higher eukaryotic genomes.

