Title       : New NMR/Derivatization Methods for Oligosaccharide Structural Elucidation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0236103

Award Number: 0236103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $457306             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brad K. Bendiak Brad.Bendiak@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1164,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Complex carbohydrates are a diverse group of molecules found in virtually all
              living organisms, and are involved in a wide variety of crucial biological
              functions. An understanding of their many roles relies on a detailed knowledge
              of their structures. Novel NMR experiments are described that take advantage of
              doubly 13 C-labeled acetyl groups after peracetylation of hydroxyl functions,
              and are specifically tailored to extract detailed stereochemical and linkage
              information in unknown oligosaccharides. The procedures should be generally
              applicable to carbohydrates from virtually any source, without requiring 13 C
              incorporation into the carbohydrate molecules themselves by isotopic labeling.
              These experiments are designed to correlate the frequencies of the newly
              introduced 13 C nuclei to sugar ring protons, using several magnetization
              transfer/selection methods. These procedures will permit larger
              oligosaccharides to be elucidated and will be applied to a series of
              oligosaccharides derived from glycoproteins having from 3-15 sugars. These
              methods will also be  important in the application of NMR spectroscopy to the
              structural elucidation of many natural products containing hydroxyl and amino
              functions.   These studies will  enable the stereochemistry of individual
              sugars in oligosaccharides to be more effectively determined, permit the
              assignment of linkages between adjacent sugars to be markedly improved, enable
              subspectra of larger oligosaccharides to be accumulated, and enable more
              detailed structural information to be garnered for many natural products.
              

Carbohydrates are a major source of biomaterials used either directly or
              indirectly in many industries, including the food, chemical and polymer
              industries.  This research will markedly improve their analyses and thereby
              provide benefits that foster their industrial use. This research project will
              be combined with teaching and training of students. Students will be encouraged
              to participate in multidisciplinary research conferences and  the results of
              this  research will be incorporated into courses in a local molecular structure
              program. The work will be broadly disseminated through publication, through
              participation in national and international meetings, and through the
              availability of new NMR pulse sequence software to other investigators in
              academics and industry. 

