Title       : Collaborative Research: Developmental, Molecular, and Evolutionary Analysis of
               Chaetognaths:a Deuterostome-Like Ecdysozoan.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0236565

Award Number: 0236565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207908             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Q. Martindale mqmartin@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0236565
Martindale


The chaetognaths, or "arrow worms", are one of the most
              abundant marine invertebrates found in all the world's seas.  The phylogenetic
              position of this ubiquitous group of animals is currently unknown.  Until
              recently, chaetognaths were considered to be basal deuterostomes based on
              developmental features such as their radial cleavage program, classic
              enterocoeley, posterior position of the blastopore, and tripartite adult body
              plan.  New molecular evidence, including Hox gene data presented in this
              proposal, has suggested that chaetognaths are not deuterostomes but basal
              protostomes closely allied with ecdysozoans such as arthropods and nematodes. 
              In fact, chaetognaths are now thought to be one of the most pivotal and
              understudied groups of metazoan animals for gaining insight into the evolution
              of protostome body plans. Only a handful of cellular and molecular
              investigations of chaetognath development have ever been made, however.  Drs.
              Martindale and Halanych's proposal describes a comprehensive and
              multidisciplinary set of approaches designed to characterize how chaetognath
              embryos "work". Using both modern developmental (intracellular cell lineage
              labeling and laser cell deletion experiments) and molecular (cloning, in situ
              hybridization) techniques, Martindale and Halanych will collect vital
              information on the normal development of these interesting animals, and be able
              to and examine the conservation of genetic regulatory mechanisms in the
              Metazoa.  In addition, techniques of gene discovery (EST screening) will
              provide valuable new information on the ancestral mechanisms of body plan
              evolution. These data will not only be important to determine the phylogenetic
              position of chaetognaths, but to also provide molecular and developmental
              insight in to the evolution of the ecdysozoan clade, and the "evolveability" of
              developmental programs.  Chaetognaths could be the most informative and
              tractable basal invertebrate system available that will allow an understanding
              of the evolution of the nematode and arthropod clades, the two most genetically
              heavily studied group of animals on earth.

