Title       : Phenotypic Plasticity, Parental Effects, and Parental Care in Plants: An
               Examination of Spike Reflectance in Plantago lanceolata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0236526

Award Number: 0236526
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $463000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth P. Lacey eplacey@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Lacey will address fundamental questions about plant reflectance patterns.
              Previous experiments with Plantago lanceolata show that during the flowering
              season, 1) warm temperatures produce higher quality offspring than do cool
              temperatures and 2) the reproductive structures in P. lanceolata adjust the
              amount of incoming solar radiation that they reflect (and conversely absorb) in
              response to prevailing temperature. For example, when temperatures are low,
              developing flowers and fruits produce pigments that reduce reflectance and
              increase absorption. Dr. Lacey will measure the effects of this plastic
              response in reflectance pattern on seed quantity and offspring quality, and she
              will test the hypothesis that this plasticity in reflectance is adaptive, in
              other words, that by adjusting reflectance, parents thermoregulate
              fertilization and early offspring development to enhance seed production and
              offspring quality. Dr. Lacey will also test the hypothesis that populations
              from different latitudes and altitudes differ genetically in overall
              reflectance pattern.


There are two practical aspects of the experiments.
              First, experiments will explicitly examine how reflectance helps plants
              thermoregulate seed production and quality, which are of agronomic as well as
              evolutionary importance. Because current knowledge about thermoregulation in
              plants is negligible, P. lanceolata will serve as a model organism for
              collecting data that can later be applied to crop species.  Second, the data
              will improve our understanding of how seed production and quality in natural
              and crop populations will respond to global warming.

