Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Pronominal Interpretation and the
               Syntax-Discourse Interface: An ERP-Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0236736

Award Number: 0236736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria M. Pinango maria.pinango@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Maria M. Pinango, Ms. Petra Burkhardt will conduct a
              series of experiments for her doctoral dissertation. She will investigate how
              different types of pronominal elements (e.g., "him/her" and "himself/herself")
              are interpreted during sentence comprehension. The experiments will record
              event-related brain potentials (ERPs) while participants listen to sentences,
              focusing on the time when the pronominal is heard. The study explores how and
              when pronominals determine their referents. In contrast to full nouns (like
              "apple" or "dog"), pronominal elements do not have fully fledged meaning of
              their own. For instance, in a sentence like "The man said that Mary called
              him," "him" may mean "the man." 

This research connects important questions
              in linguistics (regarding the architecture of the language system), computer
              science (regarding dynamic implementation of formal systems, specifically
              pronominal resolution) and neuroscience (regarding cortical distribution of
              language). The research will have implications for the study of brain and
              cognition relations, as it addresses the reasons that the representation of
              these referentially deficient elements is particularly vulnerable in certain
              neurological diseases (e.g., Alzheimer's, Schizophrenia) and cerebro-vascular
              syndromes (e.g., Aphasia). The project will also provide an opportunity for
              undergraduate students to receive research training, and it will foster
              interaction between researchers in the cognitive neuroscience community at Yale
              University.

