Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Language Styling and Switching in Speech and
               On-Line Contexts: Identity and Language Ideologies in Taiwan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0236473

Award Number: 0236473
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11854              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Walters kwalters@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Qing Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Drs. Keith Walters and Qing Zhang, Ms. His-Yao Su will
              conduct fieldwork for her doctoral dissertation. She will compare accent
              shifting between standard Mandarin in Taiwan and Taiwan-accented Mandarin, on
              the one hand, and language switching between Mandarin and Taiwanese, on the
              other, in face-to-face interactions and in on-line environments. She will study
              students from colleges in Taipei and Tainan, one in northern and the other in
              southern Taiwan. She will record their on-line and face-to-face interactions,
              interview them, and collect on-line questionnaire data to see how their
              linguistic practices are connected with their identities, language attitudes,
              and the sociopolitical context of contemporary Taiwan. The Taiwanese context is
              especially interesting for study of identity and language ideologies because of
              its unsettled national status in international politics and its politically
              hostile, yet economically beneficial, relation with China. This research thus
              concerns the complex relations among regional identity, ethnic identity, elite
              identity, and national identity. 

This research is significant in two ways.
              First, it touches on important themes in sociolinguistics and linguistic
              anthropology like the construction of identity. It also incorporates analysis
              of language interaction on the internet, a communication medium that has shaped
              human experiences tremendously but has not been much used as a source of data.
              Second, this research will contribute to better understanding of language
              attitudes and identities in Taiwan. This should prove useful to educators and
              policy makers concerned with the promotion of bilingual education in Taiwan or
              the standardization of Taiwanese. This research will also shed light on how the
              Taiwanese elite position themselves in relation to China and increase the
              general public's understanding of the complexity involved in the political 
              stalemate between Taiwan and China.


