Title       : Structural and Functional Analysis of the Plant Phenylpropanoid Biosynthetic
               Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0236027

Award Number: 0236027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $690000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Noel noel@sbl.salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1168,1228,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant phenylpropanoids including flavonoids and stilbenes comprise a
              structurally diverse group of secondary metabolites that play vital roles in
              the interaction of plants with their surrounding environment. The utility of
              these compounds in plants varies widely and includes roles as structural
              polymers, defense barriers, defense chemicals synthesized in response to
              microbial, insect, and herbivore predation, signaling molecules for
              nitrogen-fixing rhizobia bacteria, UV-protective agents, and pigments. In
              addition to their role in plant physiology, phenylpropanoids possess a number
              of properties that have proven useful to the pharmaceutical, food,
              agricultural, and nutritional industries. A major goal of this project is to
              understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the biosynthesis of plant
              phenylpropanoids. The current objectives of this research are to examine the
              functional diversity of the chalcone synthase (CHS) / stilbene synthase (STS)
              superfamily of plant polyketide synthases involved in the initial stages of
              flavonoid biosynthesis using both x-ray crystallography and enzymological
              studies, the mechanism, stereochemistry, and selectivity of chalcone isomerase
              (CHI)-mediated flavanone formation in both chalcone and deoxychalcone
              biosynthetic pathways, the structure and mechanism of chalcone reductase (CHR),
              and the energetic and architectural features of multienzyme complex formation
              involving CHS, CHI, and/or CHR during flavonoid and isoflavonoid biosynthesis
              using surface plasmon resonance and TROSY-NMR. These studies will elucidate the
              mechanisms governing phenylpropanoid production in plants and in particularly
              will relate the biosynthetic diversity of these pathways to on-going
              evolutionary change that leads to this biologically important form of chemical
              diversity. Significantly, the broader impacts resulting from the proposed
              research activities include a significant training component that involves the
              exclusive participation of both graduate (PhD) and undergraduate (BS) students
              in groups under represented in scientific research. In addition, key scientific
              findings generated by this research will be disseminated to the public
              principally through annual lectures organized through an evening seminar series
              for the general public that discusses in lay terms the science and significance
              of the on-going publicly supported work at the Salk Institute. Recently, key
              findings obtained during the initial stages of this project described the
              benefits of understanding plant secondary metabolism for mankind with regard to
              agriculture, disease prevention, and drug discovery.
	A number of
              plant-derived phenylpropanoids are valuable medicinal agents. Moreover, the
              regular dietary consumption of phenylpropanoid-derived compounds including
              lignans, stilbenes, and (iso)flavonoids has considerable health benefits
              including lowered risk factors for both cancer and coronary artery disease. The
              enzyme scaffolds that are used by plants to create these small molecules serve
              as novel and useful starting points to create new molecular entities for drug
              discovery using a novel approach that includes structural biology and genomics.
              Most importantly, all organisms utilize chemical diversity to live and prosper
              in harsh and challenging environments. While an organism's protein and gene
              diversity have captured the public's attention over the last several years,
              ultimately, chemical diversity and an organism's adapting metabolism create
              "endogenous drugs" that all species exploit for survival. This project will
              generate information with which to better understand the molecular basis for
              this on-going process of evolutionary change at the chemical level. In turn,
              such information not only provides mankind with an understanding of organismal
              evolution at the molecular and metabolic level, but also provides a framework
              for manipulating this framework for the creation of new chemicals for drug
              discovery, improvements in nutrition, and ultimately, a healthier life.

