Title       : Acquisition of a Quadrupole ICP Mass Spectrometer for the Department of
               Geological Sciences and Marine Science Program at the University of South
               Carolina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0236481

Award Number: 0236481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173268             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene M. Yogodzinski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0236481
Yogodzinski

This grant provides support for the acquisition of a
              quadrupole inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (QICPMS), to be housed
              in the Department of Geological Sciences at the University of South Carolina. 
              This project is a collaborative effort among faculty from the Department of
              Geological Sciences, the interdisciplinary Marine Science Program, and the
              Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry.  The instrumentation will be used for
              research in the diverse fields of igneous processes, chemical oceanography,
              paleoclimate, and hydrogeology.  The broad goal of this acquisition is to
              expand the trace element and isotope tracer research capabilities of the
              Department of Geological Sciences, and to help build a critical mass of faculty
              and students that are interesting in conducting this kind of research at the
              University of South Carolina.  The requested funds reflect 70% of the cost of
              the instrumentation (QICPMS with collision cell) plus three months of
              technician support and one month of PI salary.  The cost of the instrumentation
              includes factory and on-site training by the manufacturer, as well as two years
              of service and maintenance beyond the initial one-year warranty.  

All
              faculty involved in this project involve both graduate and undergraduate
              students in their research.  The interdepartmental and interdisciplinary nature
              of this project provides a significant opportunity to transfer analytical
              expertise to geology faculty and students from the chemistry department, and at
              the same time, create collaborative opportunities for chemistry faculty and
              students in the earth and ocean sciences.  In addition to the abundant and
              diverse research applications that provide the primary justification for
              funding this project, use of the proposed instrumentation will also be
              integrated into the geology curriculum through some 300 and 500-level courses
              in geology and oceanography.
***

