Title       : CAREER: Mechanisms and tradeoffs of dietary specialization in mammalian
               herbivores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0236402

Award Number: 0236402
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510656             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Denise Dearing dearing@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Limitations of the detoxification system in processing plant toxins are
              implicated as the mechanism explaining the paucity of dietary specialization
              among mammalian herbivores. In fact, little is known about how wild herbivores
              metabolize plant toxins and how detoxification restricts dietary
              specialization. Detoxification constraints are of current interest given that
              the toxin concentrations of many plants will double within the next century due
              to rising atmospheric CO2 levels. The overarching goals of the research are to
              understand the mechanisms that permit and tradeoffs associated with dietary
              specialization in herbivorous woodrats (Neotoma). Specialist woodrats are
              predicted to absorb lower concentrations of plant toxins compared to
              generalists. The research examines 3 mechanisms that may decrease toxin
              absorption: 1) tannin-binding proteins 2) p-glycoproteins and 3) intestinal
              detoxification. Specialists and generalists will be compared to determine how
              they differ with respect to these mechanisms. Biochemical and pharmacological
              methods will be employed.  In addition, theory predicts that specialists have
              detoxification systems that are more efficient in processing plant toxins in
              their diet compared to generalist herbivores processing the same compounds. 
              However, the superior ability that specialists have in processing toxins from
              their diet is predicted to compromise their efficiency to biotransform novel
              toxins, which are not contained in their normal diet. The potential tradeoffs
              of dietary specialization will be addressed by comparing 1) maximal levels of
              novel toxins that specialists and generalists can ingest; 2) capacities of
              detoxification pathways (functionalization and glucuronidation) using probe
              drugs; and 3) surveying the detoxification systems of generalists and
              specialists with DNA microarrays.   For the education component, an intensive
              course is proposed for mid-level students (sophomore-junior) to train them in
              various aspects of research by using this research project as the example and
              opportunity.  This course, "Scientific Immersion", will be offered in the fall
              semester each year to a maximum of five students. 



