Title       : Vermont EPSCoR's Research Infrastructure Improvement Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0236976

Award Number: 0236976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8010288            (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher W. Allen cwallen@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith L. Van Houten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 7217      RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Vermont EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Award will enhance the
              research infrastructure in environmental science/engineering and materials
              science.  With the goal of developing an Environmental Water Center, the
              university plans to build capacity through faculty lines in geochemistry and
              aquatic biology, along with additional physical and human resources to enhance
              established strengths.  Incorporation of earth systems and landscape ecological
              data into the Vermont Geographic Information Systems (GIS) data base will
              provide a valuable tool for the environmental science community across the
              state.  In the materials area, the University of Vermont proposes to build on
              recent investments in polymeric and nanoscale materials with two related
              positions in chemistry and mechanical engineering and outreach to polymer
              processing and fabrication companies in the state.  The goal is to develop a
              competitive materials science research center.  Each focus area, environmental
              science/engineering and materials science, will include support of early career
              faculty, post-doctoral associates, and graduate and undergraduate
              students.

The Vermont EPSCoR award includes an outreach program involving
              high school students and teachers, diverse student populations, baccalaureate
              institutions, the private sector, and public policy.  One aspect of the program
              supports high school teacher and student teams working with faculty members at
              the University of Vermont or at one of Vermont's baccalaureate institutions. 
              An additional outreach program is designed to increase the diversity of the
              undergraduate student population in Vermont by building on an ongoing
              partnership with a Bronx high school.  The rural poor of Vermont will be
              eligible for summer job internships and math/science institutes.  Faculty and
              students at Vermont's baccalaureate institutions will be able to compete for
              equipment grants and small college development grant; a small business
              innovation research (SBIR) phase (0) program will provide seed grants. 
              Finally, Vermont EPSCoR will partner with the Vermont Technology Council to
              help locate in-state resource persons for policy makers seeking scientific
              expertise.


