Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships of the Lacewings (Insecta:Neuroptera)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0236861

Award Number: 0236861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaun Winterton WINTERTONSHAUN@NETSCAPE.NET  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian M. Wiegmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Insects represent one of the most diverse and species-rich groups of organisms
              inhabiting the earth. One of the largest radiations of insects is the
              Holometabola, or insects that undergo metamorphosis, and includes familiar
              insects such as butterflies, beetles, flies, and lacewings. Closely related to
              beetles, lacewings are considered one of the most primitive groups of
              Holometabola. Lacewings represent a wide diversity of strange and unique life
              histories, but their evolutionary relationships to each other and the
              development of these unique life histories are poorly understood. We are
              examining the historical relationships of the 17 family-groups of lacewings
              using DNA sequence data from multiple genes, as well as detailed investigations
              of morphological characteristics. These two sources of information will be
              analysed using cladistic methodology to develop a phylogenetic or 'family tree'
              of evolutionary relationships.
The phylogenetic tree proposed from the
              analysis of both molecular and morphological data will then form the template
              for developing a natural classification of the groups of lacewings. This tree
              will further be used to test hypotheses of development of various life
              histories under different scenarios, including whether the first ancestors of
              lacewings were aquatic or terrestrial in origin. The results of this research
              can be used to further our understanding of the processes of insect evolution.
              Molecular and morphological character systems and genes explored in this
              project will be useful in resolving similar-aged radiations in other insects,
              especially for holometabolan relatives such as Megaloptera (dobsonflies),
              Raphidioptera (snakeflies) and Coleoptera (beetles). This project will also
              provide opportunities for education and career development of a postdoctoral
              scientist and undergraduate students, as well as foster cross-instituional
              collaborations between scientists.

