Title       : Near-surface Tornado Intensification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0236667

Award Number: 0236667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328223             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Lewellen   (Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Lewellen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the ultimate goals of tornado research is to predict tornado occurrence
              and strength as a function of the environments which give rise to them, a goal
              made extremely difficult by the range of physical scales and phenomena involved
              and the complexity of the interactions between them.  The objective of this
              research project is an improved understanding of one critical ingredient of
              this problem: the phenomenon of near-surface intensification.  

Prior work
              by the Principal Investigators (PIs) and others has demonstrated that the
              turbulent interaction of a vortex with the surface can produce maximum wind
              speeds more than double those well above the surface and an order of magnitude
              greater intensification for short periods.  Changes in the near-surface inflow
              can make the difference between extreme near-surface intensification or none at
              all.  The PIs have identified a corner flow swirl ratio and a dimensionless
              time rate of change of low-swirl flux as two critical parameters governing this
              behavior.  Near-surface intensification is expected to be important on both the
              mesocylone scale and the tornado scale, but much remains to be done to clarify
              its role in both tornadogenesis and determining tornado intensity, and to
              determine how to approximate this phenomenon in subgrid/surface
              parameterizations for storm scale simulations.  

This research will use and
              extend the PI's existing high-resolution, three?dimensional, unsteady,
              numerical model of tornado vortices.  Controlled, limited-domain, numerical
              experiments will focus on identifying the dynamical relationships involved in
              near-surface intensification during transient vortex evolution.  The approach
              complements observational case studies and storm model simulations and should
              prove useful in interpreting the results of both. The code will be modified to
              include buoyancy generated by latent heat released in the core and debris
              loading to allow initial estimates of their effects on the near-surface flow. 
              Adding the funnel and debris clouds to the simulations will also foster more
              direct comparisons with field observations of tornadoes, such as videos and
              fine-scale Doppler radar measurements. 

Society will benefit through
              increased public safety, if improvements can be made in forecasting which radar
              detected mesocyclones will generate a tornado and what the damage potential
              might be.  This research, which will include providing results to the research
              community through publications, meetings, graduate student education, and
              personal interaction, is designed to provide a necessary ingredient for such
              improvements.  Also, detailed information on the tornado wind structure and
              debris transport should aid engineer's attempts to design structures to
              withstand tornado conditions. 

