Title       : 4th World Congress of African Linguistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0236519

Award Number: 0236519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29130              (Estimated)
Investigator: Akinbiyi Akinlabi akinlabi@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark C. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The National Science Foundation will support the Fourth World Congress in
              African Linguistics, to be held at Rutgers University in New Brunswick on June
              17-23, 2003. This meeting aims to bring scholars based in Africa in direct
              intellectual contact with scholars doing research on African languages in North
              America, Europe, and other regions. To accomplish this, the conference will
              sponsor about 20 participants from Africa who would otherwise find it
              financially impossible to come. Some of these will be established senior
              figures who can serve as role models; others will be promising junior
              researchers chosen by anonymous abstracts for their cutting-edge work. In all,
              meeting organizers expect about 300 participants and close to 150
              presentations. These will cover every facet of linguistics and present data
              from all the major groups of African languages. The meeting will also include
              symposia designed to encourage research and documentation of the many
              endangered languages of Africa, and workshops that address major analytical
              problems that arise in the study of African languages. This will be the first
              time that the World Congress of African Linguistics has come to North America.
              The proceedings of the Congress will be published by Rudiger Kopp Verlag of
              Koln, giving a permanent record of the results.

Approximately one third of
              the languages spoken in the world today are African languages (an estimated
              2035), and African languages have had a large impact on the development of
              linguistic theory.  But less than 1% of these languages have been thoroughly
              documented. The difficulty is that most of these languages can only be studied
              adequately by people who are physically present in Africa, and these scholars
              tend to become isolated from the centers of theoretical and analytical
              innovation. This meeting will be a step toward improving this situation by
              creating contacts between Africans and non-Africans that can lead to productive
              long term collaborations that fertilize both communities. It will also bring a
              taste of the excitement of working on African languages to North America,
              encouraging more scholars to take up this important area.

