Title       : New Applications for Probe Microscopy of Biomolecular Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0236093

Award Number: 0236093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $567353             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen G. Hansma hhansma@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1164,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of this research is to develop innovations in probe
              microscopy of biomolecular materials.  The research will integrate both the
              imaging and the pulling aspects of probe microscopy to develop models of
              biomolecular mechanics and structures.  Specifically, the work will focus on
              three significant classes of biomolecular materials, and it will examine two
              types of biomaterials from each class:  (1) Highly elastic biological proteins
              - spider capture silk and HMW (high molecular weight) glutenin -are good model
              systems for possible improvements in the elasticity of synthetic materials. (2)
              Protein mimics to be investigated are polyamino acids and a non-peptide
              triblock copolymer mimic of the abalone protein lustrin; lustrin is the main
              protein component of abalone shell, which is 3000 times more fracture resistant
              than concrete.  (3) Novel DNA structures to be investigated are telomeric
              mimics, and DNA-surfactant liquid-crystalline films, which have been used to
              study photoconductivity of DNA.  

This research will take a
              multi-directional approach to make innovations in probe microscopy of
              biomolecular materials.  Probing many systems has been a good approach for
              maximizing the probability of innovation in probe microscopy of biomolecular
              materials. Undergraduate students will be involved in the research, and some
              will become co-authors or first authors of peer-reviewed publications.  

