Title       : The Comparative Grammar of Intensional Transitive Verbs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0236952

Award Number: 0236952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104410             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Larson richard.larson@stonybrook.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Richard K. Larson will conduct
              three years of research on the behavior and interpretation of so-called
              "intensional transitive verbs" (ITVs), a construction type that addresses the
              relation between syntax and semantics. Certain semantic phenomena (e.g.,
              intensionality) are known to correlate in English and related languages with
              certain syntactic structures (e.g., clausal complements). ITVs challenge this
              correlation. This research concerns the hypothesis that the correlation does in
              fact hold and that ITVs represent (in effect) a disguised variant of the
              expected grammatical pattern. The "disguising effect" is conjectured to arise
              from two processes found in natural languages: phonetically null elements and
              clause reduction. If this conjecture is correct, careful comparison of
              languages in which the principles governing null elements and restructuring are
              known to vary should reveal the disguise of ITVs, or else provide evidence that
              the basic hypothesis is incorrect. Data on ITVs will be collected from a wide
              range of languages, including Chinese, Hungarian, Japanese, Korean, Slovenian,
              Russian, and a number of native languages of North America. The PI will work
              with native-speaker graduate students, who directly control the target
              languages, and/or with professional linguists who have studied them. 

The
              results of this research will bear not only on linguistic theory, but also on
              broader issues in the relation between language and thought. A basic question
              is how far languages may vary in the ways that they express the same thoughts
              or concepts. Are the same ideas necessarily encoded in the same forms (once
              disguising effects are stripped away)? Or can there be true variation? This
              study will investigate the question of what variation is possible in the
              expression of intensional concepts, and so contribute to this wider set of
              questions.

