Title       : Conservation and Non-Conservation of Engrailed Gene Regulation in Metazoan
               Evolution: Amphioxus as a Model for the Ancestral Vertebrate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0236171

Award Number: 0236171
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Z. Holland lzholland@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0236171
Holland

The long term goal of this research is to elucidate the
              evolutionary origins of the patterning mechanisms that led to the vertebrate
              body plan. This proposal focuses on the evolution of cis-regulatory elements of
              the engrailed gene in relation to the evolution of body plans using amphioxus
              (Branchiostoma) as a proxy for the ancestral vertebrate. Amphioxus is
              vertebrate-like but lacks the extensive gene duplications characteristic of
              vertebrates. Thus, developmental gene cascades in amphioxus are proving to be
              similar to those in vertebrates, but less complex and easier to study.
              Evolutionary changes in developmental gene regulation are one important way to
              effect large-scale changes in animal body plans. An understanding of the
              evolution of cis-regulation of the engrailed gene can give insights into the
              ancestral roles of engrailed in development, in particular, and the
              evolutionary conservation of the roles of developmental genes versus their
              co-option for new roles in newly evolved structures, in general. Theories
              regarding the ancestral role(s) of engrailed include functions in (1) boundary
              formation, (2) specification of particular nerve cells, (3) specification of
              subsets of muscle cells and (4) segmentation. The last is particularly
              controversial. To test these ypotheses, expression of lacZ reporter constructs
              of cis-regulatory DNA from amphioxus engrailed will be compared in amphioxus,
              the zebrafish, a tunicate (Ciona), Drosophila and the lamprey. In preliminary
              work, a construct including 8.5 kb of amphioxus engrailed regulatory DNA, which
              shares many transcription factor binding sites with the mouse engrailed-2
              region that directs expression to jaw muscle precursors, was expressed in the
              first 4 of these organisms. Initial results suggest that (1) engrailed
              regulation may be conserved during evolution of the vertebrate jaw muscles from
              the anterior somites of an amphioxus-like ancestor and (2) a role for engrailed
              in specification of muscle cell identity and/or properties may be conserved in
              Drosophila, amphioxus and the vertebrates. In the present research, smaller
              constructs will be expressed in the 5 organisms to determine if the same
              constellation of transcription factor binding sites directs expression to
              muscle and the nerve cord in all organisms. Comparative experiments will be
              done with the mouse engrailed-2 regulatory regions known to direct expression
              to the vertebrate jaw muscles.  Finally, by overexpressing and blocking
              expression of amphioxus engrailed in amphioxus embryos, it will be determined
              if engrailed really does function in segmentation of the amphioxus mesoderm as
              its expression suggests. The combined results from these experiments will give
              insights into the evolution of regulation of the engrailed gene in particular,
              and the evolution of cis-regulation of genes in general. An understanding of
              the evolution of gene regulation is central to an understanding of how life
              evolved on earth. This research will continue a history of training
              undergraduate students, including woman, under-represented minorities and those
              with physical disabilities, in basic techniques of molecular biology and
              embryology. It will also provide advanced training for a postdoctoral fellow in
              experimental embryology and molecular biology. The results will be published in
              peer-reviewed journals and presented at scientific meetings.

