Title       : CAREER: Controlling Helix-Helix Interactions in Membrane Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a0236846

Award Number: 0236846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $504500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna Kumar kkumar01@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 1045,7202,9179,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research program addresses helix-helix interactions in membrane proteins.
              Materials that phase separate from both aqueous and hydrocarbon solvents will
              be utilized to direct the packing and assembly of helices within membrane
              bilayers. Peptides with fluorinated or p-aminophenylalanine residues lining
              interhelical surfaces and equipped with hydrocarbon sidechains at membrane
              exposed positions will be used to investigate driving force, packing
              tendencies, and orientation of the assemblies within the membrane. Using a
              combination of selected unnatural amino acids, the relationship between
              sidechain properties and self-assembly will be explored. Biophysical studies
              detailing the thermodynamics of partitioning and folding will be carried out to
              obtain a detailed map of peptide-lipid interactions. Sedimentation equilibrium
              and fluorescence resonance energy transfer in the presence of detergents will
              be used to ascertain the molecular weight and stoichiometries of the
              assemblies. Scanning force microscopy will be employed for direct visualization
              of morphological changes. A variety of curricular changes designed to bring
              interactivity to the learning environment will be implemented, and a public
              outreach program in the form of science and policy seminars targeting the
              non-scientist will be initiated.

With the support of this CAREER Award from
              the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Krishna Kumar, of
              the Department of Chemistry at Tufts University, is carrying out fundamental
              studies related to the designed aggregation of proteins. By developing new
              approaches for the control of how peptide molecules interact with one-another,
              Professor Kumar's studies may lead to new methods to control the passage of
              molecules across membranes and to new drug delivery systems. Professor Kumar
              will bring science to the non-scientist through a public seminar program
              addressing both science and science policy and will enhance the educational
              experience of undergraduates through the development of a series of interactive
              learning projects.
