Title       : Nontarget Effects of Host-Specific Biocontrols: Direct and Indirect Effects of
               Biocontrols that Subsidize Native Consumers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0236061

Award Number: 0236061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294267             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ragan M. Callaway callaway@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean E. Pearson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The indirect effects of consumers in food webs are known to be important in
              ecological systems, but this knowledge has not been well integrated into
              applied fields such as weed control by biological agents.  The introduction of
              exotic insects as biological control agents is an increasingly common strategy
              employed for the control of invasive plants and is thought to be ecologically
              safe so long as the control agents are host-specific.  However, even
              host-specific agents may be consumed by native species and so impact the rest
              of the food web.  This research will examine the indirect effects of an exotic
              gall fly, introduced to control an invasive grass species, on populations of
              deer mice that are key predators of insects and seeds in many western North
              American grasslands, and are the primary vectors for the Sin Nombre hantavirus,
              which causes the deadly hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in humans.  Research
              goals are to conduct a perturbation experiment by removing gall flies from
              grassland plots in order to quantify the direct effect of gall fly subsidies on
              deer mouse populations, and measure indirect effects, which include the
              prevalence of the hantavirus, seed predation, germination and recruitment of
              native plants, and abundance of native insects.  This research will advance the
              field of biological control by providing a means of more effectively filtering
              potentially hazardous insects from biocontrol programs.  Additionally,
              hantavirus information will be disseminated to regional health authorities to
              help develop management guidelines to reduce human health risks associated with
              gall fly-mediated increases in the prevalence of hantavirus.
