Title       : Acquisition of a Sensitive Magnetic Susceptibility System and a Reflected Light
               Microscope for Studies of Self-Reversal in Titanomaghemite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0236383

Award Number: 0236383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50899              (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Tarduno john@earth.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0236383
Tarduno

The remarkable ability of some rocks to acquire a
              magnetization in a direction antiparallel to the Earth's geomagnetic field, or
              self-reversal of natural remanent magnetization, is thought to be rare; it has
              been established only in a few igneous rocks bearing hemoilmenite. The
              paleomagnetism lab at Rochester has reported on two, nearly antipodal
              components of magnetization, revealed through detailed thermal demagnetization
              studies, from pillow basalts in which hemoilmenite is absent.  Application of
              laboratory partial thermoremanent magnetizations have shown that the component
              isolated at lower temperatures represents a partial self-reversal of the
              primary magnetization. Because maghemitization of oceanic crust is ubiquitous,
              partial self-reversals may make an important contribution to the decrease in
              marine magnetic anomaly amplitudes with age observed for crust formed during
              the last 30 million years.

Funds from this grant will be used to acquire two
              equipment systems to assist in further investigations of the extent and
              mechanism of self-reversal carried by titanomaghemite in oceanic basalt: (1) a
              magnetic susceptibility system with a furnace apparatus for Curie point
              determinations and (2) a reflected light microscope system for basic
              characterization of magnetic phases.  The equipment will support a Ph.D. thesis
              and the thesis studies of several undergraduate students. The equipment will
              also support the continuing work of other graduate students, undergraduates and
              postdoctoral researchers conducting studies in geomagnetism, tectonics, rock
              magnetism and environmental magnetism, and in formal course instruction at the
              University of Rochester.
***

