Title       : SGER: Nanoscale Investigation of Cement Hydration by Nuclear Resonant Reaction
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0236977

Award Number: 0236977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80881              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Schweitzer schweitz@phys.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Nanoscale Investigation of Cement Hydration by Nuclear Resonant Reaction
              Analysis 
  
Nuclear Resonant Reaction Analysis (NRRA) has been applied for
              the first time 
to study cement hydration. Through the use of this technique,
              the change in hydrogen concentration on a few nanometer scale (corresponding to
              a few unit cells) can be studied as a function of time during the induction
              period. Preliminary results have demonstrated that the surface layer formed
              during the induction period on the tricalcium silicate grains (used in this
              initial study) is consistent with a tobermorite-like material, based on the
              absolute value of the observed hydrogen concentration and the measured
              thickness of the surface layer.  
  
 Optimum beam energy resolution is a
              critical parameter as the spatial resolution of the measurement is defined
              largely by the energy resolution of the incident ion beam. Therefore, the
              Dynamitron Tandem accelerator at the Ruhr Universitat, Bochum, Germany is being
              used for the experimental studies as this machine has had extensive work done
              over the last fifteen years to generate the best possible energy resolution for
              ion beams. The hydrogen concentration is obtained over a depth of a few
              nanometers at the surface of the grains and can be measured continuously to a
              depth of about 2 microns into the grains. An initial study of the hydration
              process of tricalcium silicate at 20 oC determined an induction time of 4.25
              hours with a statistical precision of 0.07 hours. 
  
This proposal will
              support a detailed investigation of cement hydration by 
applying the NRRA
              technique. A series of experiments will investigate the effect of 
different
              parameters on the hydration process. The analysis of the experimental data will
              provide clear insights into the way different parameters, such as temperature,
              pH, and starting composition, affect the hydration process. This information
              will ultimately be used to improve the formulation of cements for construction
              and other purposes. 


