Title       : Systematics and Evolution of Barnacles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0236135

Award Number: 0236135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Crandall keith_crandall@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jens Hoeg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diana Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Since the seminal studies of Darwin and predecessors, multiple hypotheses have
              been proposed concerning evolutionary relationships among the barnacles of the
              world.  However, because of the strange and diverse morphologies associated
              with this most interesting group of crustaceans, discerning evolutionary
              relationships has been particularly difficult.  Furthermore, most modern
              attempts have been hampered by poor sampling of species diversity.  This
              international collaborative study will examine a broad array of barnacle
              species from around the world by sequencing DNA from multiple gene regions to
              infer evolutionary relationships among the major groups of barnacles.  The
              project will use state-of-the-art automated sequencing techniques combined with
              supercomputing applications for estimating genealogical relationships among the
              species sampled.
The resulting genealogical relationships will then be used to
              explore biogeographic patterns of biodiversity among the barnacles.  These
              biogeographic patterns allow global inferences of patterns of diversity
              (conspicuously absent for marine fauna in general) thus informing global
              conservation decisions.  These results will be disseminated to the public
              through the Tree of Life web project (tolweb.org - also supported by NSF). 
              This research represents a strong global collaboration, with co-Principal
              Investigators from the US, Denmark, and Australia and collaborators from many
              other countries including Brazil, Russia, and Spain, combining leading
              expertise in crustacean molecular systematics with barnacle morphology.  This
              project will also provide educational/training opportunities for
              undergraduates, high school teachers, graduate students, post-docs, and
              international faculty through research experiences and lab exchanges of
              personnel.

