Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research-Estimation of Net Energy Expenditure in
               Exercising Children: A Simple and Non-Invasive Approach Using Delta HR and
               Regression Modelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0236406

Award Number: 0236406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11933              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Newell-Morris lnm@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The importance of research into the assessment of energy expenditure (EE) has
              increased with the growing awareness of its association with physical activity,
              obesity, growth and development, health, and work levels. This study focuses on
              an important, but previously underrepresented group: children.  Over the last
              decade researchers have focused mainly on quantifying EE in adults, but have
              done little on children, primarily because of the difficulty in assessing EE in
              children.  Artificial environments, invasive techniques, equipment
              inappropriately sized for children, and lack of tabulated data on
              activity-specific costs, all contribute to this difficulty.  In addition, the
              costly portable equipment now available is often not affordable.  The resultant
              methodological and informational lacunae call for the development of new
              methods that will facilitate assessment of EE in children.  

This study aims
              to establish an affordable, simple, and non-invasive method for routine
              estimation of energy expenditure (EE) in children.  The project focuses on
              regression modeling as a means to predict oxygen consumption (VO2)-a proxy of
              energy expenditure-from heart rate (HR), in conjunction with several easily
              assessed covariates, for normal children seven to ten years old who live at sea
              level in a temperate climate.  The method used here is innovative, taking as
              its primary measures the differences between exercise and resting VO2 (DVO2)
              and between exercise and resting HR (DHR).  The reasoning is that DVO2
              partially corrects for individual differences in resting metabolic rate and
              posture, and DHR controls for interindividual variation in physiology and
              posture. This approach has not heretofore been applied to children. The study
              will use a repeated measures regression approach based on maximum likelihood
              estimation.  In the process of developing the equation, a set of tests
              involving specific activities that can be used to create population-specific
              prediction equations will be established, as well as the range of variation of
              DEE associated with these activities for children living at sea level in a
              temperate climate. This method obviates the need for  individual calibration
              between HR and VO2.

The principal broader impact of the proposed research is
              the expansion of knowledge about a particularly underrepresented group-
              children.  Ultimately, this method could serve as a baseline for developing a
              similar approach for other populations where simple, non-invasive methods for
              estimating EE are imperative. Such a method, for example, would be ideal in the
              estimation of EE in children performing subsistence labor in harsh
              environments.  Application of the method will have broad impact across diverse
              fields like physiology and human biology by allowing a better understanding of
              children's energetic issues as they relate to obesity, growth, development, and
              related biocultural parameters.

