Title       : LTREB: Variance and Synchrony in Flowering and Dormancy of Iteroparous Perennial
               Wildflowers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0236427

Award Number: 0236427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76437              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth E. Crone ecrone@forestry.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1306,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Intellectual merit: We know extremely little about population dynamics of
              herbaceous perennial plants, and few studies monitor individuals and
              populations at appropriate the temporal scale (decades) to document or analyze
              patterns over time. Funds are requested to continue demographic monitoring of
              four iteroparous, perennial plants in semi-arid grasslands in western Montana
              and southwest Alberta: Astragalus scaphoides, Silene spaldingii, Potentilla
              recta, and Anenome patens. Continued monitoring will allow investigation of
              general mechanisms of reproduction, resource acquisition and population
              dynamics in herbaceous perennial plants. Initial analyses of data from.
              Ultimately, long-term demographic monitoring will be used to analyze the extent
              to which temporal patterns of flowering and dormancy are synchronous in each
              species and
population. In addition, patterns predicted by models of ultimate
              evolutionary causes of synchrony will be tested, strength of feedback in
              individual resource dynamics will be determined, and predictions of population
              models based on individual resource dynamics to transition models based on
              above-ground plant size will be compared. These analyses will build
              relationships between individual allocation and demographic models of
              populations dynamics. In doing so, general ideas will be developed to explain
              mast-seeding in trees to mechanisms that could drive resource acquisition and
              reproduction in all plants that store resources over multiple years. 
Broader
              impacts: Herbaceous perennial plants are of great applied significance, because
              of the importance of grassland conservation, the need for weed management, and
              the possible environmental advantages of perennial crops for soil conservation
              and weed control. Observations of individual and population dynamics at decadal
              scales are central to understanding herbaceous plant population dynamics. In
              addition, each of the monitoring programs here involves demography or impacts
              of sensitive or invasive species, and can potentially improve our ability to
              manage specific species and  populations. Finally, the majority of the
              requested funds are for summer undergraduate research interns, who will spend
              about 50% of their time participating in independent research and/or public
              outreach programs at the University of Montana, when not actively counting
              plants.

