Title       : Conformal Deposition of Dielectric Nanolaminates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0236584

Award Number: 0236584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy G. Gordon gordon@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research:

In previous work supported by NSF, the PI discovered a process for
              the rapid deposition of highly conformal coatings consisting mostly of silicon
              dioxide (silica).  The method uses alternating layer deposition (ADL) from two
              different vapors supplied alternately to a surface to make a coating that is
              laminated on the nanometer scale.  Each layer is formed with a highly precise
              atomic level of control over thickness, smoothness, conformality and
              composition.

The PI proposes theories that should permit him to extend the
              capability of this deposition method in five different ways:
1.	Lower
              dielectric constant.  Carbon-doping of the silica films will be used to lower
              the dielectric constant (k).  Carbon will be introduced into the coating by
              chemical modification of the precursors.
2.	Selective sealing of pores.  By
              use of the catalytic character of the ALD process, the PI plans to deposit the
              carbon-doped low-k material to seal the pores near the surface of the
              ultra-low-k dielectrics, without placing any material inside interior pores. 
              This process will prevent the electrical leakage that occurs after deposition
              of electrically conductive materials onto ultra-low-k dielectric
              materials.
3.	Selective trench filling.  By another use of the catalytic
              character of the ALD process, the PI plans to fill the insides of narrow
              trenches with low-k material, while keeping adjacent flat surfaces free of any
              deposit.
4.	Higher growth rate.  Using his theoretical mechanism for the ALD
              process, he plans to further increase growth rate by the synthesis and testing
              of a new chemical precursor.
5.	ALD of optical multiplayer filters.  The ALD
              process has the right characteristics to make superior low-index layers for
              optical multi-layer filters, even on non-planar surfaces such as those found on
              lenses or focusing mirrors.  A method is also being considered for ALD of
              layers of the other material needed for these filters.

Broad Impact:

Each
              of the five planned activities could have important impact on critical needs in
              the microelectronics and optical communications industries:
1.	This process
              would extend the unique capabilities of ALD to make highly conformal low-k
              insulators needed in microelectronics.
2.	Selective sealing of surface pores
              on ultra-low-k dielectrics is needed to provide the smooth surfaces needed for
              making interconnections in microeletronics.
3.	Selective trench filling would
              allow the filling of isolated trenches between microelectronic transistors
              without the use of the expensive chemical/mechanical polishing step normally
              needed to remove excess silica from the top surface.
4.	Achievement of still
              higher deposition rates will make the ALD process more cost-effective for all
              practical applications.
5.	Wavelength-selective filters with higher quality
              are needed in fields such as integrated optics and electronics, and optical
              communications.

