Title       : Microbial Genome Sequencing: An EST Approach to Understanding Endosymbiotic Gene
               Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0236631

Award Number: 0236631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $789987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debashish Bhattacharya dbhattac@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcelo B. Soares  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1629      BE: Non-Announcement Research
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,1329,7187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Debashish Bhattacharya of the University of Iowa has been awarded a grant to
              create a genomic resource of expressed genes (ESTs) from the toxic
              dinoflagellate alga Alexandrium tamarense and the haptophyte alga Emiliana
              huxleyi. The EST data will be used to understand the role of  endosymbiosis in
              driving nuclear genome evolution. Endosymbiosis, in which a single-celled
              protist engulfs and "enslaves" the photosynthetic organelle (plastid) of
              another cell, explains the origin of most algae. Plastid endosymbiosis
              necessarily changes the "host" lineage because of the large scale movement of
              foreign genes from the captured endosymbiont to the host nucleus. This process,
              known as endosymbiotic gene transfer, is required for plastid function. Despite
              its importance to cellular evolution, the understanding of endosymbiotic gene
              transfer is in its infancy. To gain fundamental insights into this process, a
              genomics approach is used in this research through the sequencing of 30,000
              ESTs from Alexandrium and Emiliania. High-quality libraries of expressed genes
              are used in an efficient "gene discovery" strategy to generate a comprehensive
              collection of algal ESTs. Using these techniques, about 10,000 unique ESTs from
              each algal species will be produced. 
These data will be the basis for
              understanding endosymbiotic gene transfer and will provide a broad community of
              scientists interested in topics such as algal evolution, toxin production in
              harmful algal blooms (HABs), carbon cycling, and genetics with an invaluable
              resource for studying the biology of two taxa that are of high economic and
              ecological importance. Alexandrium causes HABs in coastal areas resulting in
              paralytic shellfish poisoning, whereas Emiliania is dominant in oceanic open
              waters where its coccolithophore phase acts as a major carbon sink on the
              planet. This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded through a
              collaborative program between the National Science Foundation and the
              Department of Agriculture.

