Title       : Three Projects in Choice Theory: Random Choice, Interdependent Preferences and
               Changing Tastes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0236882

Award Number: 0236882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang Pesendorfer pesendor@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal contains three related research projects on choice theory. All
              these projects will be undertaken jointly with Faruk Gul of Princeton
              University.
Often, observed choice behavior will not be consistent with a
              single, deterministic choice criterion (i.e., utility function). That is, the
              decision-maker will make different choices in virtually identical situations.
              Such behavior is best modeled as random choice. The first project entitled
              "Random Choice," addresses the following question: when can a random choice be
              interpreted as the consequence of maximizing a randomly chosen criterion for
              ranking the alternatives.  Hence, we investigate the consequences of behavior
              that is derived from a fixed, probabilistic rule for selecting a utility
              function. After the utility function is selected, the agent chooses the
              alternative that maximizes it among the available options. This way of
              interpreting behavior is important for the analysis of aggregate data,
              boundedly rational behavior and situations with asymmetric information. In our
              work, we study choice over risk prospects and randomly selected expected
              utility functions.

The second project entitled "The Revealed Preference
              Theory of Changing Tastes" studies dynamic inconsistency. Dynamic inconsistency
              refers to the tendency of agents to make different choices from the same set of
              alternatives depending on when they are asked to choose. For example, an
              individual who prefers a larger later reward to a smaller earlier reward may
              reverse his preference, as the date of the smaller earlier reward gets closer.
              Many decision problems require the agent to make choices at various moments in
              time. In such problems, the key is how the decision-maker forms expectations
              about his own future behavior. This research takes the position that the
              agent's beliefs regarding his future behavior can best be analyzed through his
              current behavior and seeks to identify these beliefs through choice
              experiments. That is, we wish to identify methods for determining the agent's
              expectations about his future behavior from actual choices made in the current
              period. The advantage of the revealed preference approach is that preferences
              over choice problems are - at least in principal - observable.

The final
              part of the project proposes to develop and analyze a "model of interdependent
              preferences" and to use interdependent preferences to define notions such as
              empathy, spitefulness, fairness and reciprocity.

