Title       : LTREB: Rapid Ecotonal Shifts, Pest Outbreaks, and Mortality of a Dominant Tree
               Species in Response to Record Drought
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0236204

Award Number: 0236204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299547             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Whitham Thomas.Whitham@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil S. Cobb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Gehring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This LTREB research will examine four key predictions. First, plant resistance
              to herbivory affects community and ecosystem-level processes. Beginning in 1982
              genetically resistant and susceptible trees were identified, and on 1/2 of the
              susceptible trees, 2 species of common insect have been removed each year.
              Studies involve tree fitness responses to chronic herbivory, mycorrhizal
              community responses, the community consequences of a cryptic keystone
              herbivore, and the use of resistant and susceptible trees in reconstructing
              past climates. Ongoing studies of soil bacteria, nutrient cycling, and costs of
              resistance make these long-term experiments very important to
continue.
              Second, drought results in rapid ecotonal shifts, which alter community
              structure and ecosystem dynamics. In 1996 a record drought occurred that
              resulted in 60 sites that suffered 30-70% tree mortality and killed an
              estimated 75,000 mature trees. These sites underwent a rapid ecotonal shift
              from pinyon-juniper woodland to juniper woodland or grassland. Eleven of
              these
sites, paired with adjacent low mortality sites, represent a valuable
              resource because they are the direct result of a climate change event. These
              sites are crucial for studying the causes and consequences of climate change on
              mycorrhizal mutualists, microbial decomposers, arthropod and vertebrate
              communities, and how environmental stress differentially affects biodiversity
              and
ecosystem function. Third, repeated drought events have different effects
              than single drought events. This year, 2002, is already identified as the
              driest year in recorded history. This new drought following the 1996 drought
              allows us to determine if the same sites suffer repeated mortality and
              selection, which is likely to have very different long-term consequences than a
              single  mortality event. Four, herbivore x environmental interactions affect
              insect outbreaks to alter community structure and ecosystem processes. Since
              1982 we have been monitoring the distribution of moth and scale insects that
              were restricted to sites of chronic stress. However, in response to the record
              drought of 1996, scales have expanded from these epicenters to become the
              largest outbreak in the southwest. We have mapped their expansion and are
              studying how resistant and susceptible trees are affected by drought. 
Broader
              Impacts: The southwestern US is in the midst of a drought similar to those
              predicted to increase throughout much of the US by many climate change models.
              The principles learned by studying pinyon pine and its associated community can
              be used to make informed decisions regarding the consequences of these
              predicted climate changes. In addition, because NAU is located in an area with
              a diverse population including 42 Native American tribes, we propose to
train
              and mentor students drawn from a diversity of under-represented groups. Our
              ability to do so will be enhanced by programs already in place, including an
              NSF-sponsored University Mentoring in Environmental Biology grant targeting
              under-represented groups and an NAU grants program that promotes undergraduate
              research.

