Title       : Systematics, Biogeography and Evolutionary Radiations of the Cyphophthalmi
               (Arachnida, Opiliones)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0236871

Award Number: 0236871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299809             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gonzalo Giribet ggiribet@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Cyphophthalmi constitutes a suborder of the arachnid order Opiliones
              (daddy-long-legs). Of ancient origin and widespread distribution, they live in
              the leaf litter of undisturbed temperate to tropical humid forests.
              Cyphophthalmids have been found in all continents, except Antarctica, and in
              most islands of continental origin, such as New Zealand, New Caledonia,
              Sumatra, and Madagascar. Many of the places they inhabit qualify as
              biodiversity hotspots, areas collectively comprising only 1.4% of the land
              surface area of the Earth and recommended for preferential conservation
              policies for having high diversity. Due to their localized distribution and
              scant dispersal ability, cyphophthalmids have been chosen as a model to study
              evolutionary radiations in islands of continental origin, biogeography, and
              potential issues of conservation biology. To do so, the taxonomy and
              evolutionary relationships among its species need to be worked out. We will use
              scanning electron microscopy to study the morphology of the cyphophthalmids and
              will generate lists of characters to be analyzed with standard phylogenetic
              algorithms. Other specimens will be used for genetic studies in order to
              generate DNA sequence data also to be analyzed phylogenetically. Both sets of
              information (morphology and DNA) will be used to propose the evolutionary
              relationships of the members of the group and to establish a classification.
              The evolutionary trees will also aid studies of biogeographic patterns and
              earth history. Evolutionary analyses will be aided with the use of software
              written to work in parallel on a large multiprocessor computer cluster.
              Extensive field work in New Zealand, South Africa, Madagascar, tropical West
              Africa and southeast Asia is required to obtain material suitable for
              laboratory work and to document undescribed diversity.
 
Systematics,
              biogeography, and the study of evolutionary radiations have contributed to a
              better understanding of the patterns observed in nature. Optimizing the
              knowledge of diversity across geographic areas, cladogenesis, and speciation
              may benefit from the use of model systems. The potential use of Cyphophthalmi
              as a new model in evolutionary biology has driven a dual study of the higher
              systematics of the group and the exploration of one of their most spectacular
              adaptive radiations, the one undergone in New Zealand. The research will
              develop a new model system to integrate phylogenetic and biogeographic patterns
              with evolutionary studies of explosive radiations, and will form the basis for
              future studies on biodiversity estimates and conservation biology. Global
              knowledge of the Cyphophthalmi, with a database containing geographical
              information and illustrations for all the estimated 180 species of the group,
              will be made available. During the process, one undergraduate and one graduate
              student will be fully trained in arachnid evolutionary biology. The value of
              the research project thus has both scientific and social interests. 


