Title       : Group Travel and Workshop: International Congress of Systematic and Evolutionary
               Biology, September 2002, Patras, Greece
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0236743

Award Number: 0236743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Mickevich mary.mickevich@nmnh.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,1198,7689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0236743
Mickevich
This Group Travel / Workshop grant provides partial support
              for a U.S. delegation of ca. 65 scientists to attend the 2002 meeting of the
              6th International Congress of Systematic and Evolutionary Biology (ICSEB-VI). 
              The title and theme of the Congress, Biodiversity in the Information Age,
              highlight the growing importance of Internet access to information on the
              species composition, phylogenetic relationships, distribution, and abundance of
              plants, animals, fungi, and bacteria throughout the world. The purpose of ICSEB
              is to facilitate international exchange and communication among systematists
              and evolutionary biologists. International and national meetings in these areas
              of biology are usually specialized either by taxonomic group or methodological
              approach. As the previous meeting in Hungary in 1996 opened ICSEB to Eastern
              European Countries, ICSEB-VI will include scientists from countries in the
              Balkans, the Near East, Asia and the Pacific. In the last decade, several prime
              issues have stimulated the scientific community to shift emphasis in their
              work. These are revolutions in web-based informatics and molecular sequencing
              techniques, and the global biodiversity crises. Because of the revolution in
              computational abilities and molecular sequencing techniques, the last decade
              has seen changes in evolutionary theory and major breakthroughs in our
              knowledge of the Tree of Life, the map of genealogical relationships among all
              species. Also, unique applications of these techniques have created a new
              comparative approach to the study of organismal development: evolutionary
              development or "Evo-Devo."  
The theme, Biodiversity in the Information Age,
              was chosen to reflect these recent advances in Systematics and Evolutionary
              Biology. The 210 invited speakers for the 25 major symposia are among the
              leaders in their field, and from over 20 countries (described on the Congress
              website at www.icseb-vi.biology.upatras.gr ). Topics to be addressed include:
              training of the next generation of taxonomic experts; building teams of
              scientists to construct the universal Tree of Life for all organisms; exploring
              the creation of a web-accessible data matrix of morphological and anatomical
              information on all organisms (the concept of "MorphoBank," analogous to
              GenBank); accelerating biodiversity inventories toward completion of an
              All-Species inventory for planet Earth. ICSEB-VI will take place on the campus
              of the University of Patras in Greece from 9-16 September, 2002, under the
              joint sponsorship of the University of Patras and IOSEB, the International
              Organization of Systematic and Evolutionary Biology. The new Conference center
              and the town can accommodate up to one thousand attendees. Abstracts of the
              presentations and fuller proceedings are to be posted to the conference website
              and to various specialty outlets and journals following the Congress.

