Title       : International Conference on University Collections of Historic Scientific
               Instruments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0236341

Award Number: 0236341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10024              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Kremer richard.kremer@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Pantalony  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The study of historic scientific instruments is one of the fastest growing areas
              in the history of science. Researchers increasingly are turning to the material
              culture of the laboratory as a way of investigating the practice of science;
              the general public is drawn to historic artifacts as a tangible, concrete way
              of connecting to our scientific heritage. Until recently, much of the historic
              apparatus accessible to scholars and the public could be found only in large
              national collections, such as the Smithsonian in Washington, D.C., the
              Deutsches Museum in Munich, or the Science Museum in London. Yet in literally
              dozens of universities and colleges across the globe, smaller but equally
              valuable collections of historic scientific instruments can be found, often
              located near the laboratory spaces and archival documents where they originally
              had been used. This proposal seeks support for an international conference to
              uncover and strengthen these university collections, and to make them more
              visible to both scholars and local public audiences. "Mundi Subterranei:
              Scientific Instrument Collections in the University" will be held at Dartmouth
              College in Hanover, NH, from 24-27 June 2004. The conference will bring
              together about 100 persons--curators, scientists, historians, librarians and
              archivists--who in widely varying ways are currently caring for university
              collections of historic scientific apparatus. Co-sponsored by Dartmouth College
              and the Scientific Instrument Commission of the International Union of the
              History and Philosophy of Science, the conference will address four issues.
              First, panels will discuss practical problems of collection management,
              creating collection mandates, organizing and cataloguing collections, storing
              and handling apparatus, etc. Second, scholarly papers on collections,
              individual instruments, makers, and laboratory practices will be presented.
              Third, we will discuss ways to make collections more accessible for teaching
              and research, both locally and beyond. Finally, the conference will introduce
              collection managers to an international registry of historic scientific
              instruments now being developed by the Scientific Instrument Commission
              (www.isin.org). A concurrent exhibit of instruments from the Dartmouth
              Collection will illustrate many of these issues.  University instrument
              collections offer rich, yet underused resources for increasing and diffusing
              knowledge about our scientific past. The Dartmouth conference will be a
              pioneering effort to strengthen this infrastructure by enhancing links, both
              nationally and internationally, among these collections.

