Title       : Learning to Listen: An Ethnographic Pilot Study of Informal Communication as an
               Indicator of Organizational Stress and Crisis Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0236832

Award Number: 0236832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75761              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen Batteau a.batteau@wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Accidents and disasters in many industries, including healthcare,
              transportation, manufacturing, and financial industries, are seen as
              organizational breakdowns - failures of hospitals, airlines, railroads,
              corporations, and financial institutions to adapt to opportunities and threats
              posed by competition, technology, surges in workload, or changes in their
              regulatory environment.  Other organizations, however, adapt remarkably well,
              maintaining a high level of reliability in hazardous operations in fast-paced
              and complex environments.  This adaptive capability is achieved through
              organizational flexibility, teamwork, and a sense of common purpose.  However,
              when an organization's adaptive capability deteriorates or breaks down, the
              results can be catastrophic.  

This proposal describes a research technique
              and measurement strategy for observing the adaptive capability of organizations
              by examining elements of discourse in informal communication.  These elements
              of discourse include phrase-length, tempo, turn-taking, latching, pragmatic
              particles, and intonation.  These are the elements of speech through which
              interpersonal relationships are built and maintained.  Typically the elements
              of discourse exist below the level of consciousness:  most speakers are not
              immediately aware when their speech becomes more staccato.  By observing and
              measuring discourse elements, the proposal suggests, we can achieve a subtle
              and sensitive monitoring of the changes in flexibility, teamwork, and focus
              within a work group.  These measurements will be taken among a trauma team in a
              hospital emergency room, a work setting that is similar to many other
              high-hazard contexts:  inherently hazardous, remarkably successful, yet on rare
              occasions subject to catastrophic failure.  By measuring adaptive capability,
              it is hoped that catastrophic failures can be anticipated and avoided.  

