Title       : RUI: Contribution of Retinal Melatonin to Circulating Melatonin and its
               Importance in Metamorphosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0236251

Award Number: 0236251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Wright wrightm@elms.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Our Lady of Elms College
	      291 Springfield Street
	      Chicopee, MA  010132837    413/598-8351

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This study will examine the ocular secretion of melatonin and the role of this
              melatonin in amphibian metamorphosis. The function of the vertebrate eye is not
              restricted to vision. Information about the environmental lighting cycle is
              conveyed to the circadian system via the eye and, in many nonmammalian
              vertebrates, the retina in the eye contributes melatonin to the circulation.
              Little is known about the extent of ocular melatonin secretion in amphibians.
              The technique of opthalmectomy will be used to determine the relative
              contribution of the eye to blood melatonin at different developmental stages in
              anuran tadpoles, as well as the relationships between retinal melatonin,
              thyroid hormones, and metamorphosis. This project will also examine light/dark
              cycle influences on circulating retinal melatonin, the association between
              retinal melatonin secretion and the diel rhythms in circulating melatonin and
              thyroxine, and whether a compensatory increase in melatonin production occurs
              after unilateral or bilateral opthalmectomy in an effort to maintain blood
              melatonin levels. These studies should improve our understanding of the role of
              melatonin in development and its relationship to photoperiodic influences on
              metamorphosis. The findings of this research might have significance as well to
              the study of hormone interactions and the role of melatonin in vertebrates in
              general. Moreover, these results may contribute to a better understanding of
              the environmental factors that affect declining amphibian populations.  This
              project will be carried out with undergraduate students, to develop their
              competence and experience in research and to upgrade their career aspirations.
              A postdoctoral fellow who intends to seek a career in college teaching will
              also collaborate for one year to acquire experience in combining teaching and
              research at the college level. Thus, the project will contribute substantially
              to the National Science Foundation's objective of encouraging the integration
              of research into undergraduate programs and to advance discovery while
              promoting teaching, training, and learning.
