Title       : Microbial Genome Sequencing: The Cenarchaeum Symbiosum Genome Project: Genome
               Sequence from a Psychrophilic Archaeon, the Ocean's Single-most Abundant
               Microbes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0236541

Award Number: 0236541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $759642             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward F. DeLong delong@mbari.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Olsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MBARI
	      7700 Sandholdt Road
	      Moss Landing, CA  950399644    831/775-1803

NSF Program : 1629      BE: Non-Announcement Research
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,1629,7187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Edward F. DeLong of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute has been
              awarded a grant to sequence the genome of the marine microbe, Cenarchaeum
              symbiosum.   This microbe belongs to a divergent lineage of microorganisms
              known as Archaea, and is a member of one of the most abundant microbial groups
              in the ocean.   Despite their high abundance however, these microbes have never
              been cultivated, so their biological properties and ecological significance
              remain unknown.  Genome sequencing technology can now address this problem,
              allowing genetic characterization of even uncultivated microbes.   In this
              project, contemporary genome sequencing strategies will be developed and
              applied to determine and analyze the whole genome sequence of Cenarchaeum
              symbiosum.

This project will be among the first to determine a whole genome
              sequence from an uncultivated, undomesticated microbe.  The methods and
              techniques developed will have broad applications for many other studies.  The
              technologies developed will enable the study of naturally occurring
              microorganisms in the environment in many different contexts.    Due to its
              evolutionary origin, the Cenarchaeum  symbiosum genome sequence will provide
              new insight into the mechanisms of thermal adaptation in microorganisms.  This
              information will be useful for studies aiming to modify or isolate active, 
              thermostable enzymes used in industry, biotechnology,  or commercial products. 
              Additionally, Cenarchaeum symbiosum belongs to a group of microbes that
              represent the most abundant cell types in the ocean.  The genome sequence of
              this microbe should also yield important clues about the function of these
              widespread and abundant oceanic microorganisms. The data will be made available
              to the entire scientific community, adding to the growing database of whole
              microbial genome sequences.  The data will also provide a starting point for
              future studies of ocean ecology.  This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award
              funded through a collaborative program between the National Science Foundation
              and the Department of Agriculture.

