Title       : SGER: Soft Computing-Based Life-Cycle Cost Analysis of Transportation
               Infrastructure Investments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0236694

Award Number: 0236694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50604              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerardo W. Flintsch flintsch@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) focuses on the use soft
              computing for developing practical economic analysis tools to support
              transportation infrastructure asset management.  The specific objectives of the
              research are to: (1) develop an overall framework for the incorporation of soft
              computing techniques in the life-cycle cost analysis of infrastructure assets,
              (2) formulate a prototype hybrid soft computing algorithm for life-cycle cost
              analysis, and (3) compare the algorithm against traditional life-cycle cost
              analysis tools using simple examples to assess its practical potential. 
              

One of the main concerns surrounding life-cycle cost analysis (LCCA) is the
              treatment of the uncertainty and subjectivity in the physical and economic
              aspects considered in the engineering economic analysis.  This has been
              addressed extensively in the literature using probabilistic approaches. 
              However, since some of the uncertainty is of an ambiguous nature, soft
              computing applications are theoretically more appropriate than the
              probabilistic methods. Soft computing provides a formal approach for the
              treatment of both random and ambiguous uncertainty and thus is expected to
              yield more robust, reliable, and stable results. Furthermore, a soft
              computing-based LCCA system could facilitate the incorporation of non-monetary
              factors, which require subjective assessments, into the analysis.

Life-cycle
              cost analysis tools modified to treat ambiguity are expected to increase the
              efficiency of the infrastructure management process.  Although the work will
              concentrate on a specific transportation infrastructure asset, pavements, the
              research should have a broader impact due to the generalizability of the
              methods and algorithms to other types of infrastructure assets and related
              areas. The knowledge acquired through the use of these tools will help agencies
              understand the technical and economical implications of infrastructure
              management decisions and the importance of efficiently managing and renewing
              the existing infrastructure systems.

