Title       : Studies of the Fluxes of Atmospheric Organic Nitrogen Compounds to a Forest
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0236695

Award Number: 0236695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce G. Doddridge                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327343             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul B. Shepson pshepson@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the formation and fate of organic nitrogen compounds
              in a moderately polluted forest environment.  Such compounds may play a crucial
              role in nitrogen cycling and sequestration of atmospheric carbon dioxide -
              interactions between the terrestrial biosphere and the ambient atmosphere are
              understood poorly and present an area of study not widely considered at this
              time by those concerned with carbon sequestration in forest ecosystems. 
              Specifically, the project will develop the capacity for measuring fluxes of
              some selected alkyl nitrates - (isomeric) isoprene nitrate(s) and peroxyacyl
              nitrates including peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN), producing standard(s) for
              absolute calibration of isoprene nitrate, and characterizing the fate of
              organic nitrates through deposition within a forest environment.  This project
              will be conducted at the Program for Research on Oxidants: Photochemistry,
              Emissions, and Transport (PROPHET) field site at the University of Michigan
              Biological Station.  Kinetics of organic nitrate reactions with the hydoxyl
              radical (OH) will also be investigated in the laboratory.  With regard to
              broader impacts, the project will characterize some potentially important
              forest-atmosphere interactions, offer insight into the role of nitrogen cycling
              in the carbon cycle within terrestrial forest ecosystems, and improve present
              understanding of forest biogeochemistry.  The project will provide scholarship
              and capacity building through technology transfer to a number of young
              scientists, many of those women, and through institutional and PROPHET program
              outreach - through the larger NSF Integrative Graduate Education and Research
              Traineeship (IGERT) and Biosphere Atmosphere Research and Training (BART)
              programs - facilitate broader community education and involvement. 
