Title       : Herbivory and photosynthesis of oaks under elevated atmospheric CO2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0236053

Award Number: 0236053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $585000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evan H. DeLucia delucia@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antony R. Crofts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              May R. Berenbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur R. Zangerl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jason G. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Trees and other plants are under constant assault by insects.  It is estimated
              that on average 18 percent of forest productivity is lost to insect herbivores
              each year.  The investigators hypothesize that this value underestimates the
              true impact of herbivores, and furthermore,  that it will change substantially
              as the composition of the atmosphere changes.  Widespread combustion of fossil
              fuels is causing a dramatic increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide in
              the atmosphere.  Plants respond to this increase with higher rates of
              photosynthesis.  However, other changes caused by rising carbon dioxide,
              including the formation of thicker leaves with higher concentrations of sugars
              and lower concentrations of nitrogen, are very likely to change the nutritional
              quality of leaves with respect to insect herbivores.  In North Carolina the
              investigators are exposing plots in an intact pine forest to elevated carbon
              dioxide to simulate predicted atmospheric composition in the year 2050. 
              Preliminary data show that among different kinds of oaks growing in the shade
              of the pines the amount of leaf tissue removed by insects was different in the
              high- and low-carbon dioxide plots.  However, not all oak species were affected
              the same way.  The investigators hypothesize that herbivory will be greatest
              for those species with greatest leaf nutritional quality under future
              atmospheric conditions.  To test this hypothesis measures of leaf structure and
              chemistry for oaks in elevated and ambient carbon dioxide plots will be made.
              These measurements will be paired with measurements of herbivory and of the
              numbers and types of insects. 
Estimates of the amount of productivity lost to
              herbivores typically are based on measurements of the amount of leaf tissue
              removed.  An assumption inherent in these estimates is that the remaining leaf
              tissue operates normally.  When a caterpillar devours a quarter or half of a
              leaf, does the remaining tissue have normal rates of photosynthesis?  To
              examine this question, the investigators have designed a unique camera system
              that measures light fluorescing from leaves.  Fluorescence provides a direct
              measure of the rate of photosynthesis, but unlike other methods the measurement
              of fluorescence allows determination of how the rate of photosynthesis varies
              across the surface of the leaf.  This instrument can be used to test the
              hypotheses that insects with different feeding behaviors will have different
              effects on photosynthetic rates of the remaining leaf tissue.  
These new
              measurements of the effect of herbivory on photosynthesis together with the
              experiments on the effects of elevated carbon dioxide on herbivory will provide
              new insights into how plant-herbivore interactions will alter ecosystem
              productivity in a future high-carbon dioxide world.  In addition to training
              doctoral research scientists, this project also will provide the opportunity
              for undergraduate students, including those of underrepresented groups, to
              participate in scientific research through a NSF-sponsored Undergraduate
              Mentoring in Environmental Biology grant administered by the University of
              Illinois. 

