Title       : Oxometal Complexes and Redox Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0236686

Award Number: 0236686
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig L. Hill chill@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The work of Dr. Craig Hill, Department of Chemistry, Emory University is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              of the Division of Chemistry. The project involves new inorganic complexes and
              systems that catalyze transformations using the most environment friendly and
              economically desirable oxidants (oxygen/air) and solvent (water). Specifically,
              the project will develop three major topics. First, multi-iron
              polyoxometallates (POMs) will be employed as very reactive catalysts for
              selective organic oxidations and the oxidative mineralization of carboxylic
              acids using oxygen in air at room temperature.   Secondly, catalytic oxidations
              by oxygen in water will be designed to utilize stable POM ensembles that
              consume acidic/basic side product produced during oxidations. Finally, the
              fundamental electron transfer reactions of the POM catalysts will be determined
              using stop-flow methods. 

 The project emphasizes utilization of
              environmentally benign oxidants such as air and oxygenated water to oxidize
              organic materials, including paper bleaching. The research will lead to great
              benefits to society as more environment friendly and selective catalytic
              processes are developed. The research activity will provide excellent training
              and educational experiences to graduate students and post-doctoral associates.
              
 

