Title       : Peptidases that Degrade Solid Spider Silk Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0236255

Award Number: 0236255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368323             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela J. Langer Langer@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randolph V. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1166,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Certain orb-weaving spiders are known to recycle their webs, some as often as
              every day. They accomplish this despite the fact that some web fibers, namely
              major and minor ampullate silk, are highly resistant to common proteases.
              Spider proteases that degrade these solid fibers are therefore expected to have
              novel properties. Using digestive fluid from the orb-weaving spider Nephila
              clavipes, major ampullate silk-degrading or "silkase" activity was identified.
              The objective of this research is to determine protein sequences that
              distinguish peptidase isoforms with and without major ampullate silk-degrading
              activity. By examining enzymatic and sequence data from several spider species,
              structural and functional features will be correlated. Enzymatic activities of
              recombinant and native peptidases will be compared using synthetic or soluble
              silk fibroins or native silk fibers. To test the hypothesis that certain
              peptidase sequences are key determinants for the presence of major ampullate
              silkase activity, altered recombinant peptidases will be analyzed.

Broader
              Impact: Characterization of a silkase with novel enzymatic features will
              advance our understanding of enzymes that degrade protease-resistant solid
              fibers and could lead to new biotechnological applications. Students involved
              in this research will benefit greatly from the collaboration between research
              groups interested in protein structure/function relationships from the
              perspectives of the silk fibers and fiber-degrading peptidases. The research
              will also provide a rich environment for hosting high school students from
              underrepresented groups in a summer Student Research Apprenticeship Program and
              undergraduates receiving NSF-EPSCOR summer research awards.

