Title       : Migration and Environmental Change: tenure insecurity in a Zambian frontier
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0236933

Award Number: 0236933
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa C. Cliggett cligget@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon D. Unruh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Migration in the developing world is an important force in environmental change.
              Migrants interact with other migrants and with local communities over access to
              resources - in particular the land resources needed for food security. Rights
              in land (land tenure) play a primary role in affecting how migrants interact
              with destination resources and communities, and the resulting environmental
              consequences. This research examines the links between deforestation and
              migration in Zambia, and focuses on the tenure arrangements that facilitate
              land access. With one of the highest deforestation rates in the world and
              significant migration underway, Zambia provides a representative case where
              migration in Southern province is tied to environmental degradation. The
              research will examine how land tenure systems in host communities may lead
              migrants to clear areas of forest much larger than needed for immediate farming
              needs. 
The researchers, an anthropologist and a geographer, will collaborate
              with Zambian colleagues to conduct ethnographic research, and integrate the
              data with satellite imagery (time series) analysis in order to measure
              deforestation rates, and will compare deforestation rates between migrant and
              non-migrant areas. During seven months of intensive fieldwork in Zambia, the
              researchers will investigate the land tenure rights allocated to migrants by
              local leaders, and the perception of this tenure process among migrants, in
              order to explain: 1) notions of claim among migrants and why they apparently
              attempt to gain tenure security through deforestation, and 2) the intersection
              of claims, land clearing, and concerns about children's future, given that land
              tenure systems (involving land allocation and inheritance) work differently for
              migrants in the destination area than they did in the area of origin.
              Understanding the land tenure aspects of the migration - deforestation linkage
              will provide important knowledge on how migration in the developing world
              changes the environment, and to the ongoing development of methodologies that
              mix remote sensing with 'on the ground' social science research. 
Broader
              impacts of the research include improving our understanding of the policy
              constraints and opportunities for managing migration in the developing world.
              Because all societies have rules governing property rights, local, national and
              international policies and treaties involving migration and development will
              need to attend to resource access arrangements that impact food and livelihood
              security.

