Title       : Evaluating the Effect of a Unique Maize Cysteine Proteinase on Caterpillar
               Midgut Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0236150

Award Number: 0236150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $471500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dawn S. Luthe dsluthe@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Ma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tibor Pechan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is a unique protein-degrading enzyme, a cysteine
              protease called Mir1-CP that rapidly accumulates in insect resistant corn lines
              in response to caterpillar attack.  The insect resistant corn lines were
              developed by conventional plant breeding from plant material that originated in
              Antigua. Mir1-CP is unique because the sequence of the enzyme's last 25 amino
              acids has no matches in the currently available databases. Mir1-CP appears to
              be mobilized within one hour of caterpillar feeding and accumulates at the
              wound site. When caterpillars feed on plant tissues containing Mir1-CP, their
              growth is reduced approximately 50% to 80%. This growth reduction is due to
              impaired nutrient utilization. 

To investigate the effect of Mir1-CP on
              caterpillars, the investigators examined the insect's first line of defense
              against potentially toxic components in food, the peritrophic matrix (PM). The
              PM is a membrane-like structure that consists of proteins and chitin. It
              surrounds the food bolus, protects the insect midgut from chemical and physical
              damage and plays an active role in digestion and nutrient absorption. Scanning
              electron microscopy (SEM) revealed that PMs of insects that feed on plant
              material containing Mir1-CP were severely damaged with numerous perforations,
              cracks, and holes.  Damage to the PM is likely to disrupt the digestive system
              and stunt caterpillar growth. Consequently, the smaller caterpillars have
              longer life-cycles and are more susceptible to parasites and predators in the
              environment.

The major goal of this research project is to determine how
              Mir1-CP damages the caterpillar midgut structure. Does it degrade PM proteins? 
              Does it attack specific PM proteins? Does it prevent PM formation by binding to
              chitin or other PM components? The investigators will use two different
              strategies for testing Mir1-CP's effect on the PM.  First, caterpillars will be
              fed transgenic plant material that expresses either normal Mir1-CP, Mir1-CP
              that has been mutated and has no enzyme activity, or Mir1-CP that is missing
              the last 25 amino acids. The appearance and permeability of the midgut and PM
              structure of caterpillars that eat these transgenic lines will be examined. 
              The results will reveal whether protease activity or the presence of the last
              25 amino acids is needed to damage the caterpillar midgut and PM.  Second, the
              investigators will express Mir1-CP and the mutated forms in a heterologous
              system that will permit purification of large amounts of each Mir1-CP form. 
              The purified proteins will be fed to caterpillars to see if they result in the
              same effects as those expressed in plants. In addition, PMs that have been
              dissected from caterpillars will be incubated with the three Mir1-CP forms to
              determine if they have a direct effect on PM structure, or degrade PM proteins.
               
 
Ultimately, this research will permit determination of whether Mir1-CP
              can be used as an environmentally friendly insect control agent. Insect
              herbivory is responsible for 15% of the world's crop losses each year. These
              losses are major economic and ecological problems that decrease the supply of
              food to a growing world population. US farmers have been controlling
              caterpillar pests by planting transgenic crops that express Bacillus
              thuringiensis (Bt) toxin. Currently, Bt-toxin is highly effective, but
              scientists predict that insects will eventually become resistant to the toxin.
              By understanding how Mir1-CP stunts caterpillar growth, scientists may be able
              to use Mir1-CP as an alternative to Bt-toxin in the future.

