Title       : RUI: Molecular Phylogenetics and Allopolyploidization in Rubus (Rosaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0236166

Award Number: 0236166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211592             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Alice   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WKU Research Foundation
	      106 Foundation Building, OSP
	      Bowling Green, KY  421013576    270/745-4652

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0236166
Alice
Systematic biology aims to understand relationships among
              species and infer their evolutionary histories followed by testing of
              hypotheses concerning observed patterns and causal processes.  Two important
              processes in plant speciation are hybridization and polyploidy (more than two
              copies of each chromosome per cell).  Both hybridization and polyploidy have
              been involved in the origin of many agriculturally important crops, making an
              improved understanding of these processes valuable to the public, scientific,
              and academic communities.  This research focuses on the plant genus Rubus, a
              member of the Rose family.  The genus is economically and ecologically
              important as fruit crops (raspberries, blackberries), ornamentals, food for
              wildlife and indigenous peoples, invasive weeds, and in early forest
              succession.  Rubus is considered one of the most challenging groups of
              flowering plants with regard to species identification and classification due
              to frequent hybridization, plasticity in external form, and the high incidence
              of polyploidy.  Dr. Alice's goals are to infer evolutionary relationships
              within Rubus, examine the origins of several polyploid groups, test hypotheses
              of hybridization, assess trends in morphological features that may be useful in
              classification, and develop an informative and user-friendly web site for
              Rubus.  DNA sequencing of five different chloroplast and nuclear regions is
              proposed followed by phylogenetic analysis and hypothesis testing.  Dr. Alice
              has studied the evolutionary history and classification of Rubus for the past
              several years and his laboratory routinely employs the techniques proposed. 
              Data obtained largely through the efforts of undergraduate student researchers
              demonstrated that his approach is feasible and importantly that undergraduate
              students can learn and apply these techniques.
The intellectual merit of the
              proposed activity includes the elucidation of evolutionary relationships in
              Rubus, from which changes to existing classifications will be proposed,
              examination of polyploid species and hybrids contributing insight to speciation
              processes, investigation of an infrequently used DNA region in phylogenetic
              study, and identification of morphological traits useful in classification. 
              The broader impacts resulting from the proposed project include active
              participation in all phases by three undergraduate students and one graduate
              student providing them direct insight into scientific research, training in
              highly marketable skills, and experience presenting their results at
              professional meetings.  Finally, a Rubus web site will be developed at Western
              Kentucky University for dissemination of information.

