Title       : Molecular Mechanism of EMF1-Mediated Floral Repression in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0236399

Award Number: 0236399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Z. Renee Sung zrsung@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1111,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0236399
Sung

The EMBRYONIC FLOWER (EMF) genes, EMF1 and EMF2, are required
              for vegetative development and involved in reproductive development.  Fourteen
              loss-of-function mutants were isolated and most were characterized in our
              laboratory.  The mutants flower upon germination and modulation of EMF
              activities generated fertile plants that flower early and plants that show
              altered inflorescence architecture.  Cloning the EMF genes revealed that EMF1
              encodes a putative transcriptional regulator and EMF2 a Polycomb Group (PcG)
              protein homolog. Gene expression studies suggest that EMF proteins exert global
              repression of the flower and seed program, thereby allowing vegetative
              development upon germination. The proposed research aims to investigate the
              molecular mechanism of EMF1-mediated floral repression. The long-term goal of
              the proposed research is to elucidate the epigenetic mechanism underlying plant
              development.
The objectives are to further characterize the function of EMF1
              and several proteins that interact with EMF1, and identify the target genes of
              EMF1. Immunological or tagged-protein detection will be employed to study
              possible posttranscriptional regulation of EMF1 and develop tools for EMF1
              protein detection and isolation. The regions of EMF1 responsible for
              protein-protein interaction with the EMF1-interacting proteins will be
              characterized.  An inducible system will be used to activate EMF1 in emf1
              mutants and identify early targets of EMF1. Finding a protein complex that
              inactivates the floral organ identity or other early target genes will provide
              insights into the mechanism of floral repression during vegetative development.
               Understanding of the molecular mechanism of EMF1-mediated floral repression
              would enable the design of crops that flower at specific time, thereby
              increasing the geographical range of their cultivation. A postdoctoral fellow
              and a graduate student will be involved in the proposed research.  While the
              postdoctoral fellow has the necessary skills to carry out most of the
              experiments proposed, he will also learn new concepts and techniques during the
              course of the proposed research.  The graduate student will be trained in a
              variety of molecular and immunological techniques.  Both will be involved in
              the design of the experiments and articulation of experimental findings through
              oral and written presentations.  Typically, undergraduate students of diverse
              backgrounds are involved in our research projects.  Underrepresented students
              have access to our research projects through the campus-wide Summer Research
              Opportunity Programs and Undergraduate Research Opportunity Programs. 


