Title       : Bacillus thuringiensis Crystal Toxin: Mechanisms of Resistance and Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0236169

Award Number: 0236169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rita A. Teutonico                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400632             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raffi V. Aroian raroian@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1116,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Crystal (Cry) proteins produced by the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) are
              the most important and widely used natural insecticides in the world today. 
              These proteins are non-toxic to humans but very effective against insect pests
              that devastate crops and carry human diseases.  As such, use of these protein
              toxins form a core element in the control of insect pests by: 1) organic
              farmers; 2) the World Health Organization in African mosquito/black fly
              abatement programs; and 3) transgenic cotton and corn plants that express
              them.

The main scientific concern in the widespread use of these proteins is
              the development of resistance by the insects, which would render these crystal
              (Cry) protein toxins ineffective.  To combat this threat, this project will
              study the mechanisms by which resistance to crystal proteins develop.  Cry
              proteins that kill nematodes (roundworms) are similar to those that kill
              insects.  Five genes have been identified that when mutated in the nematode C.
              elegans, render the nematode resistant to at least two Cry protein toxins.  The
              normal function of these genes is to permit the Cry toxins to kill the
              roundworm.  When any one of these is mutated, the Cry toxins cannot kill.  This
              project will study the physical mechanisms in the roundworm by which mutation
              of these genes leads to resistance.  Since at least one of these genes is found
              only in invertebrates and not in vertebrates, this project may also shed light
              on why nematodes and insects are normally killed by Cry toxins but vertebrates
              (including humans) are not.  This project will also study a different group of
              genes call the "HYP" genes, so named because mutation of these genes lead to a
              HYPersensitive response.  The function of these HYP genes is to normally
              provide some protection of the animal from Cry toxins so that when mutated, the
              animals succumb to the toxin more readily.  An understanding of how the
              nematodes normally protect themselves from the toxic effects of Cry proteins
              may help us devise more effective ways to kill nematode and insect pests.



