Title       : Microbial Genome Sequencing: Sequencing of the Genome of Myxococcus Xanthus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0236595

Award Number: 0236595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1150000            (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Nierman wnierman@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tamara Feldblyum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1629      BE: Non-Announcement Research
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Myxococcus xanthus, the most intensively studied myxobacterial species, is the
              preeminent bacterial model of multicellular development, cell differentiation,
              and gliding motility, and serves as a model for single-species biofilms.
              Myxobacteria possess a rich secondary metabolism that includes synthesis of
              over 150 extracellular molecules with antimicrobial and anti-cancer activities.
              Myxobacteria play an important role in maintaining the fertility of soil and
              constitute a taxonomically and physiologically unique group of organisms within
              the delta subdivision of the proteobacteria, none of which have been sequenced.
              Over 30 academic research groups focus on many aspects of the biology of this
              unusual organism. 

A low coverage sequence of M. xanthus has previously been
              accomplished by Cereon Genomics and is available to registered academic
              researchers and collaborators.  This resource, while useful for some purposes,
              is inadequate for comprehensive analysis of the function of the genome. The
              lack of a completed genome minimizes the usefulness of comparisons of M.
              xanthus to other completed genomes. The annotated sequence to be completed and 
              made publicly available through this project will provide the critical resource
              for going forward in the functional analysis of the M. xanthus genome.

The
              data from this project will have broad scientific impact, contributing to
              knowledge in such areas as genome evolution, genome enhancement for
              multicellular life, and bacterial chromosome size vs. stability.  Educational
              initiatives will bring Myxococcal genomics to high school teachers via an
              educational activity presented at a national teachers conference and a TIGR
              Genomics Course for Educators.

This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award
              funded through a collaborative program between the National Science Foundation
              and the Department of Agriculture.

