Title       : 4th International Symposium on Bilingualism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0236561

Award Number: 0236561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff MacSwan MacSwan@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The National Science Foundation supports the 4th International Symposium on
              Bilingualism. The symposium will be held at Arizona State University from April
              30 to May 3, 2003. The symposium is concerned with the scientific study of
              bilingualism, defined as the simultaneous use or representation of two or more
              languages by an individual or community. Topics representative of previous
              meetings of the International Symposium on Bilingualism include grammatical
              development in bilingual children; sociolinguistic and grammatical studies of
              codeswitching, or language mixture; bilingual speech processing; language
              disorders in bilinguals; sociolinguistic studies of bilingual communities and
              migration; child second language acquisition; language policy; language shift;
              language attrition/forgetting; and bilingualism in school settings. The meeting
              will provides a forum for linguists and other cognitive scientists to
              disseminate basic research on bilingualism, receive input from other
              researchers on current projects and findings, meet with potential collaborators
              to discuss projects of mutual interest, meet with editors and publishers,
              engage in discussion of ongoing theoretical and empirical problems, and promote
              the field of bilingualism as a specific subfield of linguistic research. 
              

Bilingualism is a topic of great social and scientific importance. A large
              proportion of U.S. citizens identify themselves as bilingual, and bilinguals
              are known to exhibit special characteristics of interest to cognitive
              scientists as well as to educators and clinicians. Yet relatively little
              cognitive research has been done on this population. The International
              Symposium on Bilingualism is an opportunity to promote the study of
              bilingualism in the U.S. and abroad, and to encourage cognitive science
              research in a potentially rich but under-investigated area.

