Title       : Incorporating Active Real-Time Objects and Control Into Semantic Webs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0236409

Award Number: 0236409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39949              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip Chen-Y Sheu sheu@ece.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As more real-world data are included in the Web, requirements to capture more
              meaning of the data have rapidly increased. Semantic Web has been proposed by
              W3C to be the next generation of web by representing the metadata using RDF
              (Resource Description Framework). Even though the metadata encoded in RDF have
              rich semantics and high potential for providing lots of intelligent features,
              there have not been enough efforts to utilize them in practical Web application
              areas.
A real-time Semantic Web is modeled as an active environment that
              consists of a set of real-time objects each consisting of a set of attributes,
              functions, and active rules. A real-time object can be changed spontaneously or
              triggered by demands (via messages) in real-time. The semantics of such a
              distributed, real-time object system can be described by a formal logical
              foundation called Active Real-Time Semantic Web (ARTSW) that is the ordinary
              first order language (that is time-invariant) plus a set of time-varying
              constructs. 
The ARTSW can be used to describe the constraints on top of a
              real-time Semantic Web, or it can be used as a specification language that
              defines the semantics of a dynamic environment. The declarative ness and
              inference capability of formal logic are coupled with real-time distributed
              objects in order to enable the users to encode easily the domain knowledge into
              rules. Our research is aimed at providing a software engineering framework that
              covers specification, execution, and management of an active real-time semantic
              web. Because several technical subjects (i.e., real-time objects, distributed
              systems, logic, and Web) are involved, this research will focus on the
              explorative investigation of the technical soundness of the proposed
              framework.


