Title       : CAREER: The Role of Dynamics in Enzyme Function by NMR, Chemical Synthesis, and
               Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0236966

Award Number: 0236966
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $538451             (Estimated)
Investigator: J P. Loria patrick.loria@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1164,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project addresses fundamental questions regarding the role of
              intramolecular protein dynamics in enzyme catalysis. Chemical synthesis of
              novel ligands and biophysical characterization of enzyme/ligand complexes will
              be combined with solution NMR spin-relaxation experiments to provide a richer
              understanding of the coordination between protein flexibility and protein
              function. These studies will be performed with the enzyme Ribonuclease A. NMR
              experiments will probe protein motion on distinct timescales relevant to those
              of biological function. Characterization of ps - ns motions will allow
              dissection of site-specific thermodynamic contributions involved in enzyme
              complex formation. Motions in the ms - ms regime are of similar timescale to
              chemical and physical processes essential for catalysis. Their characterization
              will provide atomic resolution of motions involved in a catalytically active
              enzyme. These experiments will provide the level of understanding of
              physico-chemical forces in enzyme function essential for the design of
              biocatalysts and optimization of protein/ligand interactions.  


To impact
              scientists and non-scientists alike, research and education must be integrated.
              Efforts to achieve this will focus on research mentoring, teaching, and the
              promotion of interaction among research groups.  Incorporated within these
              three activities will be training and teaching of students at the undergraduate
              and graduate levels and from geographically underrepresented regions in an
              effort to simultaneously advance discovery and learning. First, the principal
              component of the educational plan consists of teaching two courses,
              'Biochemical rates and mechanisms' and 'NMR spectroscopy.' These courses are
              targeted to beginning graduate students and advanced undergraduates. Both
              courses combine theory with experimental applications and rely on problem
              solving and student presentation to provide an active learning environment.
              Second, a major effort will be made as research mentor to graduate and
              undergraduate students. In addition to students from Yale, a student from rural
              West Virginia will be invited to perform research each summer. Finally, to
              promote interactions among students from diverse research groups, monthly
              seminars will be organized and students will be encouraged to attend and
              participate in discussions.

