Title       : Infrastructure Building to Develop a Center for Biological and Chemical Sensors
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0236753

Award Number: 0236753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret W. Curtis                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899765             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alvin P. Kennedy akennedy@morgan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yousef Hijji  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Santosh K. Mandal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morgan State University
	      1700 East Cold Spring Lane
	      Baltimore, MD  21251    443/885-3200

NSF Program : 1797      Doctoral HBCU Rsrch Capacity
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Morgan State University is requesting funds to develop the University's research
              capacity and to increase the number of minority students granted the PhD in its
              Bioenvironmental Sciences and Doctor of Engineering programs. The funds will be
              used to develop the research infrastructure necessary to create a Center for
              Biological and Chemical Sensors Research (CBCSR). The Center's mission will be
              to advance the fundamental scientific and technological knowledge needed to
              develop new biological and chemical sensors, in order to enhance research in
              the bioenvironmental sciences. The Center will be housed in the new science
              research annex when it is completed in Fall 2003. Faculty and staff of the
              Department of Chemistry in the School of Computer Mathematics and Natural
              Sciences will be responsible for coordination and administration of the
              Center's activities.

The Center will focus on the development of novel
              chemical and bio-analytical sensors to study biological and chemical processes
              as they relate to homeland security, environmental toxicity, improvement and
              enhancement of environmental monitoring and investigation of biological
              processes in living systems from tissue to sub-cellular levels. The Center will
              implement an integrated approach to sensor science and development that will
              include interdisciplinary research extending from molecular design, synthesis
              and characterization of fluorophores and luminophores to the development of
              microfluidic, sol-gel, and impedance based devices. A synergistic research
              program will be developed based on the following four areas of investigation:
              1) Fluorescence resonance energy transfer biological sensors based on new
              donor-acceptor pairs of fluorophores and luminophores; 2) Incorporation of
              luminophores and biologically active molecules in aerogels and microfluidic
              devices; 3) Application of the Riordan group technique to predict adhesion and
              molecular expression in RNA secondary structure as an aid in the design of
              biological and chemical sensors ; 4) Development of dual monitoring
              bio-analytical sensors based on impedance, fluorescence and near-IR
              spectroscopy.

The three components that will be addressed in this HBCU
              research capacity building proposal include administration, infrastructure and
              collaborative research. Funds for this project will be used to facilitate the
              following specific capacity building activities: upgrade an existing NMR to
              increase research productivity, upgrade an FT-NIR to perform cross-correlation
              measurements, purchase a Micro-Thermal Analyzer to characterize variations in
              sol-gel matrices and laser ablated polymer surfaces, faculty start-up funds,
              exploratory research on the feasibility of using Riordan matrices to predict
              RNA secondary structures, travel support for faculty and student to workshops
              and conferences, support for graduate and undergraduate research students and
              to hire a consultant, and administrative and technical staff. These activities
              will significantly enhance Morgan's research productivity and thereby increase
              the University's ability to effectively compete in a future NSF-CREST 

