Title       : Building research capacity and increasing doctoral successes for
               underrepresented minority students at Tennessee State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0236793

Award Number: 0236793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret W. Curtis                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $779918             (Estimated)
Investigator: Decatur Rogers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee State University
	      3500 John A. Merritt Blvd.
	      Nashville, TN  372091500    615/320-3131

NSF Program : 1797      Doctoral HBCU Rsrch Capacity
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The number of successful ventures to increase underrepresented minorities in
              STEM-related doctoral programs is low relative to the total number of such
              initiatives in the past. In 1992, for example, a top NSF official stated "In
              the past 20 years, the NSF has spent billions on increasing the minority S&E
              pipeline, but we have little to show for it."  Unfortunately, new data suggest
              that the situation may actually have worsened. 

Mindful of past
              lessons-learned, the dual goals of this proposal are to (1) develop and further
              enhance competitive research capacity and to (2) increase the production of
              underrepresented minority doctoral students at Tennessee State University
              (TSU), one of the nations 104 Historically Black Colleges and Universities
              (HBCUs). These HBCUs enroll 17% of African American undergraduates and award
              26% of the bachelors degrees to this group.

But most of the fifteen doctoral
              granting HBCUs need support to enhance research capacity to make them more
              competitive for funding from the National Science Foundation and other
              entities. For example, of these 15 HBCUs (three private, 12 public), one is
              ranked as research extensive (producing 50 or more PhDs per year) and five are
              ranked as research intensive including Tennessee State University. The doctoral
              programs at the twelve public HBCU are relatively new with average outputs of
              one PhD per year, of which 65% are awarded to African Americans. Most also lag
              in technology-based research facilities. None is ranked higher than a distant
              177 out of 615 institutions in research expenditures, 124 out of 1610
              institutions in research income, and 168 out of 1610 in graduate student
              enrollment. Within this scenario, the primary objectives are:

1. To enhance
              the competitive research capacity in interdisciplinary STEM areas at TSU, and
              to
exploit this new capability to strengthen the embryonic doctoral program
              under the TSU College
of Engineering. This objective is strongly leveraged
              through links to the TSU CREST program.
2. To significantly increase the
              number of input doctoral candidates and output PhDs among
underrepresented
              minority students in diverse STEM disciplines at TSU.
3. To integrally fuse
              education, research, and technology in all STEM classrooms at TSU

The
              broader impacts resulting from the proposed activity.
A major impact (outcome)
              from this proposal will be to help actualize the newly-approved TSU doctoral
              program in Computer Information and Systems Engineering (CISE), with its first
              four students (two African American) now enrolled under the TSU College of
              Engineering; this is a major institutional thrust. Another impact will be to
              enhance the quantity and quality of research at TSU with a focus on increased
              faculty productivity in collaborative, interdisciplinary areas, the fusion of
              academics, research and technology in the classroom, and extensive mentoring of
              students. At least 36 graduates students will be supported by this project
              toward doctoral tracks, which will directly engage 13 faculty researchers. A
              broader national impact is to help ameliorate the systemic shortage of minority
              scientists and engineers in this country, especially among African Americans
              that comprise 84% of the undergraduate student population at TSU.
Progress
              toward these outcomes will be assessed and evaluated during this project, and
              the results documented for wide dissemination and replication. 

This
              innovative project will be jointly managed through the College of Engineering,
              Technology and Computer Science (COETSC) and the TSU Center of Excellence 
              Information and Systems Engineering (TSU-COE-ISEM) with close coordination with
              the TSU Office of Sponsored Programs (OSR) to assure synchrony with long-term
              institutional goals. Notably, the TSU COE ISEM, a TSU-research arm that works
              collaboratively with TSU academic elements, manages the NSF CREST and NASAs
              Automated Space Science programs, generates $4.3M in annual research, produces
              over 40 refereed publications per year, supports an intensive mentorship
              program for undergraduate and graduate students in a wide range of STEM
              disciplines, and will leverage the project support for students on doctoral
              tracks. These resources provide a baseline to increase capacity in research and
              academics, and to significantly increase the participation of underrepresented
              minorities in STEM areas.

