Title       : Callose Synthases: What do they do in the Arabidopsis root?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0236173

Award Number: 0236173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217711             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Cleland cleland@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keiko Torii  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Callose, a b-1,3-glucan, is an important polysaccharide in higher plants.  it is
              produced in response to wounding, and is part of the plant's defenses against
              pathogens.  But callose is also a constituent of intact plants, where its role
              is far from clear.  It may be essential for the formation of cross walls during
              plant cell division, and it may be required for pollen tube growth.  But beyond
              this, little is known.  It is known that callose can cause the closure of
              plasmodesmata, the protoplasmic bridges that interconnect plant cells.  This
              will isolate cells from each other.  It is known that there are groups of cells
              in plants that are isolated from other groups of cells; we call such a group of
              cells a "symplasmic domain".  We have proposed that a major role of callose is
              to generate and maintain these symplasmic domains.  Synthesis of callose is
              mediated by a large multisubunit complex, of which callose synthase (CalS) is
              the catalytic subunit.  The "model" plant Arabidopsis thaliana contains 17
              putative CalS genes.  We have shown that 8 of these are expressed in intact
              Arabidopsis roots.  The goal of this research is to determine the role of each
              of these CalS genes, and to determine whether one or more of these CalS
              proteins is involved in the production of callose that closes plasmodesmata. 
              We will use two approaches to determine this.  First, we are preparing a series
              of single-amino acid substitution mutants in each of these genes, using the
              TILLING procedure.  These should be weak mutants that will affect the phenotype
              of the plants without being lethal.  We have T-DNA insertion mutants for 5 of
              these genes, and as expected, some of these strong mutants are lethal.  The
              ones that are not lethal will be used, along with the TILLING mutants, to study
              the role of each of these genes in the root.  The second approach will be to
              generate promoter::Green Fluorescent Protein fusions for each of the 8 CalS
              genes, and then introduced them into Arabidopsis plants.  This will allow us to
              determine in which cells each of these genes is expressed, and to study the
              conditions that activate each gene.  Together, these studies should show us
              where and when each of the callose synthase genes is active, and should
              demonstrate the effects on the root when any particular callose synthase gene
              is reduced in activity.  It should provide a starting place for future work on
              the role of callose in all parts of Arabidopsis, and in other plant species.
