Title       : Isopycnal Intrusions in Doubly Diffusive Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0236304

Award Number: 0236304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $496000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin E. Stern stern@ocean.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0236304 Stern

Two dimensional doubly diffusive intrusions will be
              investigated analytically and numerically in a frontal model. For the case of
              finger favorable vertical temperature and salinity gradients (salinity
              increasing upward) the small scale fluxes will be parameterized by previously
              obtained (numerical) calibrations. Application to the finite lateral width
              model will give a minimum critical value of the lateral salinity variation for
              the onset of a two-dimensional intrusive instability. For supercritical lateral
              salinity variation the eigenfunctions will initialize a numerical integration
              which will give the modification of the mean lateral gradients and the
              condition for isopycnal overturns. The case of a stable salt gradient heated
              from below will also be examined in a laterally bounded frontal model, and the
              vertical scale of the intrusive instability will be related to the smallest
              thermocline steps observed in the Weddell Sea. The upward heat flux in these
              steps may help to maintain the large gaps (polynyas) observed in the Antarctic
              ice which could affect the atmospheric climate.

This project will contribute
              to our understanding of the horizontal mixing of water masses by using a very
              elaborate and precise salt finger parameterization to model the intrusions
              occurring on a density-compensated thermohaline front and answer questions such
              as preferred intrusion scales and magnitudes. This research will be made
              available to the climate modeling community with presentations and publications
              so that the results can be incorporated into the general ocean circulation
              models. In addition, the post doc and Ph.D. student will gain invaluable
              experience in using state-of-the art scientific computational equipment and
              techniques to solve fluid dynamical problems of significant practical interest.
              The PI will also participate in the Summer Program in Geophysical Fluid
              Dynamics (GFD) at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution..


