Title       : CAREER: Polymeric Optical Band Gap Composites - A Study of Multifunctional
               Photonic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0236692

Award Number: 0236692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $568613             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Foulger foulger@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project aims to expand the fundamental scope of crystalline
              colloidal array de-rived photonic band gap materials, and extend photonic
              crystal research into functional polymeric composites. The project takes an
              interdisciplinary experimental approach including polymer synthesis, materials
              science, polymer physics, and applied fabrication. In addition, theoretical
              calculations are coupled with experimental activities to guide material
              modifications and relate their effects on observed optical properties of PBG
              composites. Five complementary objectives are being pursued in parallel: (1)
              development of materials and methods for the stabilization of self-assembled
              colloidal arrays and minimization of lattice imperfections; (2) development of
              materials and methods for the enhancement of the optical performance of PBG
              composites, coupled with added photonic functionalities; (4) development of PBG
              composites which exhibit thermo- and electromechanically actuated band stop
              tuning; and (5) development of PBG com-posites which exhibit intrinsic
              array-based chemical sensing characteristics. The overall research goal is to
              enable interdependent control of the primary structure of PBG composites and
              observed optical and mechanical properties. Resulting technological
              implications will be investigated to highlight multifunctional characteristics
              of these materials. 
%%% 
The project addresses fundamental materials science
              research issues having technological relevance. An important feature of the
              project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research
              and education. The research objectives are being approached by integrating
              education into the research process through student involvement at various
              levels: (1) development of graduate-level courses focused on the fundamentals
              of polymer science; (2) active mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students
              through direct participation of senior personnel in labora-tory research; and
              (3) the development of a summer research exposure program for high school
              students. The development of graduate-level courses focusing on the atomistic
              simulation of polymers and polymer physics will foster the creation of a
              College-wide interdisciplinary polymer science curriculum. To that end, these
              courses will be offered in both the School of Materials Science & Engineering
              and the Center for Advanced Engineering Fibers and Films (CAEFF), an NSF
              Engineering Research Center. The addition of these courses to the polymer
              science curriculum will assist students in developing a firm foundation in
              polymer science and, specifically, assist those graduate students involved in
              the proposed research to successfully carry out the research objectives. To
              assist with regional educational opportunities in South Carolina, a summer
              research exposure program has been developed, labeled the School-to-University
              Research Ex-posure (SURE). This program integrates lectures on material science
              to junior and senior high school level students with invitations to perform
              research at Clemson University for one month in the summer on PBG composites.
              An important goal of the SURE program is to identify those students in a wide
              socioeconomic spectrum that may be technically inclined, with a specific focus
              on minorities and adolescents from rural areas, and encourage them to pursue a
              technical field of study.
*** 

