Title       : Development of Reciprocal Attachments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1996   
File        : a9320364

Award Number: 9320364
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cindy Hazan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320364  HAZAN                                ABSTRACT    During infancy and
              childhood, parents typically serve as an  individual's primary source of
              emotional support and security. In  adulthood, a peer--usually, the
              relationship partner--becomes the  primary source of security and support.
              Thus, in the normal  course of development, these basic social needs are
              transferred  from parents to partners. There has been much research on the 
              parent-child bond and, in recent years, an increasing amount of  research on
              adult-adult bonds. However, little is know about the  processes by which
              emotional attachments are transferred, nor  about how emotional bonds are
              formed between adults. It is a well  documented fact that relationship
              experiences in one's family of  origin influence the quality and course of
              subsequent  relationships. Previous research has established that problematic 
              parent-child relationships put individuals at increased risk for  a host of
              negative outcomes, including diminished productivity in  the work place, drug
              and alcohol abuse, and impaired  psychological and physical health.
              Understanding the  developmental transition whereby individuals establish
              emotional  attachments outside their families of origin has obvious 
              theoretical as well as practical importance. This project will  investigate the
              transition by studying an ethnically and  socioeconomically diverse
              cross-section of children, adolescents,  and adults for a period of 4 years.
              Previous work by the  investigator forms the basis of a model of this
              transition which  will be tested in this research. If this model proves to be 
              correct, the thoughts, feeling, and behaviors that eventually  lead to well- or
              poorly-functioning adult relationships may be  evident in early childhood. The
              results of the project promise to  contribute to our understanding of the
              developmental course,  underlying processes and mechanisms, and the timing of a
              critical  milestone in human life.
