Title       : Collaborative Research: The Paquime Regional System, Chihuahua, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1994   
File        : a9320007

Award Number: 9320007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62816              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Whalen michael-whalen@utulsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320007  Whalen    In a collaborative project, Drs. Paul Minnis and Michael
              Whalen  will conduct archaeological research in the Casas Grande region  of
              northern Mexico. The ruins of the great adobe pueblo of  Paquime have
              consistently impressed visitors from Spanish  explorers to modern
              archaeologists. However research in the  region has been sporadic and the role
              which this site once played  and the extent of its influence are unclear. Drs.
              Minnis and  Whalen plan to conduct a systematic archaeological survey of the 
              surrounding area in order to situate Paquime within a broader  regional
              context. They will define "inner" and "outer" zones at  varying distances from
              the site and locate archaeological  occurrences within each. The size of
              material scatters and  associated structures and agricultural features will be
              noted.  "Exotic" or imported materials as well as selected pottery  samples
              will be collected and analyzed. The goal of the work is  to collect data on
              chronological and spatial variability in the  size, type and distribution of
              such sites, of productive and  ritual facilities and of artifacts. On this
              basis it will be  possible to trace the degree of control out from the center
              of  Paquime and to determine how this changed over time.    For many years
              archaeologists have studied prehistoric cultures  of the U.S. Southwest and
              have gained considerable insight into  the development of these societies
              which, at their height,  constructed pueblos which housed hundreds of
              individuals in a  complex stratified societies. However neither the origin nor
              the  geographic extent of these systems are well understood. While the  Rio
              Grande river today constitutes a international boundary, it  did not serve a
              significant function in the past. It is well  known that the Southwestern
              cultures extended South into Mexico  but comparatively little work has been
              done in this area. This  gap should be filled because further to the South
              groups such as  the Aztecs and their predecessors were present and th e degree
              of  stimulus they provided to the development of complex societies  further
              North is unknown.    This research is important because it will fill an
              important  archaeological gap in the New World. It will shed light on the 
              development of prehistoric cultures in the United States and  provide data of
              interest to many archaeologists.  ***
