Title       : The Cerro de Trincheras Excavation Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1996   
File        : a9320224

Award Number: 9320224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229102             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall H. McGuire rmcguire@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              McGuire    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Randall McGuire and 
              his colleagues will continue archaeological excavation at the  site of Cerro de
              Trincheras. Located on a large isolated volcanic  hill in northwest Sonora,
              Mexico, the site covers over a hectare  and includes more than 870 terraces on
              the slopes of the hill.  Some observable walls run for a hundred meters or more
              and  approach heights of up to 3 meters. Previous work at the site  indicates
              an occupation which extends from approximately 800-1450  AD. Excavation to date
              shows that terraces were used for  cultivation. Domestic structures were also
              constructed on these  surfaces. Building on a completed site map, Dr., McGuire
              and his  team will excavate approximately 3-5% of the surface area. The 
              excavation sample will be double-stratified by feature types and  by loci
              defined in the mapping project. This procedure will allow  for the estimation
              of parameters such as the number of houses per  residential terrace and permit
              inferences about population and  labor investment. The broadly based sample
              will provide  chronometric dates for all portions of the site and allow 
              reconstruction of synchronic activity structure across the site.  The materials
              to be recovered - these include among other  categories, ceramics, lithics,
              shell, bone and pollen - will be  analyzed by a range of specialists.     Cerro
              de Trincheras is a major and little known archaeological  site which lies just
              South of the US border. The project will  test a number of propositions about
              its prehistoric socio-  political organization. At a lower level the research
              will  address issues such as the timing of growth, the size and  permanence of
              the human population, the nature of activities at  the site and the role of the
              site in a larger regional and inter-  regional economic system.  At a higher
              level the work will  address the nature of regional interaction in
              technologically  simple prehistoric systems. It has been argued that major 
              arhaeological cultu res in the US Southwest owe their existence to  ties with
              central Mexico and that they can best be interpreted as  parts of a much larger
              interaction network. An equally plausible  interpretation sees the two as only
              weakly linked, essentially  independent phenomena. Cerro de Trincheras because
              of its  location between the two provides a means to examine these 
              alternatives.
