Title       : Global Changes in Trade: Data Collection and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9320817

Award Number: 9320817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Feenstra   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry P. Bowen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Lipsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1041,9145,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9320817  Feenstra  The rapid rise in global trade during the past decades has
              fueled  world growth, and led to a transformation of developing and  developed
              economies alike.  Understanding the sources of  international trade, and the
              impact of policy on trade, continues  to be an important topic of academic and
              government inquiry.   Essential to this study are large data sets on trade
              flows and  other aspects of trade that span countries, industries and time, 
              and not only span them but are comparable across countries,  industries, and
              time.  Unfortunately, data of this type are not  readily available to
              researchers.  Each country collects trade  figures for its own purposes,
              particularly tariff collection and  the administration of other trade
              regulations.  Each country's  system is different, and has changed over time. 
              Even the  collection of many countries' data by the UN according to  successive
              versions of the Standard International trade  Classification (SITC) does not
              produce data that are consistent  over time or that fit the industry
              classifications of the United  States or the United Nations.  The result is
              that each trade  study involves heavy expenses, and investments of time and
              effort  to manipulate these extremely large data sets and ;put them in 
              analytically useful forms.  These expenditures of time and effort  are
              overlapping and duplicative, but despite the expenses  involved for researchers
              and agencies that finance research,  there is little carryover or sharing of
              information, and much  effort is wasted.  The purpose of this project is to
              construct,  assemble and concord a number of large data sets on international 
              trade and on country commodity and industry characteristics that  determine
              trade flows, and make them widely available.    The project will provide
              well-annotated and convenient trade sets  in machine readable form on U.S.
              imports and exports, world  trade, world prices, country resource supplies, and
              industry  inputs.  The data on country resource supplies is  especially 
              exciting.  It could be come a key data source for the study of  international
              trade patterns and global environmental change.   These data have also been
              used to study the determinants of  growth in capitalist versus socialist
              economies.  The existing  data set contains data on trade flows and such
              resource  characteristics as land differentiated both by use (arable,  pasture)
              and by climatic area for 34 countries in three year  intervals from 1958 to
              1975.  The data exist in published form to  permit the number of countries int
              his database to be expanded  from 34 to over 90 with annual coverage to the
              present.
