Title       : A Pilot Study for an Issue-Oriented Database for Ethics, Technology and the
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9320258

Award Number: 9320258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn P. George environwest@uidado.edu                  kpgeorge@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas Lind  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9139,9278,GLCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9320258  George  This is a pilot study to develop an on-line issue oriented 
              bibliographic database on ethics, technology and the environment.   The pilot
              phase will allow the investigators to (1) test the  hypothetical database form
              on at least three software products and  test the utility of formal options by
              discussing them with  potential users; (2) interview potential users (news
              reporters,  scholars, scientists, and secondary and university educators) to 
              determine what questions they will want answered and to establish  criteria for
              inclusion of material in database; (3) identify issue  areas and broaden
              database coverage to give capacity for including  all or almost all Northwest
              environmental issues; and (4) identify,  for software tests, a small number of
              summary review publications  on particular environmental issues from many
              different disciplines;  begin development of thesaurus and index of ordinary
              language and  technical terms from these. The goal is to develop a user
              friendly  database for people who want to make sound social judgments about 
              environmental issues in the Northwest.  The database should be  useful to
              humanities teachers and scholars, students and teachers  and the media, by
              giving them access to not only what other  commentators are saying but also to
              reviews and other summaries  about scientific aspects of these issues.  It will
              be useful to  scientists as well as others making social comment on science by 
              giving them better access to ethical perspectives and ethical  scholarship.  As
              information comes increasingly over computerized  networks, the development of
              user-friendly sources and resources  must have high priority.  This pilot
              provides a test of ways to  develop these sources, as well as a test of a
              unique resources for  U.S. citizens and scholars interested in important issues
              of  science and environmental policy.  ***
