Title       : Effects of Surface Structure on Ordering in III/V Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9320541

Award Number: 9320541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293130             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald B. Stringfellow stringfellow@coe.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                  9320541 
              Stringfellow    The proposed research addresses fundamental surface processes 
              related to atomic scale ordering in III-V semiconductor alloys  during
              epitaxial growth.  This ordering phenomenon has only  recently been discovered,
              and is of great basic interest since  ordering is thought to be intimately
              connected with the surface  processes occurring during growth, and because
              ordering changes  fundamental materials properties such as the band gap of the 
              disordered alloy.  Recent work has indicated that surface  reconstruction and
              the motion of steps on the surface control the  ordering process.
              Unfortunately, many of the observations leading  to the ordering models are
              indirect.  The proposed research  attempts to directly relate surface features
              such as reconstruction  and steps to ordering, and to simultaneously monitor
              optical and  electrical properties of the resulting material.  %%%  At present,
              detailed understanding of the surface structure  during vapor phase epitaxial
              crystal growth is generally poor. The  proposed research will significantly
              benefit our basic  understanding, control, and general ability to improve
              epitaxial  growth processes.   The research also has significant technological 
              relevance; results from this research are expected to be useful  in a variety
              of ways in developing and bringing advanced  electronic and photonic device
              concepts to fruition.  It will  likely be useful for achieving photon and
              carrier confinement,  and for the intentional reduction of the energy band gap
              for  infrared photonic devices. Ordering is also expected to lead to 
              enhancement of free carrier mobilities by eliminating alloy  scattering.  The
              research is expected to have a positive impact  on the general areas of
              telecommunications, information  processing; and high speed computing.  ***
