Title       : Dissertation Resesearch: Technical Diversity and Technological Advice in the
               American Semiconductor Industry,1952-1965
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9320048

Award Number: 9320048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6281               (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Hounshell hounshel@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320048  Hounshell  Under the direction of Professor David Hounshell, Daniel
              Holbrook is investigating the sources and dynamics of technological knowledge
              in the semiconductor industry and its contribution to the overall development
              of semiconductor technology.  He hypothesizes that diversity in approaches to
              technological innovation was at the heart of the rapid and numerous advances in
              semiconductor technology during the early years of the industry.  Technological
              opportunities were many, and literally hundreds of firms pursued an array of
              research and development projects.  Although many of the projects were
              technological and economic failures, the knowledge produced contributed to the
              overall advance of the technology.     Evolutionary theories of technological
              development include variation and selection models;  most evolutionary
              theorists, however, concentrate on the selection portion.  Mr. Holbrook is
              exploring inputs to variation.  Diversity in expertise and the stock of
              technological knowledge possessed by firms shapes their research and
              development activities.  In the semiconductor industry, this diversity in
              expertise and technological knowledge conditioned the rate and direction of
              technological innovation.  Diverse innovative activities were often
              complementary or synergistic for the development of the entire industry.   
              After surveying technological developments across the industry, Mr. Holbrook is
              focusing on four technological areas related to the development of integrated
              circuits.  Then he will explore the diverse sets of technological knowledge
              possessed by selected firms, how knowledge governed the firms' choices of R&D
              projects, and the consequences of those choices for further technological
              development.   This study promises to illuminate the relationship between
              technological knowledge and innovation as well as issues concerning the
              dynamics and growth of technological knowledge.  It is also exploring the
              sources and importance of diversity in the evolution of technology.   ***
