Title       : History of the Facsimile Machine, 1843-1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1994     
File        : a9320001

Award Number: 9320001
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71562              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan C. Coopersmith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320001  Coopersmith  From overthrowing governments to ordering food and
              following  football, the fax machine provides easy, instant written 
              communication worldwide without the alienation of the computer.   Although most
              people assume that faxing is a spontaneous spinoff of  the electronic and
              computer revolutions of the 1980's, in reality,  fax technology has existed for
              150 years.  Major companies in the  US, Britain, and France had the opportunity
              to promote fax  technology.  Yet the social needs in Japan, which has an
              "alphabet"  that is not easily accommodated to the keyboard, led to its 
              commercial success in the past twenty years.  Dr. Coopersmith is  examining why
              it took so long for people to develop and utilize a  machine that has
              revolutionized the way we communicate.      The fax machine appears to be a
              free-standing device, but it is  intricately embedded in a system of telephone
              and computer  networks, standards, business and social mores, and legal and 
              economic structures.  Studying the fax machine provides a gateway  into
              understanding the construction and evolution of this system of  communications.
               Dr. Coopersmith is using a comparative  international approach to capture the
              evolution of fax technology.   His main themes are innovation and diffusion,
              failure and the  development of niche markets, the role of large organizations
              in  shaping technical evolution and personal choice, and changes in 
              communication.  The recent widespread use of fax machines resulted  from a
              convergence of technical, economic and social factors.  To  understand this
              convergence and the failure of prior efforts,  comparisons among the United
              States, Great Britain and Japan will  illuminate how different social and
              economic systems shaped the  debates and development of fax technology.  By
              analyzing how faxing  has changed the way people communicate and work, this
              research will  deepen our understanding of the evolving shape of 
              telecommunications on the "information revolution."  For decades  predi ctions
              about the uses and importance of fax machines outpaced  the reality, but when
              widespread acceptance came in the mid-1980's,  the plethora of applications and
              further innovation surprised  everyone, including proponents of the "electronic
              office of the  future."    Dr. Coopersmith's study is not a narrow history of a
              machine, but  an exploration of how technologies, economics, politics, and 
              societal values shaped the evolution of the fax machine and how fax  technology
              influenced societies in which it is embedded.  This  research will contribute
              to the growing literature on innovation  and further the study of the
              information revolution.  ***
