Title       : Cellular and Molecular Characterization of Angiotensin Receptor Subtypes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1997        
File        : a9320158

Award Number: 9320158
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Weyhenmeyer weyhen@staff.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9320158  Weyhenmeyer    Angiotensin is a small protein hormone that is important
              in  regulating cardiovascular, renal, endocrine, and nervous system 
              activities.  Although angiotensin is principally known for its role  in the
              regulation of blood pressure and thirst, there is now  evidence indicating that
              this protein is involved in variety of  central nervous system processes,
              including cell to cell  transmission, learning and memory, and cell growth and
              development.   The recent identification of multiple types of angiotensin
              binding  proteins or receptors have led to the suggestion that functional 
              specificity may reside at the level of individual receptor  subtypes.  Dr.
              Weyhenmeyer will identify the cellular and molecular  features of individual
              angiotensin receptor subtypes to determine  which of these receptors are
              specifically involved in the growth  and development of nerve cells.  to
              accomplish this, he will grow  cells in culture that express different
              angiotensin receptor  subtypes and expose them to a battery of growth factors. 
              Each of  growth factors is likely to cause a neuronal response.  Dr. 
              Weyhenmeyer will determine how the different growth factors  interact with the
              different receptor subtypes to induce distinct  neuronal responses such as
              proliferation, survival, differentiation  and neurite extension.  Understanding
              how individual angiotensin  receptor subtypes mediate their activity at the
              level of the cell  should not only provide important insights into their role
              in  controlling important physiological behaviors such as blood  pressure and
              thirst but may also open new perspectives in the  complex field of brain
              development, and perhaps, cell regeneration.  ***
