Title       : Rule-Based System for Prediction and Detection of Northern Hemisphere Climate
               Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1994     
File        : a9320455

Award Number: 9320455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213349             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Martin martin@cs.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sergei N. Rodionov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1303,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9320455  Martin, James H.  Rodionov, Sergei N.  University of
              Colorado  Title:    Rule-Based System for Prediction and Detection of          
               Northern Hemisphere Climate Change    Information regarding the climate system
              is often imprecise,  incomplete, vague, or uncertain.  A significant part of
              this  information exists as empirical facts and rules, expressed in 
              qualitative form.  The objective of this study is to develop a  system that can
              manipulate qualitative information is such a way as  to provide understanding
              about observed climate changes.    The appropriate method to reach this
              objective is based on concepts  and techniques of expert systems and artificial
              intelligence.  The  information about parameters of the climate system will be 
              presented both in quantitative and qualitative forms.   Relationships between
              climatic variables will be expressed as  production rules written in IF-THEN
              format.  Each rule will contain  a certainty factor that represents a numerical
              measure of the  confidence one has in the validity of a rule.  Two methods will
              be  used to combine certainty factors.  The first method is based on  the
              Dempster-Sharper theory, and the second one on the Bayesian  scheme.    The
              system will be able to evaluate the future state of various  climatic variables
              (such as temperature, precipitation, atmospheric  pressure, etc.)  and of
              macroclimatic features (such as centers of  action, jet streams, upper
              atmospheric troughs and ridges, etc.).   It will also explain why the
              conclusion was reached and how certain  it is.  This system may also be
              considered as a decision support  system valuable for recording ideas and
              retrieving necessary  information that will facilitate discussions about
              observed and  anticipated climate changes.  During the first year, the
              prototype  will be developed which will focus on the Northern Atlantic.  
              During the second year the system will be expanded to the entire  Northern
              Hemisphere.  The system will be useful both for  climatolog ists and
              decisionmakers.  It will find different  applications in fisheries,
              agriculture, navigation, recreation and  other climate-related industries.
