Title       : Collaborative Research on Snow Cover and Near-Surface Climate Interations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1994   
File        : a9320786

Award Number: 9320786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102273             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Robinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1307,5219,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9320786  ROBINSON       Physical geographers, climatologists, and other
              scientists  recently have come to understand the critical and highly variable 
              role that snow cover plays in the global climate system.  Recent  research has
              gathered data over the last century from satellite  images and ground station
              records.  This research also has  advanced analyses of relationships between
              the extent of snow  cover and surface air temperatures.  This collaborative
              research  project will continue this line of inquiry by expanding the study  of
              snow kinematics to include data on snow depths and by  extending analyses to
              consider associations among snow cover and  depth and other near-surface
              atmospheric conditions.  Data will  continue to be acquired from satellite and
              surface-based sources  in order to better explore spatial and temporal patterns
              of the  extent and depth of terrestrial snow cover throughout the  Northern
              Hemisphere.  The analyses also will identify and  diagnose sensitivities of
              near-surface atmospheric variables to  variations in snow cover across a range
              of spatial and temporal  scales.  The investigators also will test the
              capabilities of  different general-circulation climate models to simulate
              observed  patterns of snow cover and its relationships with other  variables.  
                  This research will extend a productive line of inquiry on an  important
              topic.  The data-collection activities will expand a  database of Northern
              Hemisphere snow cover over the last century,  further improving a resource that
              already has been used by other  researchers.  These activities are complemented
              by analyses of  relationships between snow cover and a range of atmospheric 
              variables.  More complete understandings of these relationships  should advance
              general knowledge and help refine meteorological  forecasting techniques.  The
              evaluation of general-circulation  models should also prove useful in assessing
              the possible  consequences of continued increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide
               and other forms  of global environmental change.  ***
