Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Interactive Modeling and Visualization of Complex
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1994     
File        : a9320390

Award Number: 9320390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tse-yun Feng                            
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109503             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony DeRose   (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Salesin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9320390  DeRose     This award is for the purchase of a state-of-the-art
              high-performance graphics workstation which will be dedicated to support
              research in computer and information science and engineering.  The equipment
              will be used for the following research projects in interactive modeling and
              visualization: (1) Geometric design optimization, (2) Multiresolution geometry,
              (3) Controlled-precision photorealistic image synthesis, (4) Computer-generated
              illustration, and (5) The see-through interface.       These projects are
              motivated by a common theme: to develop tools for exploring extremely complex
              environments and datasets such as those encountered in engineering design,
              medical imaging, and physical simulation.     The projects couple two powerful
              techniques: multiresolution analysis and interactivity.  Multiresolution
              analysis provides a mathematical framework for representing varying levels of
              detail in different regions of the data.  Interactivity allows a user to
              dynamically choose the regions of the data where a detailed representation is
              required.  Together, these techniques allow substantial performance gains,
              since in most applications high fidelity is required over only a small portion
              of the overall dataset.     Even with these algorithmic performance gains, the
              interactive graphical systems will still require fast CPUs, tightly coupled
              with high-performance graphics hardware, in order to manipulate the
              multiresolution representations, as well as to update the visual display in
              real time.  It is expected that such hardware will be relatively inexpensive
              and commonplace in the next five to ten years.   However, since there is a
              well-recognized qualitative difference between real-time interactivity and
              batch-mode simulation, attempting to simulate the interactive methods of the
              near future on less-powerful hardware is essentially futile.  It is, therefore,
              essential to acquire a high-performance graphics workstation.  ***             
              TERMINALEXE           @ j E  B  TERMINALHLP           @ j       9320390  DeRose
                  This award is for the purchase of a state-of-the-art high-performance
              graphics workstation which will be ded    4   >                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            Z   \   _   a   /   4                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 $         $ 
                     $         $              G                                   4          
                            >         4          Times    Symbol  " Helvetica    Chicago   
              Times New Roman  & Arial  5 Courier New  R ZapfDingbats    Palatino    Greek   
              GenMath    MathMeteor    MT Extra                                 "            
                    9  e9  e                        :    DeRose/Washington    Mark Purvis
              Mark Purvis                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
