Title       : Synthetic and Mechanistic Studies of Organometallic Reagents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9320696

Award Number: 9320696
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans J. Reich reich@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320696  Reich            The focus of this research is to gain a mechanistic  
              understanding of a number of important reactions and processes   in
              organolithium chemistry. Because the chemical properties of   organolithium
              reagents, perhaps more than any other class of   organometallic compound, are
              dominated by inter- and   intramolecular interactions with solvents and pendant
              groups,   the spectroscopic and reactivity studies of solvation,   chelation
              and stereochemistry together with product,   selectivity and rate studies will
              give a better understanding   of these phenomena. Since the experiments will be
              carried out   under the conditions and in solvents in which they are used by  
              synthetic chemists, the studies will allow better   predictability of the
              chemical reactions of organolithium   reagents and the expansion of the
              applications of them.   Specific projects include coordinating cosolvents
              (principally   HMPA) and the role of ion pair structure on reactivity,  
              chelation effects, allenyl/propargyllithium reagents,   preparation and
              mechanism of epimerization of stereochemically   defined organolithium
              reagents, and the lithium metalloid   exchange reaction.  %%%  With this award
              the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting the   research of Dr. Hans J. Reich
              of the Department of Chemistry at   the University of Wisconsin, Madison.
              Professor Reich will   focus his work on gaining a mechanistic understanding of
              a   number of important reactions and processes in organolithium   chemistry.
              Since many of these reagents play a central role in   organic synthesis,
              especially for the very important   carbon-carbon bond forming reactions, these
              studies will allow   better predictability of the chemical reactions of  
              organolithium reagents and an expansion of their applications.  ***
