Title       : SGER: Quarry Database Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1997     
File        : a9320133

Award Number: 9320133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey Fricker   (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. McIntosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony Fiorillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Butte College
	      Route 1 Box 183 A
	      Oroville, CA  959659801    916/895-2484

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9237,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9320133  ` `     Fricker          This project, a partnership between
              traditional paleontology and pioneering technology in photogrammetry, aerial
              and terrestrial mapping and surveying, image digitization and databasing,
              promises to revolutionize the science of paleontology.  This project will map,
              photograph and digitize the world famous fossil dinosaur quarry at Dinosaur
              Nation Monument, as well as the quarry maps of the original rock face that no
              longer exists.  The quarry rock face of what is now Dinosaur National Monument,
              near Vernal, Utah, was discovered by paleontologists in 1909.  Subsequent
              excavation yielded over 7 million pounds of dinosaur fossils, including the
              finest preserved skeletons and skulls of over 20 species of Jurassic dinosaurs,
              now distributed in over 30 museums around the world.  Only a portion of the
              original fossiliferous wall remains at the DNM visitor center, bearing about
              1600 dinosaur bones  mostly articulated skulls and skeletons    in relief.  A
              record of the entire original wall, with all of the dinosaurian elements in
              their original position, is preserved in a series of aged, disintegrating, hand
              drawn quarry maps at DNM and other museums.  The overall goal of this project
              is to produce a digitized map of the entire quarry face, past and present, with
              all of the dinosaur elements in original position, linked to an interactive
              database of those elements.  Investigators will attempt to combine emerging
              technologies in surveying, photogrammetry, computer aided mapping and advanced
              database design to map the entire face of the remaining quarry, photograph and
              calibrate the map grid to millimeter accuracy, scan the images into a digital
              record, r ecalibrate the position of the bones against the survey map, and
              produce a digitized map of the current rock face a DNM and its lode of dinosaur
              material.  A second component involves scanning, digitizing, scaling and
              orienting hand drawn quarry maps of the missing rock faces and their fossils,
              and attaching these to the digital map of the current rock face to create a
              composite master digital map of this unique paleontological record.  The third
              component is an interactive database of all of the dinosaur elements in the
              original and current quarry.  The master digitized map will allow powerful
              approaches to taphonomic and geologic investigations that were hitherto
              impossible.  The educational potential of this project is also enormous for
              informal science programs in museums and for classroom instruction. %%% This
              project will map, photograph and digitize the world famous fossil dinosaur
              quarry at Dinosaur National Monument, as well as quarry maps of the original
              rock face that no longer exists.  Discovered in 1909, the quarry rock face of
              what in now Dinosaur National Monument, near Vernal, Utah, yielded the finest
              preserved skeletons and skulls of over 20 species of Jurassic dinosaurs.  Only
              a portion of the original fossiliferous wall remains at the DNM visitor center,
              bearing about 1600 dinosaur bones   mostly articulated skulls and skeletons   
              in relief.  A record of entire original wall, with all of the dinosaurian
              elements in their original position, is preserved in a series of aged,
              disintegrating, hand drawn quarry maps at DNM and other museums.       h)      
                 0*0*0*         The overall goal of this project is to produce a digitized
              map of the entire quarry face, past and present, with all of the dinosaur
              elements in original position, linked to an interactive database of those
              elements.  This project is new to paleontology and will, if successful,
              revolutionize the science by combining traditional approaches with emerging
              technologies in surveying, photogrammetry, computer aided m apping and advanced
              database design.  The educational potential of this project is also enormous
              for informal science programs in museums and for classroom instruction. ***    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
