Title       : Schools of the Pacific Rainfall Climate Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9320686

Award Number: 9320686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Postawko spostawk@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Morrissey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Victoria Duca-Snowden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1302,5934,9177,GLCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9320686  Postawko    This three year award is designed to provide support for
              the  cooperative field project "Schools of the Pacific Rainfall  Climate
              Experiment (SPaRCE)" involving middle school, high school  and college level
              teachers and students from various Pacific  island and atoll nations. The
              project is coordinated on the  U.S. side by Dr. Susan Postawko, Dr. Mark
              Morrissey and   Dr. Victoria Duca from the University of Oklahoma. At present 
              over forty college and school sites have been identified for  participation
              under SPaRCE.  Donald Edgeworth, Principal of the  Papaaroa Adventist College
              located in Rarotonga in the Cook  Islands, is one of many foreign counterpart
              investigators  participating in the program.    Climate change is a primary
              concern to people of the Pacific  islands due to the vulnerability of their
              islands to sea level  and rainfall pattern changes. Numerous models of
              earth-atmosphere  systems have been developed in an effort to diagnose and
              predict  future climate trends. Surface rainfall observations are crucial  to
              test and validate satellite algorithms. This program benefits  the participants
              by allowing students to participate in a real  research project, and by
              providing them with educational  materials on climate and climate change. Data
              collected by  participants is compiled into data sets for distribution to 
              climate researchers. Funds in this award will be used to support  a number of
              functions including travel by program staff for  teacher training and equipment
              maintenance purposes, the support  of a student Project Coordinator to organize
              and analyze incoming  data, and to facilitate communications with the school
              network  gathering rainfall data.     The project plans to focus a considerable
              amount of activity on  regions such as Guam, American Samoa and the Northern
              Mariana  Islands, all U.S. Territories; the Republic of Palau, a U.S.  Trust
              Territory; and the freely associated states of the  Federated States of
              Micronesia and the Marshall Islands. On e of  the initial activities included
              under this award will be a  seminar on basic weather and climate with hands-on
              instruction on  the use of meteorological instruments and data analysis to be 
              conducted for SPaRCE investigators at the Annual Pacific  Educational
              Conference to be held in Saipan in August 1994.
