Title       : Collaborative Research: Modelling the Integration of Multiple Synaptic Inputs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1996      
File        : a9320597

Award Number: 9320597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Baer atbyt@asuvm.inre.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary B. Rheuben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Baer         Using theory and experiment, the investigator and his  colleague
              study the integration of multiple electrical inputs into  excitable neuronal
              structures. A new cable theory, developed by  Baer and Rinzel (1991) to study
              large populations of dendritic  spines, is adapted to fit the reality of a
              particular biological  system:  the multiterminally innervated muscle fiber of
              the insect  Manduca.  The mathematics involves the formulation and analysis of 
              reaction diffusion models for multiple populations of spines, to  model the
              amplitude and timecourse of potentials arising in  cylindrical structures
              (dendrite or muscle fiber) receiving  synchronous input from multiple clusters
              of synapses.  Important  biological properties considered are the amplitude of
              the quantal  currents, shape of the postsynaptic process, the inherent 
              uncertainty of an input actually occurring (probability of  release), and the
              precise distribution of voltage gated channels.  Theory is related to
              experimental data and drives new experiments.       The functions of all
              excitable cells, both nerve and muscle,  are regulated with precision by
              transmembrane potentials.  This  project is an interdisciplinary collaboration
              between a  mathematician and a neurobiologist to study, using experiments and 
              mathematical modeling, the spatial and temporal distribution of  electrical
              potentials in complex neuronal structures.  A  mathematical model is developed
              to simulate amplitude and  timecourse of potentials arising in cylindrical
              structures  (dendrite or muscle fiber) receiving synchronous input from 
              multiple clusters of synapses. The investigators use  multiterminally
              innervated muscle fibers to test the predictions  of the model, and conversely
              use the model to augment their  understanding of synaptic physiology.  The
              multiterminally  innervated muscle fiber allows an unusual array of
              experimental  and morphometric measurements, and has the added advantage of 
              being the topological equivalent of a dendrite having clust ers of  input
              spines.  Consequently, both the conclusions of the  simulations and the
              methodology being developed have broad  applications to central nervous system
              structures.
