Title       : Arms Transfer and Coups d'Etat: An Empirical Study on Sub-Saharan Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9320554

Award Number: 9320554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41496              (Estimated)
Investigator: Te-Yu Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320554  Wang    Early studies on arms transfers and African coups have not 
              considered the interaction between the two areas.  While arms  transfers have
              largely been treated as a matter of international  affairs, military
              intervention in Africa is usually seen as  resulting from domestic factors. 
              There exist, however, both  empirical evidence and theoretical justification
              for the  proposition that international arms shipments and African coups 
              d'etat are related.  This investigation assesses the political  effects of arms
              transfers on the occurrence of coups in Africa.   Utilizing theories of arms
              transfers and of the coup d'etat, a  causal model is constructed to evaluate
              the political  consequences of international arms shipments.  An event count 
              analysis in conjunction with conventional regression techniques  is employed
              for statistical estimation of the effects of arms  transfers on African coups. 
                The proposed research is significant in three aspects.  First, it  is
              significant in its theoretical contribution.  Since previous  studies have
              neglected exploring the linkages between African  coups and arms transfers,
              this investigation fills this  theoretical gap.  Second, this research is
              important in its  methodological contribution as an event count analysis will
              be  employed for statistical estimation.  This is an appropriate  techniques
              for coups analysis but has not been adopted by any  prior investigation. 
              Third, this investigation will expand the  existing data base on African coups,
              which, in itself, will be a  contribution to the discipline and invite
              replications of similar  research.  ***
