Title       : Ab Initio Calculation of Accurate Molecular Wave Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9320718

Award Number: 9320718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $352300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : General Atomics
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92118    /   -

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9215,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project to develop geminal-based methods in molecular electronic  
              structure theory is supported jointly by the NSF Theoretical and  
              Computational Chemistry Program and the the Advanced Scientific Computing  
              Division.   Methods will be developed for the computation of accurate, ab  
              initio, small molecule, electronic wavefunctions using contracted   Gaussian
              geminals (predetermined linear combinations of   explicitly-correlated,
              two-particle, Gaussian basis functions).  Geminal   parameters for molecules
              will be extracted from optimized atomic   wavefunctions.  Scalable algorithms
              will be developed for implementation   on parallel computers.    The quantum
              mechanical electronic wavefunction is a mathematical function   of the spatial
              and spin coordinates of all the electrons in the atom or   molecule.  These
              many-body  functions are traditionally expressed in   terms of orbitals, i.e.
              functions of the coordinates of a single   electron.  Orbital-based concepts
              and computational methods play a   central role in modern chemical theory, but
              there is a practical limit to   the accuracy attainable in orbital-based
              computations using existing   supercomputers.  The goal of this project is to
              develop improved   computational methods using geminals (explicit functions of
              the   coordinates of a pair of electrons) rather than orbitals.  If successful,
                this will significantly increase the accuracy of theoretical predictions   of
              gas phase reaction rates such as those required for improved computer   models
              of the earth's atmosphere.
