Title       : Critical Phenomena in Silica Gel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9320726

Award Number: 9320726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Cannell david@alice.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9320726  Cannell    Technical abstract:  This Condensed Matter Physics project
              used  light scattering and thermodynamic measurements to study the  effectd of
              quenched impurities on critical phenomena and phase  separations in fluids
              containing two components.  The quenched  impurities are gel structures of
              dilute rigid silica networks.  The  large surface area of these networks
              influence the equilibrium and  non-equilibrium properties of fluids that are
              entrained in these  gel structures.  The behavior of binary fluids in these
              gels are  studied by static and dynamic light scattering, as well as 
              calorimetry.  The combination of thermodynamic and scattering  measurements on
              controlled samples should add considerable to our  understanding of the effects
              of porous materials on liquid systems,  as well as to the broader issue of
              their effects on phase in other  systems.    Non-technical abstract:  This
              Condensed Matter Physics employs  light scattering and thermodynamic
              measurements to study the  effects of quenched impurities on critical phenomena
              and phase  separations in fluids containing two components.  The quenched 
              impurities are gel structures of dilute rigid silica networks.   When fluids
              fill the interstitices between the gel strands, their  equilibrium and
              non-equilibrium properties are modified by the  large surface area of the gel
              network.  The behavior of binary  fluids in these gels are studied by static
              and dynamic light  scattering, as well as calorimetry.  The combination of 
              thermodynamic and scattering measurements on controlled samples  should add
              considerable to our understanding of the effects of  porous materials on liquid
              systems, as well as to the broader issue  of their effects on phase in other
              systems.  For example, there are  many instances in nature where fluids, such
              as oil, are entrained  in high surface are solids, such as shale.  This
              fundamental study  may provide information relevant to these technologically
              important  systems.  ***
