Title       : U.S. Science Support Program Associated with the Ocean Drilling Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a9320477

Award Number: 9320477
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: J. Paul Dauphin                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Bohlen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Pyle  (Principal Investigator former)
              James A. Austin, Jr.  (Principal Investigator former)
              David A. Falvey  (Principal Investigator former)
              Nicklas G. Pisias  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kathryn Moran  (Principal Investigator former)
              Daniel F. Weill  (Principal Investigator former)
              John J. Farrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen Kappel  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Joint Ocean Insts Inc
	      1755 Mass Ave, NW
	      Washington, DC  200362102    202/232-3900

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320477  Pyle    The Ocean Drilling Program (ODP) is an international program of
               basic research in the marine geosciences supported by the National  Science
              Foundation, France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, a  consortium of Canada
              and Australia, and the European Science  Foundation (representing Belgium,
              Denmark, Finland, Greece,  Iceland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain,
              Sweden,  Switzerland, and Turkey).  Scientific drilling operations began in 
              1985, following conversion of a state-of-the-art commercial  drilling vessel,
              the SEDCO/BP 471, for scientific drilling.   Renamed the JOIDES Resolution, the
              vessel carries fifty scientists,  students, and technicians from the member
              countries on each of its  two-month cruise legs.  The Resolution is a unique
              international  resource, representing the only scientific facility capable of 
              coring sedimentary and crustal material in the world's oceans.   Additionally,
              the ODP has developed a geochemical and geophysical  logging capability which
              is unsurpassed in industry or academia.   The ODP is managed through a contract
              between NSF and the Joint  Oceanographic Institutions, Inc. (JOI).  JOI has
              subcontracts with  Texas A&M University for management of scientific support
              and  drillship operations, and with Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of 
              Columbia University for management of the logging program.    The first 52 legs
              of the program have examined the history of  global climate change in the
              equatorial and polar regions, the  early stages of continental rifting, fluid
              flow in sediments of  active margins, and the composition and alteration of the
              oceanic  crust.  Sediment samples cored from the Norwegian Sea, eastern 
              equatorial Atlantic, and Wedell Sea record synchronous change to  glacial
              conditions approximately 3 million years ago which marked  the beginning of
              northern hemisphere glaciation.  Drilling on the  Antarctic margin has traced
              the history of continental glaciation  back to at least the early Oligocene and
              possibly late Eocen e, 42  million years ago.  Drilling results in the
              northwest Indian Ocean  are being used to correlate the initiation of monsoon
              circulation  with uplift of the Himalayas.  Seismic reflection records from 
              rifted continental margins often record parallel, dipping  reflectors.  ODP
              drilling on the Norwegian margin has shown that  these reflectors are basalt
              flows that form during continental  rifting and gradually change in chemistry
              from continental to  oceanic as rifting proceeds.  Drilling along the Antilles,
               Peruvian, Japanese trenches, as well as the Cascadia margin off  Canada and
              Oregon, has documented the importance of fluid transport  to the deformation
              and alteration of margin sediments.    New ODP developments in drilling and
              instrument technology have  allowed coring of unsedimented oceanic crust.  A
              500-meter core  into the lower oceanic crust of the Indian Ocean records the 
              successive formation and solidification of magma chambers along the  Indian
              Ocean spreading center.  A major surprise was the high  magnetization of these
              lower crustal rocks,  which is at odds with  existing models for the formation
              of sea-floor magnetic anomalies.   In the eastern equatorial Pacific ODP has
              initiated attempts to use  mining drilling techniques to drill young ocean
              floor.  Although  the initial drilling results were disappointing, development
              of  this new technology for ocean drilling will be continued.   Deployment of
              down-hole instrument packages for long-term  measurement of crustal conditions
              and processes are an important  new objective of the program.  In recent years,
              close collaboration  with Global Seismic Network planning has lead to initial
              deployment  of long-period, digital seismometers in ODP boreholes.  Temperature
                and pressure sensors have been deployed in holes drilled into an  active
              hydrothermal system on the Juan de Fuca Ridge and a modern  accretionary wedge
              on the Cascadia Margin in the Northeast Pacific.   Data from these instruments
              are being recovered using submersib les  and remote vehicles.  Additional
              experiments will be deployed in  boreholes drilled in the Atlantic Ocean in
              1994.    The Ocean Drilling Program began a four year drilling program in  the
              Atlantic Ocean in early 1993.  The major scientific problems to  be addressed
              during this period include oceanographic and climate  change of the Arctic
              during the Neogene, the formation of rifted  continental margins, changes in
              equatorial circulation and  productivity, the composition of the lower crust,
              the history of  sea-level fluctuations during non-glacial periods of the
              Tertiary,  and the formation of metal-rich sulfide deposits along the Mid- 
              Atlantic Ridge.     Although drilling operations are supported by the six
              members of  the ODP, each member country independently provides support for the
               research efforts of its scientists participating in the program.   This award
              will continue support to the Joint Oceanographic  Institutions, Inc. to provide
              a number of services in support of  the U.S. Scientific community involved in
              the ODP.  These  activities include:    (1)  Planning activities to refine the
              major long-range objectives       of the ODP and develop the optimal drilling
              strategies needed       to achieve these objectives.  These activities include
              support       for workshops, U.S. participation in JOIDES (Joint      
              Oceanographic Institutions for Deep Earth Sampling) panels and      
              committees, and U.S. participation in international       conferences on
              scientific ocean drilling.    (2)  Small contracts in support of site
              augmentation and data       syntheses.  This provides support for the 
              participation of       U.S. scientists on non-U.S. site surveys and  site
              specific       science on ships of opportunity.      (3)  Educational programs
              that target students at all levels:       particularly a strong graduate
              fellowship program that       encourages PhD candidates to conduct research
              related to ODP       and encourages their participation on drilling legs.   
              (4)  Initial operati onal support for a wireline re-entry system,      
              developed by the program enabling scientists to use DSDP and       ODP
              boreholes for downhole experiments after the drillship has       left the area.
                   (5)  Support for U.S. scientists participating on the shipboard      
              scientific team and for necessary follow-up studies related to      
              publication of the Initial Report for each drill leg.     (6)  Support the
              dissemination of ODP results.  This includes       symposia enabling scientists
              to discuss ODP drilling results       and to publish symposia results volumes. 
                  (7)  Support for the administration required by the U.S. Science      
              Support Program, including a national advisory committee to       provide
              guidance and focus for U.S. science activities       associated with ODP.  ***
