Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1994     
File        : a9320317

Award Number: 9320317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tse-yun Feng                            
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gonzalo R. Arce arce@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9320317  Arce     This award is for the purchase of high capacity digital video
              equipment which will be dedicated to support research in computer and
              information sciences and engineering.  The equipment will be used for several
              research projects, including in particular: (1) Nonlinear Digital Video Signal
              Processing, (2) Joint Source-Channel Coding for Video Transmission, (3) Video
              Transmission over High Speed Computer Networks, and (4) Transport Network
              Protocols for Video in Multi-media Applications.      Digital video will be
              playing an important role in consumer electronics opening new application areas
              by exploiting the technologies of communications and computer networks.  The
              research will accomplish several goals.  Firstly, new nonlinear algorithms will
              be developed for the filtering, interpolation, format conversion,
              multi-resolution representation, and prediction of video processes needed in
              high-definition television and in its interaction with existing video systems. 
              The need of nonlinear signal processing arises since linear signal processing
              techniques are known to blur image and video details inhibiting the main goal
              of digital video -- high resolution.  Secondly, joint source channel coding
              schemes will be developed for robust video delivery.  Digital transmission
              systems suffer from a threshold effect in signal quality, while broadcast
              systems that cater to the most distant user are inefficient.  The goal is to
              design efficient video transmission schemes with a graceful degradation in
              performance.  Thirdly, the work on the interface and communications aspects of
              digital video over computer networks wi ll be emphasized, in particular, the
              research focus will be on  two important problems: packet loss and buffer
              overflows and underflows. Both these problems result in degradation of video
              quality.  This research will assess this loss in quality and design algorithms
              to minimize this loss. Finally, in order to handle video data streams more
              efficiently, new transport network protocols which are compatible with standard
              network software will be developed.   ***             video equipment which
              will be dedicated to support res                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              ~                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     $       
               $         $              G                             ?             ?        
                                           Times    Symbol  " Helvetica    Chicago    Times
              New Roman  & Arial  5 Courier New  R ZapfDingbats    Palatino    Greek   
              GenMath    MathMeteor    MT Extra                             k   "            
                       e@j                          6    Arce/Delaware    Mark Purvis Mark
              Purvis                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
