Title       : A Survey Module on Families and Social Mobility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1995     
File        : a9320660

Award Number: 9320660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $567911             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Mare MARE@SSC.WISC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Hauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320660  Mare         This is a study of the effects of families on
              socioeconomic  well-being, collecting data to test a variety of theories in the
               Human Capital and Human Resources traditions.  It will field a  module for the
              1994 General Social Survey (GSS) that will focus  on these effects.  This
              module will supplement an established  national survey and obtain information
              on family structure and  socioeconomic achievement of respondents and their
              kin, including  siblings, parents, offspring, and spouses.  Sibling information
               will be obtained through face-to-face interviews with respondents  and
              telephone interviews with one adult sibling of each  respondent.  This
              information will include socioeconomic and  demographic measures routinely
              asked of GSS respondents plus  information that will enrich our understanding
              of kinship and  intergenerational mobility processes.  It will include a
              reliable  measure of cognitive ability for respondents and siblings.  The 
              module will support a richer array of studies of the  intergenerational
              mechanisms that contribute to socioeconomic  achievement and inequality than
              have been possible to date.   Research issues that will be addressed by users
              of the data  include, but are not limited to: sibling resemblance and family 
              effects on socioeconomic achievement; measurement errors and  their impact on
              inferences about the intergenerational  transmission of socioeconomic statuses;
              the effects of  grandparents on the success of their progeny;
              multi-generational  models of mobility; marriage patterns and the socioeconomic
               makeup of families; and the effects of cognitive abilities on  socioeconomic
              success.  %%%       The data collected in this research will be a valuable 
              public resource for studies of the links between family  structure,
              intergenerational processes, marriage, and  socioeconomic welfare.  By adding a
              module to both General Social  Surveys administered in 1994, and through the
              parallel telephone  survey of siblings, this project greatly expan ds the value
              of one  of NSF's major, long-standing scientific survey projects.  Policy 
              makers concerned with careers, income and mobility will find the  large
              resulting data set of great value to them in their  important work.    ***
