Title       : Laboratory Cultures and Research Networks: Women Scientists and Community
               Building in Early Twentieth Century Nuclear Physics and Radiochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1994     
File        : a9320188

Award Number: 9320188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Norton Wise   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              1                                                                               
                                         @                   9320188  Wise    It has become
              increasingly obvious to science policy makers that the only way this country
              can maintain its leadership in science is to advance scientific talent
              regardless of race, gender or physical handicaps.  Too many women and
              minorities have been discouraged from studying science because they have found
              it inhospitable to their presence.  Yet, such was not always the case.  Nuclear
              physics and radiochemistry in the first  part of this century offer an example
              of how scientists can work together to promote the participation of women and
              minorities in the study of the most difficult of scientific areas.    Under the
              direction of Professor Norton Wise, Ms. Teresa Hopper is investigating the
              reasons for the extraordinary levels of success achieved by a relatively large
              number of women in the fields of nuclear physics and radiochemistry in the
              early decades of the twentieth century.  A number of prominent women scientists
              made outstanding theoretical contributions to the fields of nuclear physics and
              radiochemistry between 1900 and 1939; and there also existed a large number of
              women who received advanced degrees and performed advanced research, but whose
              theoretical contributions were less dramatic than those of their more prominent
              counterparts.  Ms. Hopper argues that the outstanding success of women in these
              fields is no accident or coincidence, but rather, that women's extraordinary
              participation in these fields in this period was brought about by the active
              efforts of established men and women scientists who were committed to including
              women in the practice of science in the early years of this century.  As a
              result of the cooperation of Marie Curie, Ernest Rutherford and others, a space
              was created in which women could succeed in scientific practice.  Ms. Hopper is
              analyzing women's success in these fields in terms of the existence of a social
              n etwork of established scientists who supported their researches; an
              intellectual niche that was created in domains of nuclear physics and
              radiochemistry; and a laboratory culture that provided an atmosphere in which
              they could flourish. She is investigating prominent scientists for the
              important theoretical contributions they made to their fields.  Less prominent
              scientists are also relevant because of their role in shaping the laboratory
              cultures into places where women could succeed in scientific practice.  ***    
                             w                                                               
                                                                             n     n     n   
               n     n     n     n     n     n     l                                         
                      = <                = /     2   !     ;       -h                        
                                                                                         y   
                   z                                                                         
                                                       U = > ? @ A h p                       
                                      01/03/9401/03/94    Ronald J. Overmann 01/03/94p
