Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Sociology: Perceptions ofFisheries Management
               on Lake Victoria, Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9320235

Award Number: 9320235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9450               (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig K. Harris craig.harris@ssc.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0315000   Social Data & Comm Development          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 5928,9186,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                INT 93-20235  Harris    This dissertation enhancement grant provides partial
              support for a U.S. graduate  student, Douglas C. Wilson,  working under the
              guidance of  Prof. Craig Harris, of  the Department of  Sociology at Michigan
              State University, to study the fisheries  management situation on the Tanzanian
              shore of Lake Victoria.  The research  will look at how several existing or
              proposed management regulations are  perceived by those in the industry, in
              terms of  their particular economic interests  and the interest of preserving
              the resource.  The study will use a multi-site, multi-  method approach to
              understanding the perceptions of fisheries management of  small-scale fishers,
              processors, and traders on eight fishing beaches, and their  large-scale
              counterparts in the three major lakeside towns.  Methods to be used  include
              formal surveys, in-depth interviews, focus groups, and a q-methodology  survey
              to identify how perceptions vary according to location, species pursued, 
              technology used, demographic characteristics, and the class of the various
              actors.   The research will be done in cooperation with, and assisted by
              personnel from,  the Tanzanian Fisheries Research Institute.  The
              characterization of the  constituencies in the Lake Victoria fishery that
              emerges from this research will be  given to the Tanzanian fisheries
              authorities to facilitate the design and  implementation of future management
              programs.    This study will make an important contribution to the social
              science understanding  of a major biological change in one of the world's great
              aquatic ecosystems.  The  research could provide useful real-world data to
              illuminate the issue of what  influences behavior toward either the "free
              rider" or the "respecter of the  commons" mode.  The grant will launch a young
              scientist on a comparative  research program to evaluate and improve the
              effectiveness of  this multi-site,  multi-method approach to understanding
              common pool resources.  ***
