Title       : U.S.-Philippines Workshop to Plan Phase III of the Flora of the Philippines
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1994 
File        : a9320518

Award Number: 9320518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34182              (Estimated)
Investigator: Seymour H. Sohmer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Botanical Rsch Instof TX
	      509 Pecan Street
	      Fort Worth, TX  761024060    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5927,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9320518  Stone    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Benjamin C. Stone, 
              Botanical Research Institute of Texas (BRIT), to conduct with Dr.  Domingo A.
              Madulid, National Museum, Manila, a workshop to plan  Phase III of the Flora of
              the Philippines Project (FPP).  The  participants, six U.S. scientists, three
              from Western Europe, and  four from the Philippines are members of the
              Philippine Advisory  Committee, the International Scientific Advisory
              Committee, and  the Living Collections Committee of FPP.  The workshop provides
               an opportunity for the members of these three committees to  discuss the third
              and final component of FPP.  This component  involves the research, writing,
              and editing that will lead to the  new flora of the Philippines.  Session 1 of
              the workshop will be  held at BRIT, in Ft. Worth, Texas, while Session 2 will
              be held  in Manila.    A completed flora will have major global significance
              because an  important portion of the earth's biodiversity will be better 
              understood.  Earlier collections of Philippine plants held at the  Museum in
              Manila were destroyed during World War II.  There is an  urgency in completing
              FPP at this time in order to catalog and  classify Philippine plants that are
              endangered, threatened, or on  the brink of extinction.  The collaborators are
              well known  researchers in the field of this project.  This project is 
              relevant to the objectives of the East Asia and Pacific Program  which seeks to
              increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and  East Asian scientists and
              engineers through the exchange of  scientific information, ideas, skills, and
              techniques and through  collaboration on problems of mutual interest and
              benefit.  ***
