Title       : Learning and Equilibrium Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9320678

Award Number: 9320678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193031             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry W. Samuelson larrysam@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320678  Samuelson  Noncooperative game theory has become a pervasive
              theoretical  tool in economics.  Unfortunately, this theoretical success has 
              not been matched by empirical applications, and noncooperative  game theory is
              often dismissed with the charge that it makes no  testable predictions.  The
              primary difficulty in using game  theory to make empirical predictions is the
              equilibrium selection  problem: games typically have a multitude of equilibria,
              and game  theory provides very little guidance as to how to choose between 
              them.  The project continues the development of an approach to  the equilibrium
              selection problem based on evolutionary models of  games, consisting of four
              components.  The first is the  construction of explicit models of how boundedly
              rational players  learn to play games.  These models are then used to derive 
              dynamic processes describing the evolution of play.  Third, the  limiting
              outcomes of these dynamic processes are examined, with  particular interest in
              how these outcomes compare to common  equilibrium concepts.  Finally, the
              robustness of the results to  various types of trembles or noise int he
              learning process is  investigated.    More specifically, under the current
              grant the project extends  existing, preliminary models of how boundedly
              rational players  learn.  Best-reply learning models are extended to new
              classes of  games, including signaling games; and "noisy selection" models  are
              extended beyond the 2x2 symmetric games to which they are now  confined.  With
              these models in hand, the heart of the research  involves investigating the
              outcomes of evolutionary processes in  the presence of various environmental
              randomness or "trembles."   The preliminary results indicate that such
              randomness can have a  profound impact on the evolutionary outcome.  The
              proposed  research addresses the apparent arbitrariness of evolutionary 
              learning models by investing the evolution of the learning rules  by which
              players guide their behavior.
