Title       : SGER: Measurement Using Calcium-Specific Probes of Ca in a Diatom Treated With
               Chemotactic Effectors: A First Step in the Dissection of the Signal
               Transduction Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1995  
File        : a9320335

Award Number: 9320335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Cooksey umbkc@gemini.oscs.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara W. Cooksey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,9237,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9320335  Cooksey    The long term goal of this research is to understand the 
              regulation of adhesion, motility and chemotaxis in diatoms of the  genus
              Amphora.  This project will expand on preliminary  observations that calcium
              plays a role in the regulation of these  processes.  Preliminary results
              indicate that a certain level of  extracellular calcium is necessary for
              adhesion and motility and  that Amphora responds chemotactically to simple
              sugars and  glutamate.  Calcium has a pivotal role as a second messenger in 
              control of numerous biological processes.  This ion is  responsible for
              signal-response coupling in animal, plant, and  other cells during such
              physiological processes as secretion and  the development of cellular polarity.
               The availability of  calcium-sensitive fluorescent probes such as Fura-2,
              Indo-1,  Fluo-3 has made possible the direct visualization of spatial and 
              temporal changes in cytosolic free calcium in single cells using  confocal
              laser scanning microscopy, and changes in intracellular  calcium can be
              detected in suspensions of synchronized cells  using an appropriate
              spectrofluorimeter.  Research supported by  this Small Grant for Exploratory
              Research will establish the  experimental conditions for applying these
              important experimental  tools in studies of the role of calcium in regulation
              of cell  adhesion, motility, and chemotaxis in diatoms.  These tools will  then
              be used to study the effects of external calcium and sugars  that promote
              chemotaxis on intracellular free calcium levels as  part of a longer term study
              of the control of physiological  processes by calcium in these, rather
              primitive, eukaryotes.  %%%  Marine diatoms are responsible for more than half
              of the world's  replacement oxygen.  The diatoms that are the subject of this 
              research grow attached to illuminated surfaces in the nearshore  benthic zone. 
              Whether chemotaxis is a common property of these  organisms is not known. 
              Although diatoms are green algae and can  carry out photosynthesis, ma ny
              diatoms from this niche also can  use some simple sugars and amino acids to
              support their growth.   If, as suggested by preliminary observations, they can
              sense  chemical gradients of these compounds in the sediment pore water  and
              move toward higher concentrations, these diatoms could be  important in
              turnover of dissolved organic carbon in illuminated  sediments.  Yet, despite
              the potential importance of these  organisms, very little is known about the
              mechanisms of their  responses to stimuli such as organic compounds.  This
              Small Grant  for Exploratory Research will be used to lay the experimental 
              groundwork for studies of the signal transduction pathways  regulating diatom
              adhesion, motility, and chemotaxis.  The longer  term results of this research
              will not only fill a gap in  knowledge of the mechanisms by which these
              little-understood  organisms respond to environmental signals, but should also 
              provide new insights into their ecological role in the nearshore  food web. 
              ***
