Title       : Nonlocal Electromagnetic Response: Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1996        
File        : a9320633

Award Number: 9320633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharine L C. Hunt klch@tpauli.cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Katharine Hunt is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and  
              Computational Chemistry Program to continue her theoretical work which  
              exploits the properties of the nonlocal polarizability density to find  
              relationships connecting observable molecular properties such as infrared  
              intensities, vibrational Raman intensities,  overtone intensities,   electric
              field shielding tensors, force and anharmonicity constants, and   field
              gradients at nuclei.  The nonlocal susceptibility tensors describe   the 
              reaction to changes in the fields due to the nuclei in the same   molecule when
              the nuclei shift.  She also plans to extend the theory to   cover nonlocal
              response to inhomogeneous magnetic fields which would then   make it possible
              to relate chemical shifts to other magnetic properties,   and to increase the
              information obtainable from magnetic probes of local   chemical environments.  
               Electromagnetic radiation is the primary probe of microscopic molecular  
              systems, and most of our knowledge regarding the electronic behavior of  
              molecules arises from various experimental spectroscopic techniques.    There
              are a number of quantities which can be observed in spectroscopic  
              experiments, and we rely on theoretical models to relate these   observations
              to various molecular properties.   Hunt's research is   uncovering new and
              important relationships which exist between various   spectroscopic
              observables.  These relationships further our understanding   of molecular
              electronic structure, and assist in the interpretation of   experimental
              spectroscopic data.
