Title       : A Biography of Leslie R. Groves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1994        
File        : a9320369

Award Number: 9320369
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Goldberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9320369  Goldberg  Ever since World War II, the United States has endeavored to
              find  a "quick scientific fix" for the problems confronting this nation.  
              Previously, it was the "War on Cancer" that would find a cure  within a
              relatively short period of time.  Currently, activists are  calling for a
              "Manhattan Project" for AIDS to find an immediate  cure for that dreaded
              disease.  When these projects fail, the  public which has been led to foot the
              massive costs of these  "Manhattan-like" projects rightly becomes skeptical of
              science--  even if it is the case that it was the politicians who cynically 
              made these promises.  Given these problems, it is critically  important for the
              public to understand why and how the Manhattan  Project succeeded and how
              current projects may or may not fit the  model that that war-time effort
              presents.  It is this task which  Dr. Goldberg is continuing with this grant.  
               Dr. Goldberg is completing his study of General Leslie R. Groves,  Commanding
              General of the Manhattan Engineer District.  Dr.  Goldberg aims to provide a
              context of understanding who General  Groves was, why he was picked to head the
              atomic bomb project, and  the characteristics that made his administration of
              the project so  effective.  He is also exploring the reasons why these very
              same  characteristics served him so poorly after the war.  Most  treatments of
              the Manhattan Project focus on the technical puzzles  which were solved in
              record time or on the impact of the  development of the bomb on end-of-the-war
              and post-war diplomatic  history.  By examining the Manhattan Project in the
              context of a  study of General Groves, one is immediately confronted with the 
              need to assess his philosophy of organization and the importance to  the
              success of the project of Groves' administrative style and the  administrative
              machinery he created.  ***
