Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Expansion of Japanese Enterprise Networks
               and Industrialization in Southest Asia: A Case Study of Indonesia and Malaysia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1994      
File        : a9320899

Award Number: 9320899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Giovanni Arrighi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9320899  Arrighi          This  is  an award under the Grants for Improving 
              Doctoral  Dissertation Research program.  It is a study of the  penetration  of
               Japanese business networks into Indonesia and Malaysia  since  1980.  The
              student will travel to these two countries and collect  systematic  data  on  a
               wide range of  local  firms  which  have  received  Japanese investment or are
              involved in other  forms  of  networking   connections   to   Japanese  
              companies.     Through  quantitative analysis of the data collected, the
              changing pattern  of  Japanese business penetration into Indonesia and Malaysia
              and  the  impact  of such penetration on the economies  of  those  two 
              countries will be examined.       The sources of industrial competitiveness is
              a central issue  of  great  practical as well as theoretical importance. 
              Previous  work  has  suggested that innovative forms of  Japanese  economic 
              penetration  of  other  countries which  involve  networking  and 
              subcontracting,   rather   than   vertical   integration,    have  contributed 
              to  Japanese  economic  success.   Through  studying  concrete  examples  of 
              how  Japanese  economic  penetration   is  occurring in two of the most dynamic
              economies of the world, this  project  should  shed light on such claims.  In
              addition  to  the  scientific gains to be achieved by the research, this award 
              will  materially  assist  a  highly  promising  student  in  completing 
              research for the Ph. D. dissertation.  Thus it contributes to the  future 
              scientific  manpower  of  the  nation  and  the  thorough  training of the next
              generation of social scientists.  ***
