Title       : AMP: Alliance for Minority Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1997        
File        : a9153720

Award Number: 9153720
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5803638            (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis Dale ldale@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) AMP proposal seeks               
              funds to support the creation of an alliance between eight                     
              historically black colleges and universities (Tougaloo College,                
              Miles College, Alabama A&M University, Oakwood College, Talladega              
              College, Stillman, Alabama State University, and Tuskegee                      
              University) in the "Deep South" with UAB serving as the lead                   
              university.  Alabama A&M is the only institution listed other than             
              UAB that offers a doctorate degree in an NSF fundable academic                 
              area.  The UAB AMP also has considerable business support with the             
              Coca-Cola Foundation, Rust International Corporation, Minnesota                
              Mining and Manufacturing Company already on board.                             
                                                                                             
              The fundamental goal of the proposed alliance is to increase                   
              significantly the number of minority scholars that complete the                
              B.S. degree in NS&E areas.  The UAB AMP Program will attempt to                
              increase the number of science and/or engineering students on the              
              nine campus alliance by using a comprehensive and longitudinal                 
              approach involving thirteen programs that focus at different points            
              along the "academic pipeline".  The P.I. is requesting support for             
              five of these programs.  Many of the other programs are currently              
              supported by off campus sources ( including businesses, Federal                
              government, local sources) or from UAB.  The five programs to be               
              supported in part from NSF are:                                                
                                                                                             
              o    AMP Scholars,                                                             
              o    Summer Research Internship Program,                                       
              o    Science and Engineering Drop-in Centers,                                  
              o    High School and College Science Campus, and                               
              o    Instructional Enhancement Program.                                        
                                                                                             
              UAB AMP will couple these five programs with the existing programs.            
                                                                                             
              The P.I. presented a unique diagram tying together all the                     
              elements in the UAB AMP pipeline programs.  The complete list                  
              follows:                                                                       
                                                                                             
              o    The Titusville 200:  Partnership for excellence program,                  
              o    Grade School and Middle School Science Camp,                              
              o    Pre-college Summer Research Internships,                                  
              o    High School Summer Research Internships,                                  
              o    HBCU Summer Research Internships,                                         
              o    College Summer Research Internships,                                      
              o    Undergraduate Scholarship,                                                
              o    AMP Scholars,                                                             
              o    Science and Engineering Drop-in Centers,                                  
              o    High School and College Science Camp,                                     
              o    Instructional Enhancement Program,                                        
              o    Graduate Fellowships,                                                     
              o    Postdoctoral and Visiting Faculty Fellowships, and                        
              o    Faculty Recruitment, and Faculty Retention activities.                    
                                                                                             
              The UAB AMP programs are located in a region with a high minority              
              population; the potential impact of this alliance is significant.
