Title       : THE MAGIC SCHOOL BUS: A CHILDREN'S TELEVISION SCIENCE SERIES
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1994  
File        : a9153967

Award Number: 9153967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4660647            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison Blank   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Startz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Scholastic Productions Inc
	      
	      New York, NY  10003    212/228-7546

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Award-winning Scholastic Productions, Inc. proposes to                    
              produce 39 fully animated, half hour television programs,                      
              based on the successful children's science book series, The                    
              Magic School Bus.  We are seeking funding for the initial                      
              three seasons (13 episodes per season) which will be                           
              produced over a four year period.  Designed as an informal                     
              science education series for PBS, it is targeted primarily                     
              for 6-9 year-olds, with special attention given to reaching                    
              girls and minority children.  The series has clear science                     
              pedagogical goals: 1) to motivate children to further                          
              science study, 2) to present science facts, concepts and                       
              systems, and 3) to inspire positive attitudes towards                          
              science and education for students and teachers.  Throughout                   
              the production, audience research and field testing will                       
              ensure that the programming is effectively meeting these                       
              goals.  The series features a remarkable teacher, Ms.                          
              Frizzle, who takes her class on equally remarkable field                       
              trips.  While other teachers may go to a museum, Ms. Frizzle                   
              leads her class onto a yellow school bus that shrinks (along                   
              with its students) to the size of a cell to journey through                    
              the human body, rocket into outer space, or travel into the                    
              eye of a hurricane.  Thus, the series makes science tangible                   
              and relatable for an audience of children who are still                        
              concrete thinkers.  We will create a broad outreach program,                   
              utilizing the publishing and distribution resources of                         
              Scholastic Productions' parent company, Scholastic Inc.,                       
              (the largest publisher of children's materials in the                          
              English-speaking world), and other targeted organizations.                     
              Through viewer guides, series publicity and promotion,                         
              magazine editorials, community and after-school programs, we                   
              expect to reach a large and culturally diverse audience,                       
              including minorities frequently not served by PBS.
