Title       : The Interactive Electronic Blackboard for Natural Science and Math Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1991     
File        : a9153162

Award Number: 9153162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98934              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Desharnais   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Novak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-3481

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project's purpose is to substantially increase retention                  
              of natural science and math students, especially those with                    
              poor academic preparation and English language deficiencies,                   
              through a highly visual, user friendly computer-based learning                 
              environment that is interactive, powerful and intuitive. An                    
              electronic classroom of 25 NeXT student stations is being used                 
              in a comprehensive plan for developing this visual and                         
              intuitive approach. Discipline specific courseware already                     
              created by CSLA faculty along with available commercial                        
              applications is being  used. Each student's station serves as                  
              an interactive electronic blackboard so that science and math                  
              can be seen, heard, and explored, thus fully engaging the                      
              senses in learning. Eight faculty from 5 target disciplines                    
              have already spent 2 years developing curricular materials and                 
              designing courseware for the NeXT. In this project the team                    
              teaches approximately 10 courses in the proposed lab involving                 
              more than 150 natural science and math undergraduates and 100                  
              general education students annually. Four new interdisciplinary                
              courses are being developed: Using Mathmatica in Science,                      
              Spreadsheets for Scientists, Visual Display of Scientific                      
              Information, and Electronic Networking as a Tool in Scientific                 
              Research. Targeted existing courses are: Biometrics, Biological                
              Modelling, Population Genetics, Intro. Chem., Physical Chem.,                  
              Physical Geology, Computer Aided Map Making, Calculus, Computer                
              Graphics, Object Oriented Programming, General Relativity, and                 
              Theoretical Physics and Astronomy.  Project results are being                  
              disseminated regionally and nationally, taking advantage of                    
              faculty experience in running statewide faculty workshops on                   
              NeXT courseware development.The grantee is matching this award                 
              from non-Federal sources.
