Title       : A Nationally Distributed Planetarium Star Program & Chart onExploration: "From
               the Earth to the Stars"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1992     
File        : a9153890

Award Number: 9153890
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Von Del Chamberlain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hansen Planetarium
	      15 South State Street
	      Salt Lake City, UT  841111518    801/537-5732

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The Hansen Planetarium proposes the creation, writing,                    
              and production of a 50-minute star theater program, From The                   
              Earth To The Stars, and educational chart aimed at                             
              informally educating over a million individuals regarding                      
              the exploration of our planet, the planets of our solar                        
              system, and the stars beyond.  The further production of                       
              three interactive exhibits is planned to accompany the                         
              program.  This program will be marketed and distributed at a                   
              nominal charge to 250 national planetariums, with 50                           
              additional production packets planned for loan.  In this                       
              fashion, top-quality, accurate, and timely science education                   
              can be guaranteed to a large selection of audiences.                           
                                                                                             
                   In America today there is growing awareness and concern                   
              surrounding the serious deficit our society will soon                          
              experience in the fields of science and technology.  The                       
              Hansen Planetarium's goal is to stimulate learning and                         
              interest in astronomy and other sciences for students of all                   
              ages across the country.  Exploration is, perhaps, the human                   
              activity in western culture which can most provoke debate,                     
              excite intense interest and stimulate scientific and                           
              cultural growth.  The utilization of expert consultants, in                    
              conjunction with Hansen Planetarium staff, will insure this                    
              program presents the most current information available                        
              about the past, present, and future of exploration.  Its                       
              interactive format is designed to stimulate a proactive                        
              approach to problem solution on the part of the audience as                    
              a stimulus to the learning process.  The star show format,                     
              with its dynamic special effects, will enhance the learning                    
              of science in America today.
