Title       : New Image of Programming: In Search of an Educationally Powerful Concept
               Technological Fluency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1993  
File        : a9153719

Award Number: 9153719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly C. Hunter                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1725000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Seymour A. Papert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project seeks to describe a new vision of programming, as                 
              part of an effort to define and refine the idea of technological               
              fluency as a source of learning power.  Our Constructionist                    
              theory leads us to view technological knowledge as "reflexive,"                
              valuable not only in its own right, but also capable of enhancing              
              the learning of many other things.  In the past, th focus has                  
              been on programming as the most accessible form of such                        
              reflexive knowledge.  Now new ideas and new advanced computers                 
              make possible a dramatic extension of this role of technological               
              fluency.  Programming continues to provide a natural entry route,              
              but in this new context a new sense of what programming                        
              means.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              As a means of developing and studying this extended notion of                  
              programming, three complementary activities are in proposed.  In               
              the "Pogramming Paradigms" activity, the focus is on transferring              
              new computational frameworks, most notably multiprocessing, into               
              education.  In the Robotics activity, the classical construction               
              kit to include new computational elements.  In the "Software                   
              Design" activity, the learning that takes place when                           
              children develop complete, multimedia software "products,"                     
              designed for use by others will be explored.  Each of these three              
              activities involves technology development.  But in each case,                 
              the main focus is on conceptual development and new educational                
              issues and strategies.  In  each activity, the appropriability of              
              its technologies and its ideas in close interaction with schools               
              and particularly with communities that have traditionally been                 
              undeserved or intellectually disenfranchised will be studied.
