Title       : Critical Issues in Reforming the Preparation of Elementary Teachers in
               Mathematics and Science: A Proposed Conference;Greeley, Colorado; October 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1991     
File        : a9153715

Award Number: 9153715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Marie Smith                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80864              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn F. Cochran cochran@dijkstra.univnorthco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              April L. Gardner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Northern Colorado
	      Carter Hall 4000
	      Greeley, CO  80639    303/351-2881

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  The University of Northern Colorado will convene a                        
              conference on the topic, "Critical Issues in Reforming the                     
              Preparation of Elementary Teachers in Mathematics and                          
              Science."  at Greeley, Colorado, in October, 1991.                             
              Participants in the conference will be teams composed of                       
              science, mathematics, and education faculty and                                
              administrators from approximately thirty teacher preparation                   
              institutions across the country.  A primary  goal of the                       
              conference will be to disseminate products and                                 
              programs being developed through NSF elementary teacher                        
              preparation projects to institutions preparing large numbers                   
              of teachers who are not active in reform or aware of recent                    
              developments in the preparation of elementary teachers in                      
              mathematics and science.  Institutions will be targeted that                   
              produce large numbers of elementary teachers and are not                       
              research oriented and/or do not grant doctoral degrees.                        
              Historically minority institutions and institutions                            
              preparing large numbers of minority teachers will be                           
              especially encouraged to attend and will receive advance                       
              notice of the conference.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The program will include invited addresses on pedagogical                      
              content knowledge, constructivism, and new directions in                       
              elementary mathematics and science curriculum.  There will                     
              be panel sessions in which the panelists will be staff of                      
              major NSF-funded projects and other noted teacher educators                    
              and researchers involved in reform of elementary mathematics                   
              and science teacher preparation. Breakout groups will allow                    
              participants to discuss specific courses and programs with                     
              panel members.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The University of Northern Colorado is a logical host for                      
              this conference for several reasons:  (1) A comprehensive                      
              five-year NSF model project in elementary mathematics and                      
              science teacher preparation is in its fourth year at UNC.                      
              (2) UNC is the third-largest producer of first-degree                          
              certified teachers in the U.S. (3) UNC has important                           
              contacts to other colleges and universities preparing large                    
              numbers of teachers through its membership in two important                    
              reform groups in teacher education, Project 30 and the                         
              Renaissance Group.
