Title       : Project LEARN (Laboratory Experience in Atmospheric Researchat NCAR)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9153756

Award Number: 9153756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1147180            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol F. McLaren   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joyce Gellhorn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Project LEARN will open a working national laboratory to 40                    
              middle/junior-high school teachers, giving them first-hand                     
              experience in what it is like to do science.  It will invite                   
              five-member teacher teams from eight varied urban and rural                    
              districts in California, Colorado, North Carolina, and                         
              Texas.  One team member will be a master teacher, and the                      
              others will be promising but less experienced; the project                     
              especially targets population groups underrepresented in                       
              scientific professions.                                                        
                                                                                             
              The teachers will attend three consecutive summer workshops                    
              at the National Center for Atmosphere Research (NCAR), where                   
              they will do experiments, bolster their understanding of                       
              background scientific concepts, and learn effective hands-on                   
              methodologies.  With guidance from the principal                               
              investigators, from master teachers, and from NCAR                             
              scientists, they will translate what they learn into                           
              classroom activities for their own districts, with their                       
              different curricula and different student populations.                         
                                                                                             
              Project LEARN will also provide leadership training, so as                     
              to prepare teachers to lead inservices in their home                           
              districts and to catalyze change in district-wide teaching                     
              strategies.  As each participant excites colleagues who                        
              attend district inservices and they all change the way they                    
              teach, the benefits of Project LEARN will be greatly                           
              multiplied.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              In the fourth and final year of the project a one-week                         
              workshop will focus on intensive leadership training for                       
              giving peer-led workshops.  It will synthesize experiences                     
              gained by teachers in the two previous years as they led                       
              such workshops and plan a third inservice for their local                      
              district.  The intent is that such inservices can become a                     
              regular part of the districts professional development                         
              program.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing equals 47% of the NSF award.
