Title       : Pathways to Engineering for Hispanics: The Family Connection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1991    
File        : a9153465

Award Number: 9153465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge J. Santiago-Aviles santiago@pender.ee.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 7440,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a model project focused on the Hispanic middle school                  
              eight grade population of the Philadelphia area to address the                 
              underrepresentation of Hispanics in engineering.  The project                  
              is a collaborative effort between a private research oriented                  
              University (University of Pennsylvania); LULAC, a non-profit                   
              organization serving the Hispanic community; four middle                       
              schools with a large Hispanic constituency; and the North                      
              Philadelphia Hispanic community.  It consists of weekly                        
              gatherings during the summer with 20 students and their parents                
              in the Hispanic community of North Philadelphia.  These meeting                
              are used to discuss the advantages, potentials and family                      
              infrastructure needs associated with a college education in the                
              engineering sciences.  The students spend two days a week for                  
              10 weeks during the summer at the Penn campus to participate in                
              workshops and other activities.  The purpose of these                          
              activities is to familiarize them with what engineering is                     
              about and what engineers do.  In addition to time on the Penn                  
              campus, the students visit local industries to allow for                       
              exposure to the engineering work environment.  A mentoring                     
              system has been designed in cooperation with Hispanic                          
              undergraduate students, graduate students and postdoctoral                     
              fellows.  These individuals provide tutoring and academic                      
              guidance to the participating students; they are also                          
              responsible for explaining in detail the academic requirements                 
              and other needs involved in obtaining an engineering degree.
