Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1991      
File        : a9106071

Award Number: 9106071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer M. Olson  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Most studies of human coping strategies have been limited to              
              the responses of a population to cataclysmic events like                       
              droughts.  Equally important is the response of a population to                
              gradual, human-induced degradation of the physical resource base               
              in an intrinsically verdant environment.  This doctoral                        
              dissertation project will examine agricultural responses of the                
              population of the Highland prefecture of Gikongoro in Rwanda,                  
              which is experiencing serious declines in food production, to                  
              increasing population density.  It will identify and explain                   
              changes over time in land productivity as interpreted by farmers               
              and documented in the literature, and it will analyze the                      
              agricultural and non-agricultural responses to changes in land                 
              productivity.  National and Gikongoro surveys of changing views                
              towards land productivity and agricultural practices, aerial                   
              photographs showing land uses in  1958, 1979, and 1990, data from              
              existing ministry surveys, and information from libraries and                  
              other sources will be use to assess relationships among a variety              
              of societal and environmental factors over time and space.                     
                                                                                             
                   This project will contribute to geographical and social                   
              scientific understandings of strategies for coping with food                   
              deficits, and more broadly, with basic problems of food                        
              production in tropical Africa.  It also will test the validity of              
              using a political ecology framework for analyzing questions about              
              human-environment interactions.  This project also will provide                
              an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to                      
              continue to develop independent research skills.
