Title       : Prehistoric Ecology and Behavior in the Western Cape Province, South Africa 
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1992    
File        : a9106399

Award Number: 9106399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21049              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Klein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn Cruz-Uribe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Richard Klein and               
              Kathryn Cruz-Uribe will study archaeological faunas excavated                  
              from two sites located in the Western Cape Province of South                   
              Africa.  While both date to the period immediately prior to                    
              European discovery of the Cape and are located only 70 km. apart,              
              archaeological remains differ significantly between them.  At                  
              Kasteelberg, domestic sheep as well as pottery are common, while               
              at the Dune Field Midden site both pottery and domesticates are                
              rare.  Drs Klein and Cruz-Uribe will focus on the abundant faunal              
              remains from both sites.  They will identify these according to                
              species and body part and will look for butchering marks and                   
              other forms of alteration.  They will also determine the ages of               
              animals were killed and on this basis determine the seasons                    
              during which the sites were occupied.  Data collected should also              
              shed light on the subsistence strategies practiced.                            
                                                                                             
              The first European accounts of Southern Africa indicate the                    
              presence of two groups of people, one which hunted and another                 
              which followed a pastoral way of life.  Anthropologists have                   
              pointed out that it is unclear whether these two distinct                      
              "groups" are actually separate or rather represent a single                    
              culture in which bands switch, perhaps according to season, from               
              one lifestyle to another.  Through analysis of two sites which                 
              are essentially contemporaneous and which apparently represent                 
              byproducts of each group, the investigators hope to insight into               
              this question.  If the sites are occupied in different seasons as              
              Drs. Klein and Cruz-Uribe suspect, the "single group" case will                
              be strengthened.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will shed                  
              light on the issue of human adaptability and cultural                          
              variability.  Hunters and herders follow very different                        
              lifestyles, often with different sets of values and to switch                  
              from one to another over a single year is a considerable feat.                 
              The data themselves will be of interest to a wide archaeological               
              audience.
