Title       : Theoretical Stereochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1993   
File        : a9106318

Award Number: 9106318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt Mislow kmislow@chemvax.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Three major problems will be studied by Professor Mislow. In the               
              first project, a quantitative method will be developed to                      
              determine chirality. This will employ analytical and computational             
              methods to relate the shape of chiral molecules to the magnitude               
              of psuedoscalar observables. Two-dimensional models that were                  
              developed in the past will be extended to three-dimensional                    
              models. By this means the scope of the concept of prochirality                 
              will also be enlarged. In the second project, the details of                   
              enantiomer interconversion will be explored. Two aspects of this               
              problem will be explored: (i) the relative importance of chiral                
              pathways when achiral pathways are also energetically accessible,              
              and (ii) the possibility of ratchet-type molecular motions. The                
              third project will be to develop a system to recognize isomeric                
              relationships. This will allow one to recognize structural                     
              similarities among molecules that are independent of chemical                  
              functionality and bonding connectivity.                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor Kurt Mislow at Princeton University.              
              The research will be in the general area of stereochemistry, which             
              is the study of the three-dimensional nature of molecules. Within              
              this framework, the research will investigate this chirality of                
              molecules, which refers to their "handedness," i.e., whether                   
              molecules have a right or left handed array. Mathematical methods              
              will be used to determine chirality, which in some instances is                
              difficult to identify. In another aspect of this research,                     
              pathways by which one chiral molecule is converted to its other                
              chiral partner will be studied. Finally, a system will be                      
              developed to recognized molecules that have the same molecular                 
              composition, but differ in their three-dimensional array.
