Title       : Development of Molecular Biology Approaches to Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1995       
File        : a9106011

Award Number: 9106011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $675649             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Davis dbowe@sequence.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,9109,9197,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              We propose to develop a number of new techniques to facilitate the             
              genetic and molecular biological analysis of higher plants.  The               
              model organism is Arabidopsis and the model signal transduction                
              pathway is the touch response pathway which results in a phenomenon            
              known as thigmomorphogenesis.  The technologies that we propose                
              include:  (1) the development of inducible promoter systems, (2) a             
              method for conducting homologous DNA recombination for gene                    
              disruption, and (3) a negative selectable marker for use in the                
              isolation of non-inducible mutants.  Several inducible promoters               
              which respond to exogenously added substances such as nitrate or               
              steroid (glucocorticoid, estrogen, etc.) will be developed. Systems            
              will be developed that allow induction in whole plants or in a                 
              specificly targeted tissue.  Using this system we will explore the             
              physiological consequences of the induction of a touch response                
              gene, such as calmodulin.  Single or multiple combinations of genes            
              can be induced with this system.  We will also develop methods                 
              for gene disruption using homologous recombination.  The initial               
              investigation will target the tms2 gene; such disruption can be                
              directly selected and should facilitate rapid assaying for                     
              homologous recombination.  This gene disruption system will be                 
              applied to the disruption of the touch response pathway genes.                 
              Since homozygous disruptions of these genes may be lethal we                   
              propose to place the genes under inducible promoter control.                   
              Physiological consequences can then be assessed by withdrawal of               
              the inducer.  We also propose to identify genes involved in the                
              overall touch response pathway by fusing touch response promoters              
              to the tms2 gene for direct selection of non-inducible mutants.                
                                                                                             
              Technique development has often made possible significant advances             
              in conceptual insights.***//
