Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Finite Element Methods for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9106051

Award Number: 9106051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Falk falk@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    This project continues the numerical and analytical                      
              investigation of plate models and also studies finite element                  
              methods to approximate linear hyperbolic and convection-diffusion              
              equations.  The first area of study deals with the                             
              Reissner-Mindlin plate model, which determines the transverse                  
              displacement of the midplane and the rotation of the fibers                    
              normal to the midplane of a plate as the solution of a coupled                 
              system of partial differential equations with appropriate                      
              boundary conditions.  Unlike the biharmonic plate model, this                  
              model has a boundary layer, which is studied by developing and                 
              rigorously justifying an asymptotic expansion of the solution in               
              terms of powers of the plate thickness.  The investigator expects              
              to show how the strength of the boundary layer depends on                      
              particular physical boundary conditions used in the model and                  
              that for certain boundary conditions no boundary layer exists                  
              near a flat portion of the boundary.  Using these results, he                  
              will develop finite element approximation schemes that give                    
              higher rates of convergence in the interior of the domain and for              
              which the overall convergence rate may be enhanced by mesh                     
              refinement techniques geared to the exact nature of the boundary               
              layer. He also intends to study higher order models, derived from              
              pure displacement or mixed variational principles.  He will                    
              investigate analytical properties (such as boundary layer                      
              effects) by means of asymptotic expansions and develop                         
              approximation schemes that do not suffer from "locking," a common              
              problem for the Reissner-Mindlin model that causes deterioration               
              in accuracy for thin plates.  Because all these models are                     
              approximations to the full three-dimensional model, an important               
              aspect of this research is to compare the predictions the various              
              models make about properties of the three-dimensional solution.                
              Finally, the project involves the derivation of local error                    
              estimates for a finite element method for the approximation of                 
              linear hyperbolic and convection-diffusion equations.  The intent              
              is to show that the domain of dependence properties of the                     
              approximation scheme closely imitate those of the exact solution.              
              %%%      Plate models are two-dimensional mathematical models                  
              that greatly simplify the study of thin three-dimensional elastic              
              bodies.  They are commonly used by engineers to predict                        
              displacements and stresses of objects when various forces are                  
              applied.  The project aims to use a rigorous mathematical                      
              analysis to better understand the predictions of the models, to                
              develop improved computational algorithms for numerically                      
              approximating the partial differential equations that comprise                 
              the model, and to compare the predictions the plate models make                
              about properties of the three-dimensional object.  In particular,              
              a rigorous study is made of the boundary layer phenomena                       
              predicted by each model.  (The boundary layer is a region near                 
              the boundary of the object in which various physical quantities                
              undergo rapid changes.)  Finally, the derivation of "local" error              
              estimates for a finite element method to approximate linear                    
              hyperbolic and convection-diffusion equations, which are used as               
              mathematical models in a variety of applications, will rigorously              
              show that certain important qualitative properties of the exact                
              solution are closely imitated by the approximate solution                      
              computed by the finite element method.  This gives confidence to               
              the users of the method that the numerical results reliably                    
              predict the behavior of the physical quantities being modeled.
