Title       : Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics of Formate Utilization in Methanogenic
               Archaebacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1994      
File        : a9106456

Award Number: 9106456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. Ferry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The enzyme requirements for growth on formate, and expression of               
              the formate dehydrogenase operon in Methanobacterium formicicum,               
              will be studied.  The specific aim is to identify the factors                  
              require for efficient initiation of transcription of the highly                
              expressed formate dehydrogenase operon using an in vitro cell-free             
              transcription system.  The results are expected to extend the                  
              current view of methanogenesis beyond a biochemical understanding,             
              and reveal new principles of gene expression in the archaebacteria.            
              The long-term goal is to utilize in vivo molecular approaches (i.e.            
              site-directed mutagenesis) to study (i) fundamental principles of              
              transcription in the archaebacteria, and (ii) the biochemical                  
              mechanism of formate dehydrogenase (and other enzymes) required for            
              formate utilization. The research proposed here, together with work            
              in progress to develop a transformation system, will lay the                   
              foundation for these long-term goals.                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              The process of biological methanogenesis occurs in a variety of                
              anaerobic habitats and is a significant component of the global                
              carbon cycle.  Methanogenic organisms are archaebacteria which are             
              phylogenetically distinct from eubacteria and eukaryotes; thus, the            
              study of these unusual organisms offer a third perspective to study            
              fundamental cellular processes.  The present understanding of                  
              methogenesis is largely based on microbiological and biochemical               
              studies.  This research will combines molecular genetic and                    
              biochemical approaches to investigate the pathway of                           
              formate-dependent CO2 reduction to methane.
