Title       : Oxalate Biogeochemistry of Forest Soil Ectomycorrhizal Mat Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1995       
File        : a9106784

Award Number: 9106784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford N. Dahm                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Griffiths griffitr@ccmail.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Baham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Caldwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kermit Cromack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Drs. Griffiths, Caldwell, Baham and Cromack have shown that certain            
              specialized ectomycorrhizal species of Gautieria and Hysterangium              
              form extensive hyphal or rhizomorph mat structures that are                    
              significant features of temperate coniferous forests.  In                      
              comparison with soils without obvious mat development, both types              
              of mats have elevated pore-water concentrations of dissolved                   
              organic carbon, fluoride, oxalate, and sulfate, as well as major               
              and trace metal cations, including Al and Fe which can be                      
              responsible for controlling the solubility of both organic and                 
              inorganic phosphorus.  In Hysterangium mats, most of the oxalate               
              was present in the solid phase, presumably as calcium oxalate,                 
              while in Gautieria mats, a relatively larger fraction of oxalate               
              was in solution at concentrations that approached those used in                
              organic matter extractions of soils.                                           
                                                                                             
              While long implicated in mineral dissolution, the ligand properties            
              of oxalate also suggest other significant roles in forest soil                 
              processes.  Drs. Griffiths, Caldwell, Baham and Cromack will use               
              these mat communities to investigate the role of oxalate species               
              and other major organic ligands in mineral weathering, solution and            
              solid phase soil chemistry, Al and Fe activity, and the processing             
              of organic nitrogen and phosphorus by soil enzymes in diverse                  
              forest ecotypes.  Results from field studies and laboratory                    
              experiments will be used as input to a quasi-steady-state model of             
              soil solution and solid phase biogeochemistry.  This model will                
              provide insight into actual mechanisms controlling nutrient cycling            
              in forest ecosystems.  These researchers are experts in the area               
              of forest soil biogeochemistry.  The facilities available for this             
              research are outstanding.
