Title       : SGER: Exploratory Comparison of Eight Nuclear and mtDNA Sequences Among Selected
               Taxa of Deltocephaline Leafhoppers (Homoptera: Cicadellidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  1991    
File        : a9106221

Award Number: 9106221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: H.Derrick Blocker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   The Deltocephalus-like genera of leafhoppers have posed a                 
              difficult problem for workers because of an absence of phylogenetic            
              information and definitive characters necessary for generic                    
              separation.  Towards obtaining a clearer picture of phylogenies in             
              this group, the investigators hope to perform cladistic and                    
              molecular analyses of a subset of 24 nearctic genera in which                  
              fusion of the connective and aedeagus appears to represent a                   
              synapomorphic character of the subset.  A current problem in the               
              field of molecular systematics is that there is no agreement as to             
              which DNA sequences can be used in insect taxonomic studies at the             
              generic level.  Almost all molecular systematic studies to date                
              have compared species at higher taxonomic levels.  Most of the                 
              sequences which have been examined at these levels are monomorphic             
              at lower taxonomic levels.  At the other extreme there are                     
              sequences which demonstrate extensive intraspecific variation but              
              which may present no recognizable homology at higher taxonomic                 
              levels.                                                                        
                   Funding is requested for one year to examine eight different              
              DNA sequences in leafhoppers selected at four taxonomic levels.                
              Five candidate nuclear regions and three mtDNA regions have been               
              identified.  The nuclear DNA regions include: 1,2) two internal                
              spacers (ITS1 and ITS2) in the rDNA cistron, 3) a hypervariable                
              region of the 28s from the rDNA cistron, 4) an intron in the                   
              invariant histone H2A gene and 5) the ribosomal S14 protein gene               
              and its intron.  The mitochondrial genes are: 1) a region of the               
              12s rDNA 2) the 16s rDNA and 3) a region of the cytochrome oxidase             
              III gene.  All regions will be amplified with PCR and sequenced.               
              These regions will be initially compared among three species in                
              three tribes in the leafhopper subfamily Deltocephalinae, if the               
              sequences show variation at this level, two additional species will            
              be compared within two of the three tribes.  If intergeneric                   
              variation is detected within tribes then two species within one                
              genus will be examined.  If variation is detected at this level                
              then an examination of intraspecific variation will take collection            
              from different geographic populations of one species.  With this               
              protocol the taxonomic level at which each of these sequences can              
              be used can be determined.  The goal is to identify 2-3 DNA                    
              sequences which can be used in an intensive survey of 24 genera of             
              the Deltocephalus-like genera of leafhoppers.
