Title       : Structure and Role of D-Amino Acid Transaminase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9106174

Award Number: 9106174
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Manning   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Studies on bacteria D-amino acid transaminase will focus on                    
              the functional groups at its active site, its stereochemical                   
              mechanism, and its role in bacteria as a target for enzyme                     
              activated inhibitors.  The gene that encodes this enzyme                       
              allows several hundred milligrams of pure enzyme to be                         
              prepared in one week.  Several site-directed mutagenesis                       
              studies have been carried out; the most interesting is the                     
              change of the active site Lys-145, which binds pyridoxal-5'-                   
              phosphate, to Gin.  This mutant turns over very slowly so                      
              that the kinetics of formation of several intermediated can                    
              be easily measured.  Thus, the formation of the Schiff base                    
              with the substrate, D-alanine, takes place over a period of                    
              minutes at 27o.  Exogenous (added) amines have a significant                   
              effect on the rate of Schiff base (aldimine formation).  The                   
              rate of formation of the E-PMP and/or ketimine form takes                      
              place over a period of hours and the exogenous amines have no                  
              effect on this step with this mutant enzyme.  The effect of a                  
              large number of amines with the K145Q mutant enzyme and the                    
              K145N mutant will be ascertained in the present proposal.                      
              The K145Q mutant enzyme is under less stringent                                
              stereochemical control than is the wild-type enzyme (see                       
              enclosed galley proofs of manuscript in press).  This result                   
              will be extended with isotope studies to determine which                       
              proton of the C-4 of PMP is retained or released in the wild-                  
              type enzyme as well as in the K145Q and K145N mutant enzymes.                  
              L-Ala and L-Glu can undergo one turnover with D-amino acid                     
              transaminase in the half-reaction to yield the corresponding                   
              keto aid and the pyridoxamine-5'-phosphate form of the                         
              enzyme.  However, in the second half of the reaction, i.e.,                    
              transfer o the amino group to another keto acid only D-amino                   
              acids are formed.  Therefore, stereochemical fidelity is                       
              maintained.  These experiments will also be performed with                     
              the K145Q and K145N mutant enzyme to determine whether there                   
              is less stereochemical constraint as measured by this                          
              technique also.                                                                
              D-serine, a relatively slow substrate, generates a quinonoid-                  
              like intermediate band at 493 nm.  The half-life of species                    
              is of the order of hours and its disappearance is correlated                   
              with inactivation of the enzyme.  Preliminary studies by                       
              stopped-flow methods indicate that another quinonoid with a                    
              rapid turnover is formed.  These studies will be continued.                    
              The mode of inactivation by D-serine by use of 14C-labeled                     
              compound and peptide mapping will be investigated.                             
              D-Amino acid transaminase inactivated by chloro-D alanine,                     
              cycloserine, or gabaculine will be investigated by difference                  
              maps once the structure of the wild-type enzyme is                             
              established.  The inactivation of D-amino acid transaminase                    
              by various suicide substrates and the accumulation of                          
              intermediates during this process will be studied.
