Title       : A Supercompiler with Recursive Restrictions on Configuations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1994      
File        : a9106426

Award Number: 9106426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54585              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valentin Turchin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 2875      SYSTEM SOFTWARE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A supercompiler is a program transformer of a certain type.  It traces         
              the possible generalized histories of computation by the original              
              program, and compiles an equivalent program, reducing in the process           
              the redundancy that could be present in the original program.  This            
              may lead to a deep restructuring of the program and a great increase           
              in its efficiency.  A single supercompiler program can serve as a              
              powerful partial evaluator; as a converter of multi-pass scanning              
              algorithms into one-pass algorithms; as a means of program                     
              verification and theorem proving.                                              
              The underlying language used is Refal.  The tracing of computation             
              histories is done by operations over the graph of states and                   
              transitions of the abstract Refal machine.  The states are                     
              configurations of the Refal machine.  In the current supercompiler a           
              configuration is a combination of nested function calls with the               
              values of free variables restricted by a Refal equivalent of certain           
              inequalities.  These restrictions are, however, nonrecursive.  This            
              work will upgrade the system so as to allow arbitrary recursive                
              predicates as restrictions on configuration variables.  The                    
              supercompiler so improved will be then used for a wide range of                
              practical and theoretical problems, such as partial evaluation,                
              automatic construction of compilers, functional inversion, and theorem         
              proving.
