Title       : Topics in Statistical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1995      
File        : a9106237

Award Number: 9106237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Fisher fisher@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Collective phenomena in condensed matter systems associated with               
              quenched randomness and transport will be investigated.  Phenomena             
              to be studied include the effects of thermal fluctuations and                  
              pinning on eqilibrium and non-equilibrium behavior in Type-II                  
              superconductors in a magnetic field and statics and dynamics of                
              spin glasses, random magnets and other systems such as cross-linked            
              gels.  All of these involve classical phase transitions in the                 
              presence of randomness and slow dynamics which result from a                   
              distribution of barrier heights.  The statistical behavior of                  
              nonlinear collective transport phenomena such as the nonlinear                 
              dynamics of flux lines in superconductors, sliding charge density              
              waves, fluids in porous media, sand piles and the motion of                    
              geologic faults will be studied with an emphasis on their universal            
              features.  The effects of randomness on low temperature quantum                
              mechanical behavior of superfluids, superconductors, metals and                
              spin systems will also be investigated.  In particular, the nature             
              of the zero temperature phase transitions, such as metal-insulator             
              transitions, will be studied.                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              The study of the collective behavior of many-particle systems lies             
              at the foundation of condensed matter, or solid state, physics.                
              However, very few, if any, of these systems are perfect.  To                   
              varying degrees all condensed matter systems have randomness                   
              associated with their properties.  The proposed research will study            
              the effects of randomness in a variety of specific systems of                  
              current interest, such as superconductors and magnets, to determine            
              its effects on the system statics, dynamics and transport.  This               
              basic research will look for universal features which are common to            
              these systems and thus provide a solid physical understanding of               
              the behavior of a variety of condensed matter systems.
