Title       : Dissertation Research: Technology and Culture in the Pliocene, West of Lake
               Turkana, Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1991       
File        : a9106186

Award Number: 9106186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11947              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mzalenda Kibunjia  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. John Harris, Mr. Mzalendo Kibunjia                  
              will collect data for his doctoral thesis.  In prior work, Mr.                 
              Kibunjia has discovered three archaeological sites located to the              
              West of Lake Turkana in Kenya which date to between 1.8 and 2.3                
              million years in age.  Given the geological nature of the region,              
              it is highly likely that additional sites are present.  Mr.                    
              Kibunjia will conduct detailed stratigraphic excavation at the                 
              three sites and analyze the lithic and mammal remains recovered.               
              He will then use geological and other relevant data to set these               
              sites into a broader ecological context.  He will also conduct a               
              regional survey to locate, and hopefully excavate, other similar               
              occurrences.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Archaeological evidence indicates that the first recognizable                  
              stone tools produced by hominids (early humans) date to just over              
              2 million years ago.  All come from sites in Eastern and Central               
              Africa.  Because use of complex tools is a uniquely human                      
              hallmark, archaeologists are very interested in the development                
              of this trait.  Very few sites, however, have been located and                 
              the data from these is sparse.  Therefore, the Lake Turkana sites              
              are of great archaeological significance and their excavation                  
              will hopefully shed new light on early human adaptive strategies.              
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons beyond those                    
              described above.  The data gathered will be of direct interest to              
              a large number of archaeologists who will also study these                     
              remains.  The project will assist in the training of an extremely              
              promising young scientist and because he is Kenyan it will also                
              contribute to strengthened U.S.-Kenya scientific relations.
