Title       : Studies of Fronts and Precipitation Bands in the Central United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1995   
File        : a9106235

Award Number: 9106235
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1641045            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter V. Hobbs phobbs@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Locatelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The potential economic and safety benefits of improved                    
              short-term weather predictions are well known.  Due to the                     
              modernization of the national weather observing system,                        
              meteorologist will have access to data of much better spatial and              
              temporal resolution than previously possible on a day to day                   
              basis.  This improvement in the operational weather system                     
              provides opportunities for enhanced research in the area of                    
              mesoscale meteorology.  Mesoscale meteorological processes                     
              generally control the timing, location and severity of most life               
              threatening and economically disruptive weather such as flash                  
              floods, heavy snowfalls, tornadoes, etc.  The opportunities for                
              fundamental improvements in short term forecasts (up to two days)              
              has caused several agencies within the US government to plan a                 
              major interagency research program known as the US Weather                     
              Research Program (USWRP).                                                      
                   The USWRP consists of several components including a series               
              of intensive field observational studies.  The first of these,                 
              know as the Stormscale Operational and Research                                
              Meteorology-Fronts Experiment, Systems Test (STORM-FEST), has                  
              three closely related objectives: focussed investigation of the                
              structure and evolution of wintertime fronts and associated                    
              mesoscale phenomena with emphasis on precipitation and severe                  
              wintertime weather (e.g. severe icing conditions); a research                  
              assessment of the new operational and research meteorological                  
              instrumentation facilities and composite observational networks;               
              a study to begin to understand mesoscale prediction capabilities               
              and limitations in active frontal regions.                                     
                   The Principal Investigator will use a wide variety of                     
              research and operational data, including data from the next                    
              generation of operational instruments, to study frontal mesoscale              
              structures.  The data will come from the STORM-FEST and a                      
              previously completed experiment which studied east coast winter                
              storms, know as the Genesis of Atlantic Lows Experiment (GALE).                
              The principal objectives of the research are to: document the                  
              structure of precipitation in winter cyclones; to determine the                
              mechanisms responsible for the organization of significant                     
              mesoscale precipitation phenomena; to improve the forecasting of               
              heavy precipitation in winter cyclones.
