Title       : The Evolution of Lymphocyte Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1993       
File        : a9106316

Award Number: 9106316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Warr warrgw@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry E. Ledford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed studies focus on the expression of the immunoglobulin             
              (Ig) heavy chain gene in the channel catfish, Ictalurus punctatus.             
              The specific issues addressed are:  1) Regulation of the                       
              differential expression of B-cell membrane receptor and secreted               
              forms of the IgM heavy (mu) chain.  This laboratory has found that             
              the pattern of alternate exon splicing involved in the production              
              of the mRNAs encoding the membrane and secreted forms of the mu                
              chain in the channel catfish is different from that used by                    
              mammals, elasmobranchs and amphibia.  Expression vectors containing            
              relevant regions of the channel catfish mu chain gene will be                  
              transfected into mouse pre-B or plasma cells to investigate the                
              factors influencing splice-site choice in the catfish mu chain                 
              transcript.  2)  Assembly of hybrid catfish/mouse Ig heavy chains              
              in mouse B cells.  This laboratory has observed that the assembly              
              and secretion of Igs in which the heavy chain consists of a mouse              
              VH domain fused to the channel catfish mu chain constant region                
              domains is blocked.  It is proposed to identify the sites of this              
              blockage in the biosynthetic pathway.  Potential sites of blockade             
              to be investigated include defects in disulfide bond formation                 
              improper glycosylation, abnormal association of the heavy chain                
              with the immunoglobulin binding protein (BiP), and failure to                  
              associate correctly with the endogenous mouse light chains.  3)                
              Identification of the putative enhancer driving expression of the              
              channel catfish Igh locus.  Regions of the channel catfish Igh                 
              locus will be put into appropriate expression vectors, and B-cell              
              specific enhancer activity in heterologous (mouse) B lymphocytes               
              will be sought.                                                                
                                                                                             
              These studies should result in greater understanding of the                    
              expression of the antibody mu chain gene and the function of its               
              encoded protein in the channel catfish.  In addition, they will                
              contribute to our overall understanding of the evolution of the                
              immunoglobulins and their genes in the vertebrates.
