Title       : Parallel Evaluation Of Deductive Database Queries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1992     
File        : a9106450

Award Number: 9106450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ron Ashany                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165262             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abraham Silberschatz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project concerns parallel evaluation of deductive database                
              queries by processors interconnected by a communication network.               
              Deductive database systems are key to the future design of                     
              complex applications like knowledge bases, expert systems, and                 
              scientific applications. Yet the potential of such systems is                  
              compromised by poor performance in environments where the data                 
              cannot fit in main memory. Parallelization is investigated as the              
              means to improve performance, with attention on Datalog, a logic-              
              based deductive language that naturally expresses queries that                 
              arise in advanced database applications. Based on three                        
              parameters of discriminating functions, discriminating variables               
              and hash functions, a framework for the parallelization of                     
              Datalog programs is designed. Discriminating functions and                     
              variables which establish only required interconnections between               
              parallel processors, thereby minimizing the overhead of                        
              unnecessary communication, are investigated. Hash functions are                
              designed which capture the division of labor between processors                
              and provide maximum performance by effectively balancing the                   
              workload. Although parallel systems promise enormous computing                 
              resources, their performance rests on the design of sophisticated              
              parallelizing compilers that can make effective use of such                    
              resources. This research makes a pragmatic contribution to                     
              parallel system performance by providing an approach to the                    
              automatic parallel evaluation of an important subset of deductive              
              database programs, Datalog.
