Title       : In vivo Studies of a Yeast Signal Recognition Particle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9106352

Award Number: 9106352
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Ogrydziak dmogrydziak@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Presently, there is only limited and indirect in vivo evidence                 
              supporting any of the proposed functions of the signal recognition             
              particle (SRP) deduced from in vitro studies.  Specific objectives             
              of this project are to confirm an in vivo role in secretion for                
              SRP, to examine in vivo translational arrest mediated by SRP, and              
              to initiate studies of regulation of 7S RNA synthesis.  These                  
              studies will be done with the genetically tractable yeast, Yarrowia            
              lipolytica. It has two SCR genes coding for functional 7S RNAs, and            
              it secretes high levels of a protease (AEP).  Mutated genes coding             
              for SRP components will be introduced into Y. lipolytica, and the              
              effects on synthesis and translocation of secretory proteins                   
              determined by pulse-chase immunoprecipitation experiments using                
              AEP-related polypeptides as reporter molecules.  Three interrelated            
              lines of research will be conducted.   First, scr1-1, a mutation               
              of SCR1 which results in translational arrest of AEP synthesis,                
              will be further characterized.  Second, SRP will be purified, sizes            
              of the protein subunits determined, partial amino acid sequences               
              of the Y. lipolytica homologues of Srp14p and Srp54p obtained, and             
              the SRP14 and SRP54 genes cloned and sequenced.  Conditional                   
              mutations will be isolated, and their effects on AEP synthesis and             
              secretion determined.  Third, SCR regulation will be studied by                
              determining the role of a 5' consensus sequence on SCR1 and SCR2               
              RNA synthesis.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The presumed function of the signal recognition particle, as                   
              deduced from in vitro studies, is to recognize the amino-terminal              
              signal peptide leader sequence of nascent proteins destined for                
              sequestration in the endoplasmic reticulum, and facilitate protein             
              translocation to that organelle.  SRP binds to the signal peptide              
              of the nascent protein, transiently arresting further translation.             
              The peptide-bound SRP then binds to a receptor on the cytoplasmic              
              side of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane; this results in                    
              dissociation of the peptide from the SRP at the site of                        
              translocation across the ER membrane.  The experiments to be                   
              carried out will extend our understanding of the function of SRP               
              and provide information derived from in vivo studies.  SRP and the             
              secretory process in general is well-studied in yeasts,                        
              particularly S. cerevisiae and S. pombe, and it has become clear               
              that there are significant differences between those two yeasts in             
              this process.  Yarrowia lipolytica, which is not closely related               
              to either of the better-studied yeasts, has a very high secretory              
              capacity and is currently being developed as a cellular factory for            
              the commercial production of genetically-engineered proteins.  A               
              better understanding of the secretion process in this yeast is                 
              therefore significant not only because of the basic information                
              that can be derived, but also because of the potential contribution            
              to biotechnology through improved commercial yields of genetically-            
              engineered proteins.
