Title       : Protocols & Software Structures for Network Managers-Agents Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1994      
File        : a9106127

Award Number: 9106127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308679             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yechiam Yemini yemini@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Current network management technologies and standards are based             
              on a centralized management paradigm.  Management logic is                     
              centralized in managers who access management-information bases                
              (MIBs) at device agents.  Manageability is bounded by the number of            
              MIB variables that may be centrally accessed and the access speed.             
              Thus management does not scale for large, complex, high-speed or               
              low bandwidth networks.  This project aims to develop and study a              
              novel alternative to centralized management:  management by                    
              delegation.  Management applications would, under this paradigm,               
              delegate programs to agents who will apply them to monitor and                 
              control network devices.  Management functions could be flexibly               
              distributed to agents and execute in close proximity to devices.               
              Delegation thus decentralizes management rendering it scalable for             
              large, complex and fast networks.  Success in this project would               
              mean that the principal investigator has established novel                     
              protocols for delegation of programs and remote control of their               
              executions; created efficient architectures for execution,                     
              coordination and security of management; established semantic                  
              models of management functions and language constructs to script               
              them; established the performance behaviors of the proposed                    
              delegation mechanisms in comparison to current centralized                     
              management models; embedded and demonstrated these technologies                
              within real network-management systems and tools, and exported them            
              to academia and industry.  Success would mean that the research has            
              resulted in establishing unifying principles and mechanisms for                
              effective distributed scalable network management.
