Title       : Interactive Mathematical Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9106389

Award Number: 9106389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176378             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Hanson hansona@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6845,
Abstract    :
                 This is the first year of a two year continuing grant.  One                 
              long-term goal of this research is to develop and exploit                      
              techniques to make it possible for scientists to study and solve               
              problems in mathematics and physics that could not be undertaken               
              without automated assistance.  Another long term goal is to                    
              deduce general principles about the nature of human capabilities               
              and limitations in mental engagement with abstract data spaces.                
              intelligent constraint-based interaction (rule-based) methods                  
              will be combined with semi-automated optimization techniques                   
              develop a domain-independent interactive system of constraints.                
              This system will be designed to allow manipulation of objects                  
              that are transforms of non-observables which are conceptually                  
              difficult mathematical properties.  Simulations that transform                 
              non-observables into manipulatable observables are useful to                   
              exploit human learning processes to master abstract problems.                  
              The abstract concepts range from issues of relative size and                   
              speed estimation, unfamiliar dimensions, and chaotic processes in              
              physics and interactions in many-body problems.  Domain-dependent              
              constraints on representations are used to form a model of a                   
              desired class of spatial configurations.  This leads to a                      
              rational automation methodology.  Direct, context-free                         
              manipulation of objects, rather than manipulation of objects,                  
              rather than manipulation of corresponding surrogate "control"                  
              objects, will also be examined.  This effort seek to lay a                     
              foundation for understanding human capacity for mental engagement              
              with visual representations of abstract concepts.  This will be                
              useful as a basis for subsequent experiments on psychophysical                 
              theories of visualization.//
