Title       : Stable Isotopic Constraints on The Paleoclimate of a High- Latitude Cretaceous
               Terrestrial Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1992     
File        : a9106073

Award Number: 9106073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne Bourgeois                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Gregory   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt M. Ferguson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Cretaceous has long been considered a time of equable                 
              climate while the cenozoic is regarded as a time of ice ages.                  
              Recent work suggests that the concept of an ice free Cretaceous may            
              need to be re-examined.  The best place to look for the extremes               
              of Cretaceous climate is within a high latitude terrestrial                    
              sedimentary basin.  Such rocks exist within the Otway and                      
              Strzelecki groups, southeastern Australia, which were deposited at             
              high latitude (>70 degrees S) during the lower Cretaceous.  Stable             
              isotopic measurements provide a vehicle for inferring the surface              
              temperature.  Previous work on the carbonate concretions recovered             
              from terrestrial sandstones revealed extremely  O-depleted values              
              for calcite, and these data indicate precipitation from low  O                 
              meteoric fluids and annual temperatures on the order of 0 degrees              
              C.  In addition, isotopic profiling of individual concretions and              
              cemented beds indicates that secular changes  in the    O values               
              of calcite cements can be correlated on three different scales:                
              within an individual concretion, within a relative age sequence in             
              a composite concretion, or over meter scales in a vertical section             
              by comparing the isotopic compositions of concretion cores.  This              
              type of detailed isotopic work in conjunction with textural studies            
              indicate that it is possible to differentiate in these rocks the               
              near surface primary meteoric water signature from complications               
              arising from subsequent diagenetic events.  Interpreted in terms               
              of temperature change, the maximum   O change would correspond to              
              about a 5 degree C change in mean annual surface temperature.  In              
              this study, we propose to further constrain the carbonate oxygen               
              isotope data with   O/  O data on phosphate from fossil bones, and             
              with D/H and  O/  O data from paleosols.  Because of the high                  
              paleolatitude of this site and because of its terrestrial                      
              character, any Cretaceous global climatic changes should be                    
              amplified and easily detected in sequential samples in                         
              stratigraphic sections.  The changes already detected in limited               
              stratigraphic sampling suggest that it may be possible to recognize            
              Milankovitch climatic forcing in the isotopic record of the                    
              Cretaceous, southeastern Australia.
