Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1990    
File        : a9014706

Award Number: 9014706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5124               (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert J. Parker ajparker@uga.cc.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia
	      Boyd Graduate Studies Res
	      Athens, GA  30602    404/542-3030

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The impacts of large-scale human disturbance on natural areas have        
              not been well documented.  Large-scale forest clearing provides an             
              opportunity to examine the role of anthropogenic disturbance in the            
              dynamics of forest succession.  Nearly all of the original forest cover        
              on the Georgia piedmont has been removed for agriculture since European        
              settlement began in the early 19th Century.  Much of this land later           
              was abandoned and reverted to forest.  It is therefore an excellent            
              locale in which to evaluate whether differences between pre-colonial           
              and present-day forest vegetation can be attributed to human                   
              disturbance.  This doctoral dissertation project will use a systematic         
              sample drawn from a presettlement forest survey conducted by the state         
              of Georgia in order to reconstruct species-environment relations of            
              this period.  The sample will be analyzed to determine the physical            
              controls of species distribution, the degree to which these factors            
              explain forest patterns, and the ecological roles of species.  The             
              composition and structure of present-day vegetation will be sampled            
              throughout the study area to establish the impacts of forest clearing          
              by examining the successional status of the modern vegetation and              
              variation in compositional controls between the two periods.                   
                   This research will clarify theoretical aspects of forest                  
              succession, such as distinctions between natural and artificial                
              disturbance and effects of the varied scales of technological impacts          
              by native and immigrant Americans.  It therefore will contribute to the        
              scientific basis of our understanding of human-environmental                   
              relationships.  In addition, it will contribute to the understanding of        
              the region's environmental history and to evaluation of practical and          
              conceptual issues in environmental management.  The project also will          
              provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to              
              continue to develop independent research skills.
