Title       : U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on Narrow Bandgap IV-VI Semiconductor
               Microstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1991    
File        : a9014015

Award Number: 9014015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arto V. Nurmikko arto_nurmikko@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip J. Stiles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bennett B. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 5955      AUSTRIA
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1462,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research on the topic                    
              of semiconductor microstructures. The US investigators are                     
              Dr. Arto Nurmikko and Dr.Phillip Stiles, Brown University,                     
              and Dr. Bennet Goldberg, Boston University.  The Austrian                      
              collaborator is Professor Gunther Bauer, Institut fur Physik,                  
              University of Linz, Austria.  The goal of the project is to                    
              explore novel semiconductor microstructures, based on Narrow                   
              bandgap IV-VI compounds.  A range of sophisticated experimental                
              studies are proposed, with emphasis on lower dimensional                       
              electronic phenomena in quantizing magnetic fields.                            
                                                                                             
              Specifically, compositional and doping superlattices, hetero-                  
              junctions and other microstructures of column four and column                  
              six elements will be grown, fabricated and studied by optical                  
              and transport experimental probes.  The emphasis on PbTe-                      
              based systems is due to the inherent high carrier mobilities,                  
              ease of doping, and large dielectric constant unavailable in                   
              other materials.  The study will concentrate on determining                    
              the unusual many body properties of systems when the Coulomb                   
              energy between carriers is of the same order of magnitude as                   
              the kinetic energy. They will also examine the reduced                         
              dimensional aspects of this interaction, by creating                           
              compositional and doping heterojunctions which confine the                     
              carriers in two dimensions.  The experimental tools to be                      
              applied are magneto-transport, interband and intraband                         
              magneto-optics, and transient optical probes.  Samples will be                 
              grown in Austria and patterned at Boston University and                        
              Brown University. The project will benefit from the                            
              complementary expertise of the US and Austrian investigators                   
              and their past history of successful collaboration.
