Title       : Predictability of Forced, Dissipated and Bounded AtmospheresFor Global,
               Synoptic, and Mesoscales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1993        
File        : a9014650

Award Number: 9014650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Paegle jpaegle@met.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In a classic 1969 paper, Lorenz proved that the                           
              predictability in a simple (frictionless and unheated) model of                
              the earth's atmosphere was, in principle, limited to about five                
              days.  Specifically, this meant that the forecast error would                  
              exceed the variability (say of wind, or pressure) on the actual                
              map at the verification time of the forecast, after some forecast              
              period.  A better model and/or a more complete and accurate set                
              of observations at initial time might reach this time of                       
              "useless" forecasts later, but even the best combination of these              
              would have to reach it in about five days. The predictability, by              
              this measure, in an actual operational forecast model now used in              
              the ECMWF has gone from five days in 1980 to eight days in 1990.               
              This operational model does include the effects of heating, and                
              frictional and topographic interference with the flow caused by                
              the earth's surface.  With these complications it is not amenable              
              to the type of theoretical treatment used by Lorenz.  However, it              
              is possible that precisely these complicating processes somehow                
              enhance the predictability of the operational model.  Thus the                 
              time limit on useful forecasts has yet to be determined, and ways              
              to enhance the predictability deserve extended exploration.                    
                   The objective of the research supported under this award is               
              to estimate the attainable enhancement of predictability by: i)                
              Improving the model's treatment of the larger-scale flow                       
              components, which have the most obvious forecast errors, and                   
              which are most directly linked to pole to equator and continent-               
              ocean contrasts in heating and frictional/topographic                          
              interference; ii) Fitting a research version of the model with                 
              more detailed formulas for the calculation of momentum, heat, and              
              water exchanges with the underlaying surface, and iii) Studying                
              the sensitivity of the global-scale forecast error growth rate                 
              to simulated observational errors in selected regions which are                
              presumed to require fine mesh specification of the initial state.              
                   The PI's prior research in Numerical Weather Prediction,and               
              tropical, boundary layer, and mountain meteorology is especially               
              relevant to the proposed work.  These studies will increase our                
              understanding of the factors affecting predictability, and are                 
              likely to contribute to further improvements in Numerical Weather              
              Prediction over the next decade.
