Title       : U.S.-Germany Workshop on Research in Physics Learning; Bremen, Germany; March 5
               - 8, 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1991     
File        : a9014155

Award Number: 9014155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred M. Goldberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              This award supports ten U.S. participants in a small interna-                  
              tional meeting that will be held in Bremen, Germany in March,                  
              1991 to discuss theoretical issues and empirical studies of                    
              students' learning processes in physics.  The objective of the                 
              meeting is to orient physics education research toward the                     
              investigation of learning processes that lead to a deeper and                  
              more robust understanding of physics.  The workshop has been                   
              co-organized by Professor Fred M. Goldberg of the Institute for                
              Research in Mathematics and Science Education, San Diego State                 
              University, and Professor Hans Niedderer of the Institute of                   
              Physics Education, University of Bremen.  Specific aims of the                 
              workshop are: (1) to analyze theoretical frameworks for the                    
              investigation of student learning processes in physics; (2) to                 
              propose and consider new methodologies and standards for                       
              qualitative empirical research on student learning processes in                
              physics; (3) to discuss new teaching strategies that promote a                 
              deeper understanding of physics concepts; and (4) to suggest                   
              specific research questions which might facilitate collabora-                  
              tion among workshop participants.  The primary participants                    
              are all highly qualified science education researchers who                     
              have made significant contributions to the field.  In addition,                
              several postdoctoral researchers are invited; the opportunity                  
              to interact with international leaders in the field of physics                 
              education research should provide them with a significant                      
              opportunity for professional growth.                                           
                                                                                             
              Since the late 1970's, there has been a major effort in physics                
              education research to identify students' ideas about scientific                
              phenomena, both prior to and following formal classroom                        
              instruction.  Very few studies have focused on how students                    
              learn physics.  There is no international professional                         
              organization to link researchers interested in the study of                    
              physics education.  Thus, this workshop provides an opportunity                
              for physics education researchers from the United States and                   
              Germany (and a few experts from other countries) to come                       
              together for intensive discussions to promote a new orientation                
              in their research.  Proceedings will be published by the                       
              Institute for the Teaching of the Natural Sciences, Kiel,                      
              Germany.  This will be a vehicle for encouraging a continued                   
              focus on the issues raised at the workshop, and for sharing the                
              results with a larger audience.
