Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1990    
File        : a9014537

Award Number: 9014537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Athol D. Abrahams abrahams@geog.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Basic hydraulic variables, such as water discharge and flow shear         
              stress, are derived from velocity profiles assuming that their shape is        
              logarithmic.  Recent studies have demonstrated that velocity profiles          
              in coarse bedded streams are often not logarithmic but segmented or            
              S-shaped.  This doctoral dissertation research will focus on the               
              various factors affecting the shape and spatial variation of velocity          
              profiles in natural streams with coarse bed material.  In this project         
              two sets of data will be collected on velocity profiles:  one set of           
              measurements from 10 natural coarse bedded streams in New York and             
              Quebec and the other set from a flume with a bed of coarse material in         
              the Hydraulics Laboratory at the State University of New York at               
              Buffalo.  Respectively, these two sets of measurements will permit the         
              elucidation of the effect of varying bed roughness on the shape and            
              spatial variation of velocity profiles and the examination of the              
              effect of variables such as channel slope that are difficult to isolate        
              in the field.  These two complementary sets of field and laboratory            
              data will make possible the more accurate estimation of water                  
              discharge, bed sediment entrainment, and bed sediment transport rates.         
                                                                                             
                   This research will contribute to a better understanding of flow           
              and resistance in channels with large roughness elements.  The                 
              solutions to many problems in geomorphology, engineering, and                  
              environmental science encountered in the exploitation of surface water         
              resources depend upon developing more accurate flood routing models and        
              sediment transport models.  The project also will provide an excellent         
              opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to develop               
              independent research skills.
