Title       : Organometallic Chemistry of the Iron Triad Metals in High Oxidation States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1992       
File        : a9014374

Award Number: 9014374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Shapley pshapley@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and                   
              Organometallic Chemistry Program is the organometallic                         
              chemistry of three transition metals: iron, ruthenium and                      
              osmium. Of particular interest are compounds of these metals in                
              which oxygen or nitrogen atoms, or nitrogen-containing organic                 
              molecules, are bound to the metal. Results of the project are                  
              expected to provide an improved understanding of oxidation                     
              reactions mediated by metal complexes in organic chemistry and                 
              by metalloenzymes in living systems.                                           
                                                                                             
              Alkyl complexes of the iron triad metals in high oxidation                     
              states will be studied. Novel reaction chemistry of                            
              nitridoosmium(VI) and ruthenium(VI) will be exploited in                       
              cross-coupling reactions of organic halides with Grignard                      
              reagents. The syntheses of new oxo or nitrido metal complexes                  
              containing a second pi-donor ligand (oxo, sulfido, alkylimido,                 
              or alkylidene) will be undertaken, and the reactions of these                  
              new complexes with unsaturated organic molecules, two-electron                 
              donors and electrophiles will be examined.  New types of                       
              heterobimetallic molecules will be synthesized which will be                   
              both coordinatively unsaturated and highly oxidized. These new                 
              heterobimetallic complexes are expected to show increased                      
              reactivity and selectivity in the oxidation of organic                         
              molecules, since they will be designed to bind substrate,                      
              activate it toward intramolecular atom transfer, and suppress                  
              competing electron transfer reactions. The cooperativity                       
              between the two metals may aid in the utilization of dioxygen                  
              as the secondary oxidant. A thorough study of the mechanism of                 
              the oxidation of alcohols by dioxygen, utilizing a                             
              previously-discovered bimetallic osmium-chromium complex, will                 
              be undertaken. Finally, previous work on the organometallic                    
              chemistry of ruthenium and osmium in high oxidation states will                
              be extended to include oxidized alkyl iron complexes.
