Title       : Collaborative Research on the Use of Case Control Methods To Test Opportunity
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1993    
File        : a9014187

Award Number: 9014187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24704              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Cantor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Westat Inc
	      1650 Research Blvd
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/251-1500

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Over the past decade, a major focus of crime etiology has been                 
              opportunity theories of victimization.  The appeal of these                    
              theories has been the idea that opportunity, as much as criminal               
              motivation, is a necessary element for crime to occur.  Despite the            
              popularity of opportunity theory, neither theoretical nor empirical            
              research has gone much beyond the original principles articulated              
              in the late 1970's.  The development of the theory has been slowed             
              by the over-reliance on secondary data which has limited the                   
              refinement of concepts and the testing of theoretical propositions.            
              As a result, the theory is not sufficiently developed to                       
              operationalize key opportunity concepts.                                       
                                                                                             
              This collaborative project will expedite theory building by using              
              a case-control design to refine and test the theory as it applies              
              to non-commercial robbery.  A sample of 50 robbery victims and 50              
              nonvictims will be interviewed using both structured and semi-                 
              structured questions.  Qualitative and quantitative information                
              will be collected on both the lifestyle and ecological contexts of             
              each group.  This information will be used to determine (1) the                
              situational and lifestyle circumstances associated with becoming               
              a robbery victim and (2) discernable differences between victims               
              and nonvictims in terms of their ecological and lifestyle patterns.            
                                                                                             
              The results of the research will enable refinements to the criminal            
              opportunity model as it applies to victimization.  As importantly,             
              it will provide an assessment of the utility of the case-control               
              design for testing opportunity models.  Beyond advancing theory and            
              methodology in criminological research, results of this research               
              could have significant implications for crime reduction.
