Title       : Excavation of Middle Stone Age Occupation Horizons at the Katanda Sites, Semliki
               Valley, Zaire
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1991  
File        : a9014092

Award Number: 9014092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78131              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison S. Brooks abrooks@gwis2.circ.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The earliest known remains of anatomically modern humans occur in              
              Africa.  These remains are associated with people practicing                   
              Middle Stone Age (MSA) activities.  The most intensive research                
              on MSA peoples has been in the Cape Province of South Africa, but              
              remains also have been uncovered in the Katanda area of the                    
              Semliki Valley in eastern Zaire.  The Katanda sites are                        
              associated with fish remains, which suggest that aquatic                       
              resources may have been used much earlier than is evident at the               
              South African sites.  One of the Katanda sites also has yielded                
              six barbed bone points, which are estimated to date from about                 
              40,000 years before the present, the earliest known record of                  
              complex bone technology.  This grant will permit further                       
              excavation of paleosol-related remains at the most productive of               
              the Katanda sites.  It also will permit surveying and mapping of               
              the paleosol horizon along a roughly three kilometer exposure in               
              order to place the archaeological findings in a broader regional               
              context, and it will enable use of dosimeters and additional                   
              samples to determine more accurately the age of these MSA                      
              horizons.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This project will expand on the work of previously sponsored                   
              excavations from a very promising site, which already has shed                 
              new light on Middle Stone Age peoples in central Africa.  This                 
              work will contribute to our knowledge about the specific features              
              of this site, and it also will contribute to our more general                  
              understandings of the processes by which evolution of modern                   
              humans was related to the development of new technologies and the              
              exploitation of new environments and food sources.
