Title       : U.S.-UK Cooperative Research: Corrosion, Oxygen Mass Transfer and Heat Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1991   
File        : a9014205

Award Number: 9014205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Euan F C. Somerscales   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1406,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Euan Somerscales, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and Drs.                    
              A.D. Mercer, P.E. Francis and A. Turnbull, National                            
              Physical Laboratory (NPL), Teddington, Middlesex, England.                     
              The objective of the project is the study of the transport                     
              of oxygen to a corroding heat transfer surface, using a                        
              unique piece of experimental equipment at the NPL.                             
                                                                                             
              The corrosion of heat transfer surfaces by flowing water                       
              can result in loss of material from the surface and                            
              eventual perforation. In addition, the accumulation of                         
              corrosion products introduces a thermal resistance which                       
              impedes the transfer of heat.  This is a topic of technical                    
              importance because of the almost universal use of water of                     
              various qualities, as a medium of heating or cooling.  In                      
              spite of this, the corrosion of heat transfer surfaces is                      
              not well understood from the fundamental point of view.                        
              Consequently, quantitative information of the type that would                  
              permit the designer and user of heat transfer equipment to                     
              predict with confidence the effects of corrosion on its                        
              life is not available. The proposed investigation will                         
              provide data on the mass transport rate of oxygen to a                         
              corroding surface under heat transfer conditions in turbulent                  
              flow.  The results of this research will make a significant                    
              contribution to the development of methods to predict the                      
              operating life and performance of heat transfer equipment,                     
              such as cooling passages of internal combustion engines,                       
              steam power plant condensers, and receivers of solar                           
              collectors.  The project will benefit from the complementary                   
              expertise of the U.S. and British investigators in the area                    
              of corrosion fouling of heat transfer surfaces, and from                       
              the availability of unique experimental equipment at NPL to                    
              carry out the proposed studies.
