Title       : Dissertation Research: Isolating the Hominid Contribution to Dual-Patterned
               Archaeological Bone Assemblages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1990      
File        : a9014227

Award Number: 9014227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11692              (Estimated)
Investigator: Salvatore D. Capaldo  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Blumenschine, Professor of                   
              Anthropology at Rutgers University, Mr. Salvatore Capaldo will                 
              conduct actualistic studies in the Serengeti region of Northern                
              Tanzania.  The data thus collected will provide the basis for his              
              doctoral dissertation.  Following an already completed pilot                   
              study, he will collect information on carnivore modification of                
              bone.  The results will be of direct use in interpreting                       
              archaeological assemblages.  Mr. Capaldo will obtain carcasses of              
              large mammals which have been collected by park officials.  These              
              will then be processed in a variety of ways which attempt to                   
              mimic prehistoric butchering patterns.  The bones will then be                 
              exposed to predation by hyenas and other carnivores and the                    
              resultant remains then collected and analyzed.  Unmodified bones               
              will also be treated in the same way to serve as a control                     
              sample.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              On this basis, it will be possible to examine important                        
              archaeological assemblages from East Africa to determine the                   
              extent to which they have resulted from human, as opposed to                   
              carnivore, activity.  In recent years, archaeologists have                     
              strongly disagreed about the role of hunting in the development                
              of human society.  It has been argued that faunal assemblages                  
              found with early stone tools represent not hunting - as formerly               
              believed - but rather human scavenging from carnivore kills.  It               
              has proven extremely difficult to decide between these                         
              alternatives, and actualistic work, such as that which Mr.                     
              Capaldo will undertake, should serve to provide a needed                       
              interpretive context.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will help to               
              develop a methodological tool which will be applicable to many                 
              sites in different parts of the world.  It will ultimately                     
              increase our understanding of how humans developed and, finally,               
              will assist in the training of an extremely promising scientist.
