Title       : Variable Binding in Extraction and Anaphoric Constructions: Levels of
               Representation or Direct Surface Interpretation?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1991     
File        : a9014676

Award Number: 9014676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86320              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pauline I. Jacobson pauline_jacobson@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                  A central question of linguistic theory is the relationship               
              between syntax, the formal organization of the meaningful                      
              elements of language, and semantics, the system of rules and                   
              principles for interpreting the meaning of a syntactically                     
              organized utterance.  When one makes a serious effort at                       
              formalizing these components of a language, a number of paradoxes              
              and quirks arise to frustrate any given systematic choice as to                
              their structure and relationship.  Developing and improving                    
              models of language which surmount these obstacles to give fuller               
              and more coherent accounts of the full range of linguistic                     
              phenomena is the trade of syntactic and semantic theoreticians,                
              and the aim of the present project.                                            
                                                                                             
                   One of the fundamental choices to be made in constructing a               
              model of language is to determine whether the semantic                         
              interpretation takes as its input structure the surface syntactic              
              structure of an utterance, or whether there is some more abstract              
              underlying syntactic structure which serves as the basis of                    
              semantic interpretation.  Both possibilities have been explored                
              extensively in the literature, and both have advantages and                    
              disadvantages in the naturalness with which they account for                   
              linguistic data, so the question remains open.                                 
                                                                                             
                   The present project takes as its premise a model which                    
              directly interprets surface syntactic structures, and will                     
              examine a number of the unresolved problems which such a model                 
              confronts.  Some recent work by the Principal Investigator and                 
              others has suggested new approaches to these problems, which the               
              PI will explore in detail.  The problems relate generally to the               
              interaction of variable binding with extraction and with certain               
              anaphoric phenomena such as VP deletion in English.  The                       
              phenomena to be examined will include the behavior of reflexives               
              and bound pronouns in wh-questions, pseudo-clefts, and the                     
              'tough' construction; the account of sloppy identity in VP                     
              deletion and 'paycheck' pronouns; the analysis of antecedent                   
              contained deletion; and the interaction of weak crossover with                 
              all of these constructions.
