Title       : Research Training Group in Neural Processing in Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1994      
File        : a9014347

Award Number: 9014347
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $872682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Schneider wws+@imap.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Simons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. Bard Ermentrout  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1115      RESEARCH TRAINING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 1115,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for the establishment of a Research                  
              Training Group in Neural Processing in Cognition.  The faculty                 
              group is a mixture of outstanding senior and junior investigators              
              who come from disciplinary backgrounds as diverse as mathematics,              
              neural science and human behavior, but who share a common interest             
              in the use of mathematics and other analytic tools in the study of             
              relation between neural science and cognition.  The research                   
              programs in which trainees will participate cross the boundaries               
              of neurophysiology, neuroanatomy, psychology, biophysics and                   
              mathematics.  The funds will provide stipends for graduate students            
              and postdoctoral fellows, will support research participation by               
              undergraduate students, will defray part of the cost of the                    
              trainees' research and will enable the trainees to attend                      
              scientific meetings.  In addition, funds will be used to purchase              
              specialized research equipment to be used by trainees, and to bring            
              visiting faculty from other research and academic institutions                 
              for seminars and workshops.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The challenge of relating structural and functional information                
              about the nervous system to behavior is, at once, one of the most              
              exciting and challenging problems of modern science.  In recent                
              years, the development of a variety of new techniques for locating             
              individual neurons within the brain and other complex structures,              
              for detection and isolation of hormones and other neuropeptides,               
              and for the analysis of the activity of individual neurons has lead            
              to an extraordinary increase in understanding of the physical                  
              structure and functional organization of the brain.  Similarly, the            
              development of theoretical paradigms and computational tools for               
              analysis of behavior has significantly increased the sophistication            
              of behavioral analysis.  The merging of these disparate areas of               
              research in approaching the underlying physiological basis of                  
              cognition requires the training of researchers with diverse                    
              expertise in fields not often taught together.  The program funded             
              by this award will provide both the formal training and the                    
              research experience required for creative work at the forefront of             
              modern cognitive science.
