Title       : An Inherently Updatable On-line Load Forecasting Technique
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1991      
File        : a9014331

Award Number: 9014331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149804             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saifur Rahman Srahman@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Govinda Shrestha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Short term load forecasting is an important and complex task requiring         
              in-depth understanding of the technique and the system.  Many                  
              statistical and expert system based techniques produce fairly accurate         
              forecast.  However, most statistical techniques are computationally            
              burdensome as these methods need updating with changing conditions.            
              Expert systems are more adaptable to changing conditions, but it is            
              not always easy to express the available expertise (knowledge) in              
              clear quantitative terms, often leading to inconsistent rules.                 
                                                                                             
              The objective of this research is to develop a new load forecasting            
              technique which combines the capabilities of both the expert systems           
              approach and the statistical techniques, but avoids their drawbacks.           
              Expert systems approach is adopted to utilize the available body of            
              knowledge to form a subset of historical data which are most pertinent         
              to the forecast point.  The priority vector method, explained in the           
              proposal, is applied to quantitatively express any qualitative factors         
              involved in the process.  This approach is fundamentally different             
              from the others, because we create subsets of historical data                  
              according to the conditions at the forecast point, instead of the              
              traditional approach of analyzing the whole historical data set.               
              Further, the updating function becomes automatic in our technique              
              since the subset of data is continually reconstructed and the                  
              relationships redetermined to match each forecast point.                       
                                                                                             
              The development of the technique in its simplest form is outlined and          
              the application is demonstrated in weekly load forecast.  We have              
              identified and briefly discussed the areas which need further work to          
              make the model sophisticated for better performance, and to extend it          
              to perform interval forecasting.
