Title       : Equipment for the Study and Development of a New Family of Gas Sensors for
               Pollution Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1990 
File        : a9014237

Award Number: 9014237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185882             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean J. Robillard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9130,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The adsorption of gas on a solid surface can produce                           
              considerable variation in the electrical and optical                           
              properties of this surface and eventually lead to the                          
              identification of the gas adsorbed as well as a                                
              quantification of its presence in the environment                              
              (pollution).                                                                   
                                                                                             
              With semiconductor surfaces the adsorbed gas is able to                        
              play a role comparable to a "dopant" and therefore                             
              initiate drastic changes in electrical and optical                             
              properties.  For example, one part of nitrogen dioxide in                      
              109 parts of air can be detected on certain                                    
              semiconductors.                                                                
                                                                                             
              As the phenomenon occurs at the surface of the material, a                     
              high surface to volume ration is advantageous, thus                            
              leading to thin films structures.  Such structures can be                      
              utilized in a small sensor tailored to a specific gas.                         
              The specificity will result from the compatibility of the                      
              electronic structure of the material near its surface and                      
              the atomic structure of the gas being detected.                                
                                                                                             
              The main technical objectives of the project will be (a)                       
              to study the mechanism of adsorption over different types                      
              of materials (metal, inorganic and organic                                     
              semiconductors); (b) to establish the conditions for                           
              specificity in adsorption; (c) to design electronic                            
              structures in materials providing selective adsorption                         
              with resulting changes in surface conductivity or optical                      
              reflection coefficients; (d) to prepare thin films of                          
              selected materials with the above structure and                                
              incorporate them in a sensor configuration; and (e) to                         
              carry on comparative sensitivity tests with existing                           
              sensors or methods of detection.                                               
                                                                                             
              The University of Texas at El Paso is requesting support                       
              from the RIMI program for equipment for this project,                          
              which would involve faculty and students from the                              
              Departments of Physics, Electrical Engineering,                                
              Chemistry, and Geological Sciences.  The proposed project                      
              will enhance both our Minority Research Center of                              
              Excellence in Materials Science and our newly established                      
              Center for Environmental Resource Management.
