Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1990      
File        : a9014554

Award Number: 9014554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5985               (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan Lichtenstein  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The interrelationships among politics, ideology, and the economics        
              of industrial organization have direct relevance to focal issues in            
              industrial geography:  the spatial location of industrial enterprise,          
              the constraints on decision making imposed by various ownership                
              patterns, and decisions about the introduction of new technology.              
              Within the country of Israel, a remarkable diversity of production             
              structures coexists.  Production structures are characterized by the           
              way in which the labor process is organized and by the distinct                
              political and ideological structures that regulate the production              
              process.  This doctoral dissertation project will apply recent                 
              theoretical insights in the field of industrial geography to                   
              compare the organization of production and the location of industry in         
              four distinct production structures--the kibbutz, Histadrut (labor             
              federation), government, and private industry.  This research will             
              relate the industrial restructuring taking place at the level of the           
              firm in Israel to the distinct economic, political, and ideological            
              characteristics of each production structure and to the economic,              
              political, and ideological restructuring taking place at the national          
              level.  The doctoral student will conduct twenty firm-level analyses,          
              five for each production structure, and the validity of the findings           
              from the individual firm-level analyses will be tested and compared to         
              empirical findings of the contribution of each production structure to         
              the Israeli economy in general over the last thirty years.                     
                                                                                             
                   This project will contribute to our understanding of the extent to        
              which organization and location of industry in these production                
              structures is constrained and motivated by political and ideological           
              elements in the use of space, labor supply and demand, the application         
              of technology, organizational structure, and the availability of               
              capital.  It will expand our understanding of location theory as it            
              applies to capitalist economic development, and it will add the                
              dimension of space to the study of industrial restructuring.  The              
              project also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising             
              young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.
