Title       : Administrative Support for Soviet Participants in US-USSR Joint Committee
               Meeting (April 14-20, 1990)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1992        
File        : a9014746

Award Number: 9014746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerson Sher                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : May 1,  1990         (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: N. P. Laverov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Travel Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5939      US/USSR ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal supports the local costs for the foreign                         
              participants at the first meeting of the US-USSR Joint                         
              Commission for Cooperation in the field of Basic                               
              Scientific Research to be held in Washington, DC on April                      
              19-20, 1990.  Dr. Bromley, OSTP, and Dr. Nikolay Laverov,                      
              Chairman of the USSR State Committee for Science and                           
              Technology will chair the proceedings.                                         
                                                                                             
              The Joint Commission was created by the January 1989                           
              intergovernmental Agreement on Cooperation in the Field of                     
              Basic Scientific Research.  That agreement, in turn,                           
              provides the framework for subordinate agency-level                            
              memoranda of understanding through which the cooperative                       
              activities are actually implemented.  It is under this                         
              umbrella that the NSF signed a Memorandum of Understanding                     
              last May with the Soviet Academy of Sciences.  This                            
              agreement has given us, for the first time, a direct link                      
              with the Soviet Academy of Sciences and the ability to                         
              support investigator-initiated, competitively reviewed                         
              cooperative research proposals.                                                
                                                                                             
              The Commission's  main task is to review the                                   
              implementation of this new cooperative program.  It will                       
              discuss issues and problems, such as the difficulties of                       
              bridging barriers in the Soviet Union between the Academy                      
              and the universities, new research topics and emphases,                        
              and coordination of the global change research between the                     
              two countries.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This project fulfills the program objective of advancing                       
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in                        
              the United States and the U.S.S.R. to combine                                  
              complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong                      
              mutual interest and competence in the field of basic                           
              scientific research on the basis of equality, reciprocity,                     
              and mutuality of benefit.
