Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Integration of Textand Database Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1991       
File        : a9014236

Award Number: 9014236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16570              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Bruce Croft croft@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 6845,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in computer                     
              science between Dr. W. Bruce Croft, University of                              
              Massachusetts, and Professor Erich Neuhold, Integrated                         
              Publishing and Information Systems Institute, German National                  
              Research Center for Computer Science, Darmstadt, Germany. The                  
              objective of the project is to improve text retrieval models.                  
                                                                                             
              There is an increasing need for information systems that can                   
              provide access to complex, multimedia data.  Conventional                      
              database systems provide many useful data management functions,                
              but have a limited capacity for handling unstructured data,                    
              such as text.  Dr. Croft's current research focuses on text-                   
              based information retrieval that uses relevance feedback                       
              from the searcher to modify intelligently subsequent queries                   
              and improve overall retrieval effectiveness.  The proposed                     
              cooperative work will explore ways to incorporate relevance                    
              feedback and probabilistic retrieval models that are used in                   
              text-based information retrieval with relational database                      
              models used in field-oriented information retrieval.   The                     
              approach is to represent documents and queries as separate                     
              directed graphs; the document will be static and the query                     
              graphs will be matched to the document graphs and reconstructed                
              dynamically, based on feedback from the searcher. The                          
              research project will benefit from the complementary expertise                 
              of the two investigators.  Dr. Croft will work on the retrieval                
              model and study the implications of this model for hypertext                   
              retrieval and integrated query languages.  Professor Neuhold                   
              will concentrate on the implications for data models, the                      
              actual integration with a database system, and the design of                   
              user interfaces for the integrated system.  The results of                     
              this research are expected to lead to a better understanding                   
              of the issues of integration, both from a theoretical                          
              perspective and from practical experience gained through                       
              building a prototype.
