Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1990  
File        : a9014392

Award Number: 9014392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5628               (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew G. Hannah  (Student current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Few explorations of the implications of the important relations           
              between surveillance, space, and social control have been made outside         
              the narrow institutional confines of prisons, asylums, and similar             
              settings.  During the nineteenth century, the U. S. government expended        
              considerable effort to bring Native Americans under its dominion, and          
              its task was particularly difficult in the case of the more mobile             
              tribes.  No native group posed a greater threat to American expansion          
              than the Northern Great Plains Indians.  The eventual conquest of the          
              Northern Plains tribes depended crucially on the U. S. government's            
              dealings with the Red Cloud band of the Dakota Indians during the span         
              of existence of the Red Cloud Indian Agency, 1871-1880.  This doctoral         
              dissertation proposal poses the following significant historical               
              geographical question about the conquest:  Did social control dependent        
              significantly on surveillance and did surveillance in turn depend on           
              spatial characteristics of the watched population?  The project will           
              use documents on microfilm at the National Archives in Washington which        
              include correspondence between Indian agents and Commissioners of              
              Indian Affairs, records of the Dakota Superintendancy, annual reports          
              of Sioux ageneices, correspondence of the departments of War and               
              Interior, and records of treaty negotiations to construct a detailed           
              history of the conquest of the Red Cloud band.  It will assess the             
              degree to which this history was driven by relationships between               
              spatial fixation, the production of knowledge, and social control.             
                                                                                             
                   This research focuses on the spatial aspects of processes of              
              modernization that have not as yet been recognized as prerequisites            
              for the establishment of modern social control.  It will provide               
              valuable information on the relationship between space, knowledge and          
              social control.  If the hypothesis that the links between space,               
              knowledge, and control were important to the establishment of control          
              over the Red Cloud band is supported by documentary evidence, the              
              research will contribute to establishing a new niche for historical            
              geographers and for geographers interested in the present day:                 
              describing and explaining the spatial conditions of possibility for            
              modern social control based on surveillance.  The project also will            
              provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to              
              continue to develop independent research skills.
