Title       : U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on the Nonlinear AC Dynamics of Collective
               Modes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9014193

Award Number: 9014193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19610              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Gruner gruner@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5955      AUSTRIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1765,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor George Gruner of UCLA and a                      
              graduate student to collaborate with Dr. Karlheinz Seeger and                  
              other of the Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Solid State                        
              Physics and the University of Vienna, Austria.  They share an                  
              interest in the nonlinear ac response of the charge density                    
              wave (CDW) ground state.  By combining the experimental                        
              techniques available at the two institutions, they will                        
              explore a range of nonlinear frequency dependent phenomena of                  
              solids.  They will extend their previous collaboration on                      
              CDW's to the low temperature (or type II) CDW dynamics,                        
              which has properties fundamentally different from the high                     
              temperature dynamics.  In addition, they will begin new                        
              studies of the nonlinear ac response of high temperature                       
              superconductors, with experiments conducted as the function                    
              of both temperature and external magnetic fields.  They have                   
              previously studied the small amplitude ac response of the high                 
              temperature superconductors in the micro- and millimeter wave                  
              spectral range.  This work, which will be continued, is                        
              essential in interpreting nonlinear response.  Austrian                        
              scientists will come to UCLA to conduct the small amplitude                    
              (low field) ac response experiments on various single                          
              crystal and thin film specimens.  The same specimens will                      
              then be investigated for ac harmonic mixing at the Ludwig                      
              Boltzmann Institute in Vienna.                                                 
                                                                                             
              High temperature superconductivity is the focus of very great                  
              current interest.  Charge density wave research is also a                      
              very active area in solid state physics.  For both charge                      
              density waves and the superconductors in the vortex state,                     
              certain responses are fundamentally determined by lattice                      
              irregularities.  Thus there are significant variations from                    
              specimen to specimen, and the same key set of responses must                   
              be measured on each specimen.  The collaborating U.S. and                      
              Austrian research groups bring a unique combination of                         
              capabilities to bear on these problems.  Complementary                         
              experimental methods and measurement facilities at the two                     
              laboratories allow the comprehensive investigation of linear                   
              and nonlinear response phenomena in the micro-and millimeter                   
              wave spectral range.  The small amplitude ac response can be                   
              monitored at UCLA over a substantial spectral range, while                     
              the nonlinear ac response is measured at Vienna at selected                    
              frequency.
