Title       : Origin of Microtubule Systems by Symbiosis: Axoneme- spirochete Comparisons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1990       
File        : a9014372

Award Number: 9014372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn Margulis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research is directed toward testing the hypothesis of the                 
              origin of eukaryotic cell organelles by microbial symbioses.                   
              Intracellular microtubule systems are purported to derive from                 
              symbiotic associations of fermenting and motile bacteria.  In                  
              particlular, the idea that centrioles and axonemes as well as                  
              cilia, eukaryotic "flagella", the mitotic spindle, and other                   
              eukaryotic microtubular systems are derived from spirochete                    
              motility symbioses.  This proposal suggests development of two                 
              lines of evidence in approaching this problem:  cloning the gene               
              for a tubulin-like protein which this laboratory recently has                  
              detected in Spirochaeta bajacaliforniensis, and seeking proteins               
              in spirochetes similar to axonemal proteins using immunological                
              techniques,  To facilitate these studies methods will be                       
              developed to culture large, free-living spirochetes.                           
                                                                                             
              Some two decades ago Dr. Margulis proposed a major hypothesis for              
              the origin of eukaryotic cells.  She suggested that cells evolved              
              by a sequence of steps in which close symbiotic relationships                  
              were formed between microorganisms.  In effect, one type of                    
              microorganism took up residence inside another (became an                      
              "endosymbiont") and ultimately became a cellular "organelle".                  
              Her ideas concerning the origin of plastids, and mitochondria as               
              microbial endosymbionts have been substantiated by molecular                   
              studies in a number of laboratories.  Her idea that major                      
              cellular organelles responsible for motility arose from symbiotic              
              relationships between microbes like present day spirochetes has,               
              as yet, not been tested.  The work proposed here would enable Dr.              
              Margulis to begin a systematic comparison between spirochete                   
              proteins and proteins comprising the organelles responsible for                
              motility in present day eukaryotic cells.  The results will lead               
              to a critical test of a major postulate of this important general              
              hypothesis concerning the origin of cellular organelles.
