Title       : Structure and Function of D- and L-Aminotransferase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1991     
File        : a9014924

Award Number: 9014924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dagmar Ringe ringe@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Aminotransferases (also called transaminases) are a class of                   
              pyridoxal-phosphate-depending enzymes that are known to be at                  
              the core of amino acid metabolism in all organisms.  Because                   
              of their central metabolic position, they have been                            
              demonstrated to be involved in a number of diseases that are                   
              characterized by inborn errors of metabolism.  The best                        
              studied of all of this class of enzymes is the aspartate                       
              aminotransferase, which equilibrates aspartic acid and                         
              glutamic acid through the corresponding a-keto-acids,                          
              ketoglutarate and oxalaoceate.  The enzyme is a dimer of two                   
              identical subunits, each of overall molecular weight about                     
              40,000.  The crystal structure of E.coli enzyme shows that                     
              each subunit consists of two domains, and that the active                      
              site lies at the domain and subunit interfaces.  There is a                    
              large conformational change, involving the movement of over                    
              100 amino acids in the smaller of the two domains, when                        
              substrate binds.  Another less well-characterized                              
              transaminase is the bacterial D-amino acid transaminase,                       
              which does not handle L-amino acids at all but does have s                     
              wide specificity for the D-counterparts.  Both are                             
              crystalline, and both bind substrates in the crystalline                       
              state.  A third transaminase which will be studied is the                      
              alanine specific one from beef heart.  The goal of this                        
              project is to understand the specificity and catalytic                         
              mechanism(s) of these transaminases in terms of their                          
              structures.  Structural comparison of the aspartate and                        
              alanine specific transaminases will give insight into the                      
              side-chain specificities of these enzymes.  Comparison of the                  
              L-and D-specific transaminases will give insight into the                      
              chiral specificities of these enzymes.  Mutants of the                         
              bacterial enzymes and structures of complexes with substrates                  
              and inhibitors will  giveinsight as to the roles of specific                   
              amino acids at the active sites and the structural basis for                   
              changes in catalysis (mechanism).  The causes of the                           
              substrate-dependent conformational change in the aspartate                     
              enzyme (and possibly in others) will be probed in detail                       
              through the combined use of crystallography and site-specific                  
              mutagenesis.
