Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1990    
File        : a9014589

Award Number: 9014589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Brian Harley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Atlases consist of both maps and accompanying descriptions and            
              explanatory texts.  As a result, they are both written geographical            
              texts and works of cartography.  While maps are a fundmental medium of         
              geography, the texts accompanying them are crucial to any                      
              interpretation of the maps, and they lend substance to the abstract and        
              highly codified cartographic images.  This doctoral dissertation               
              research seeks to explain the sources and influences on atlases.  It           
              will try to explain how both maps and text are interrelated                    
              in the structure and discourse of atlases as a whole.  The earliest            
              English world atlases are closely related to the political, economic,          
              scientific, and social developments in seventeenth- and early                  
              eighteenth-century England.  This study aims to reconstruct the                
              presence of this context within the content of the atlas texts.                
              Specifically, the doctoral student will examine how information about          
              North America was structured and diffused by early modern world atlases        
              with English texts, and she will analyze the interrelationships of maps        
              and texts of atlases.  Atlas sections covering North America will be           
              analyzed in the contexts of their editorial and commercial theory and          
              practice in seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century England.  The            
              role of atlases as a medium of power and knowledge in the formation of         
              an English overseas empire also will be explored.  Historical                  
              reconstruction based on archival research in the U. S. and England will        
              take three forms:  the roles of atlases as practical documents; the            
              meaning of the atlases to contemporaries; and the social impact of             
              atlases in English society.                                                    
                                                                                             
                   This project will illuminate several aspects of cartography.  The         
              theoretical and empirical contributions it will make will constitute           
              cutting edge research that is redirecting the history of cartography           
              toward increased intellectual significance.  The project will further          
              develop a method for the study of the systematic map-and-text                  
              arrangements that is vital to the study of human communication, and it         
              will expand the seventeenth- and early eighteenth-century historical           
              context for any further study of science and society in that period.           
              The project will also provide an excellent opportunity for a promising         
              young scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.
