Title       : U.S.-Austria Cooperative Research on Population Genetic Models for
               Symbiont-Induced Speciation and Coevolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  1991    
File        : a9014242

Award Number: 9014242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15280              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Moody   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 5955      AUSTRIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for a sabbatical visit by                  
              Professor Michael E. Moody of Washington State University to                   
              the University of Vienna, Austria, to collaborate with Professor               
              Reinhard Buerger of the Institute of Mathematics and other                     
              experts in mathematical genetics.  They share an interest in                   
              the mathematical approaches to examining fundamental problems                  
              in population genetics.  They will develop mathematical models                 
              to examine more precisely the population genetics implicit in                  
              a qualitative theory concerning the mechanism of one type of                   
              speciation.  Specifically, they propose to test the theory that                
              symbiont-induced speciation could result from differential                     
              coadaptation between habitats along an environmental gradient.                 
              Such a gradient could give rise to alternative outcomes of the                 
              coevolutionary interaction.  Professor Moody has considerable                  
              experience modeling population genetics problems such as                       
              coevolution and population structure through analysis of gene                  
              flow at a single locus in geographically structured populations.               
              The University of Vienna has several faculty possessing a                      
              variety of complementary expertise in mathematical genetics,                   
              including multi-locus models.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The most striking aspect of biological evolution is the                        
              radiation of species into the vast array of forms observed in                  
              every corner of the earth.  Understanding species evolution was                
              the goal of Darwin's original theory, and, to this day,                        
              elucidating the mechanisms of speciation remains the central                   
              challenge of evolutionary biology.  One of several conjectures                 
              is that coevolution between species may contribute directly to                 
              speciation; the interaction between symbionts and their hosts is               
              one likely mechanism.  However, the genetic and ecological                     
              conditions under which symbiont-induced speciation will occur are              
              poorly understood.  The proposed collaborative research should                 
              provide theoretical insights into the genetic consequences of                  
              symbiont-induced speciation and therefore contribute toward                    
              improved understanding of evolutionary divergence.
