Title       : Research Training Group in Mathematical Behavioral Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SBR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1996    
File        : a9014278

Award Number: 9014278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1393587            (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Duncan Luce rdluce@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,1115,1180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for the establishment of a Research                  
              Training Group in Mathematical Behavioral Sciences.  The faculty               
              group is a mixture of outstanding senior and junior investigators              
              who come from a diverse set of disciplinary backgrounds, but who               
              share a common interest in the use of mathematical models in the               
              study of cognition and related phenomena.  The research programs               
              in which trainees will participate are aimed at investigation of               
              axiomatic and foundational issues, and at modeling behavioral                  
              phenomena from psychophysics, decision making, cognition processes             
              and social networks.  The funds will provide stipends for graduate             
              students and postdoctoral fellows, will defray part of the cost of             
              the trainees' research and will enable the trainees to attend                  
              scientific meetings.  In addition, funds will be used to purchase              
              specialized research equipment to be used by trainees, and to bring            
              visiting faculty from other research and academic institutions to              
              provide specialized seminars and coursework.                                   
                                                                                             
              Traditionally, the study of behavior has been undertaken by                    
              investigators in a number of distinct disciplines, often defined               
              by the subjects with which the behavior deals.  Thus there are                 
              important behavioral aspects to the study of economics, political              
              science, sociology, anthropology, risk management and decision                 
              science, among others.  Because of the considerable specialized                
              knowledge required by each discipline and the differing arenas in              
              which the behavior may occur, it has been difficult for                        
              investigators to identify underlying commonalities in behavior                 
              patterns.  Increasingly, the use of mathematical models is                     
              providing an important approach for identifying such commonalities             
              and for providing a means for applying principles recognized in one            
              discipline to the problems of another.  The training program funded            
              by this award will produce researchers able to bridge disciplines              
              and to bring the full power of mathematics to bear on a large                  
              variety of problems in the social and cognitive sciences.
