Title       : U.S.-German Cooperation in Comparative Studies of Lake Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9014131

Award Number: 9014131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19906              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Adams msadams@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Frost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Magnuson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,
Abstract    :
              This award supports four scientists from the Center of Limnology               
              and Department of Botany of the University of Wisconsin, led by                
              Professor Michael S. Adams, to collaborate in several studies                  
              of mutual interest with Dr. Max Tilzer and others of the                       
              Institute of Limnology of the University of Konstanz.  The U.S.                
              participants are basing their collaboration on their NSF-funded                
              Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) project that focuses on                   
              the physical, chemical and biological limnology of several                     
              small lakes in the Northern Highland Lake district of Wisconsin.               
              The Germans, in contrast, are studying the limnology of a deep,                
              large lake in southern Germany, Lake Konstanz (the Bodensee.)                  
              One topic of emphasis in both large research programs is the                   
              role of light scattering and absorption by algal and non-algal                 
              materials in controlling primary productivity (the growth of                   
              the suspended phytoplanktonic algae.)  The collaborating                       
              scientists will also compare their different conceptual models                 
              of primary productivity and their different methods of measuring               
              it.  Both groups are also involved in long term studies of the                 
              impact of acid rain on aquatic systems.  They intend to compare                
              the insights they have gained.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The German project leader is an expert on phytoplankton quantum                
              efficiency.  The US methods will be strengthened and benefit                   
              from accurate interpretations of quantum efficiency.  The US                   
              team uses a sophisticated laboratory incubation method for                     
              determining primary productivity that permits great experimental               
              and analytical flexibility.  The German group uses the older                   
              "in situ" procedures that give accurate field measurements but                 
              lack experimental flexibility.  The lakes they use for field                   
              study differ in a number of ways that make for interesting                     
              comparisons.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The proposed collaboration will enhance understanding of the                   
              natural variability of aquatic systems, of primary productivity                
              methods and models, and of the light climate of lakes.  It will                
              also contribute to important on-going research efforts in acid                 
              deposition.
