Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Analysis of Bone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1990      
File        : a9014815

Award Number: 9014815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11624              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Blumenschine rjb@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie M. Selvaggio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Blumenschine, Professor of                   
              Anthropology at Rutgers University, Ms. Marie Selvaggio will                   
              conduct actualistic studies in the Serengeti region of Northern                
              Tanzania.  The data thus collected will provide the basis for her              
              doctoral dissertation.  Following an already completed pilot                   
              study, she will collect information on carnivore modification of               
              bone.  The results will be of direct use in interpreting                       
              archaeological assemblages.  Ms. Selvaggio will collect bones                  
              from observed carnivore kills after the predators have abandoned               
              them.  She will analyze these to take into account the species of              
              both prey and carnivore, as well as the position and nature of                 
              bone modification.  She will attempt to collect a large series                 
              which includes actions by all the major predators.                             
                                                                                             
              On this basis, it will be possible to examine important                        
              archaeological assemblages from East Africa to determine the                   
              extent to which they have resulted from human, as opposed to                   
              carnivore, activity.  In recent years, archaeologists have                     
              strongly disagreed about the role of hunting in the development                
              of human society.  It has been argued that faunal assemblages                  
              found with early stone tools represent not hunting - as formerly               
              believed - but rather human scavenging from carnivore kills.  It               
              has proven extremely difficult to decide between these                         
              alternatives, and actualistic work, such as that which Ms.                     
              Selvaggio will undertake, should serve to provide a needed                     
              interpretive context.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will help to               
              develop a methodological tool which will be applicable to many                 
              sites in different parts of the world.  It will ultimately                     
              increase our understanding of how humans developed and, finally,               
              will assist in the training of an extremely promising scientist.
