Title       : Research Training Group in Development of the Nervous System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9014275

Award Number: 9014275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $785418             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Oakley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard I. Hume  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn W. Tosney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela A. Raymond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1115      RESEARCH TRAINING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1115,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for the establishment of a Research                  
              Training Group in Development of the Nervous System.  The faculty              
              group is a mixture of outstanding senior and junior investigators              
              who come from a variety of disciplinary backgrounds and work with              
              a variety of organisms, but share a common interest in development             
              of the nervous system.  The research programs in which trainees                
              will participate are aimed at three problems central to the                    
              development of all nervous systems: neurogenesis, axonal                       
              navigation, and synaptogenesis.  The funds will provide stipends               
              for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, will support                   
              research participation by undergraduate students, will defray part             
              of the cost of the trainees' research and will enable the trainees             
              to attend scientific meetings.  In addition, funds will be used to             
              purchase specialized research equipment to be used by trainees, and            
              to bring experts from other research and academic institutions to              
              aid in a summer laboratory and lecture course for trainees.                    
                                                                                             
              In recent years, remarkable advances in the use of genetics,                   
              biochemistry, and microscopy have led to significant new knowledge             
              about the development of multicellular organisms.  Despite this,               
              much remains to be learned about development and, in particular,               
              about the mechanisms of key problems posed by the development of               
              many different tissues and structures.  These include the                      
              differentiation of cell types, the basis of cell-cell recognition,             
              and the migration of cells during development.  In this respect,               
              some of the most exciting opportunities and, at the same time, most            
              difficult challenges are presented by developmental studies of                 
              animal nervous systems, which typically contain a large variety of             
              cell types and extend throughout the animal.  Successful research              
              in this area requires a mixture of diverse intellectual and                    
              experimental skills not often taught in traditional neuroscience               
              programs.  This award will provide funds for the training of young             
              neuroscientists who have the multiple skill needed to attack one               
              of the last great frontiers of modern biology.
