Title       : US-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research: Semantics Driven Compiler Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1991   
File        : a9014042

Award Number: 9014042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14570              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Schmidt schmidt@cis.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2875,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in computer                     
              science between Dr. David Schmidt, Kansas State University,                    
              and Dr. Daniel Le Metayer, French National Institute for                       
              Computer Science and Automation (INRIA), in Rennes, France.                    
              The project addresses the problem of analysis and efficient                    
              compilation of functional programming languages.                               
                                                                                             
              Research at KSU has focused on automated transformation                        
              techniques for implementing languages defined by denotational                  
              semantics definitions.  The emphasis has been on using the                     
              data typing information of a program's denotation to transform                 
              the expression that represents the denotation into an easily                   
              implementable form.  Work by the INRIA group at Rennes has                     
              focused upon the application of transformation techniques for                  
              the compilation of functional programs.  A methodology has                     
              been developed for the time and space-complexity analysis of                   
              functional programs, which has been implemented in the                         
              framework of a European ESPRIT project.  In this                               
              collaborative project, the KSU group wishes to benefit from                    
              the expertise of INRIA in compiler-oriented program transfor-                  
              mations, in particular in the formation of abstract interpre-                  
              tations of language definitions.  Since type inference is                      
              just a simple-minded form of abstract interpretation, and                      
              since some abstract interpretations can be coded as type                       
              inference problems, significant gains will be made, once the                   
              KSU group learns how to adapt its type inference-bases                         
              analysis method to describe both storage sharing analysis and                  
              other general abstract interpretation-based analyses.  This                    
              award will fund the travel of Dr. Schmidt and his postdoc-                     
              toral to INRIA to carry out this research.
