Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Southeastern Australian Test of the Role of
               Eustasy in Development of Small-Scale Upper Devonian Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1991      
File        : a9014939

Award Number: 9014939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Milsap                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Cotter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 5912      AUSTRALIA
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Edward Cotter of Bucknell University and Dr. Patrick Conaghan                  
              of Macquarie University, Australia. The proposed research                      
              will attempt to determine whether small-scale (fifth- or                       
              sixth-order) sea-level fluctations were experienced worldwide                  
              during Late Devonian time, thereby contributing to the debate                  
              concerning whether such cycles in North America and Europe                     
              were caused by eustatic (world-wide) or more local tectonic                    
              processes.  The basic approach is to investigate marine and                    
              marginal-marine sedimentary sequences in the Upper Devonian                    
              succession (Lambie Group) of the Lachlan Fold Belt in                          
              southeastern Australia to determine whether they contain                       
              rhythmic patterns, one to ten meters thick, showing cyclically                 
              alternating changes of depth. If such rhythmic alternations                    
              of water depth are found, calculation of the periodicities of                  
              such changes will permit comparison with the periodicities                     
              determined for contemporaneous (Fransnian-Famennian) sequences                 
              in the Appalachian Basin of North America. Should the                          
              southeastern Australian periodicities center around 100,000                    
              years, as is the case in North America, not only will this                     
              support a eustatic control of cycle development, but it                        
              reinforces the idea that eustasy was related to Milankovitch-                  
              type orbital variations. However, if small-scale cycles of                     
              change in relative water depth are not in the Lambie Group                     
              and its correlatives in southeastern Australia, it will be                     
              much more difficult to argue for eustasy as the control on                     
              the cycles in North America.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This project represents excellent collaboration between the                    
              New Zealand group which has made major contributions to                        
              knowledge of the patterns of sedimentation that result from                    
              interaction of tectonic plates and the Cotter work on whether                  
              small-scale sea fluctuations during Late Devonian time were                    
              eustatic.  This is important work which will contribute to the                 
              debate concerning whether such cycles in North America and                     
              Europe were caused by eustatic or more local tectonic                          
              processes.
