Title       : Connectionist Learning Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1991 
File        : a9014065

Award Number: 9014065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222232             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay A. Farrell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Louis Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Charles S Draper Lab Inc
	      555 Tech Square
	      Cambridge, MA  02139    /   -

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The state-of the-art control system                                            
              design methodology for complex                                                 
              nonlinear systems is best described as                                         
              a "black art".  The traditional                                                
              approach (gain scheduling) is an                                               
              arduous, multi-step process: multiple                                          
              linear controllers are employed in an                                          
              ad hoc fashion requiring substantial                                           
              manual adjustment.  Although an                                                
              extensive and well-developed theory                                            
              exists for linear systems, a similarly                                         
              effective theory for nonlinear control                                         
              system design remains elusive.  A                                              
              further difficulty arises after the                                            
              control system has been designed.                                              
              Because the physical models used                                               
              during the design process rarely                                               
              accurately reflect the actual plant                                            
              dynamics, extensive on-line manual                                             
              tuning of the nominal control system                                           
              is required to ultimately achieve                                              
              satisfactory performance.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Artificial neural networks (ANNs)                                              
              offer unique capabilities that may be                                          
              exploited to overcome the limitations                                          
              of conventional nonlinear control                                              
              system design methods; namely, the                                             
              inability to accommodate spatial                                               
              nonlinearities and adapt to time-                                              
              varying dynamics.  The potential                                               
              benefits of practical neurocontrol                                             
              systems apply to a wide assortment of                                          
              complex nonlinear systems and                                                  
              processes; these include atmospheric                                           
              and underwater vehicles, manufacturing                                         
              processes, and robotic systems.  For                                           
              such applications, a neurocontrol                                              
              system might be used advantageously to                                         
              synthesize the required nonlinear                                              
              feedback control law automatically,                                            
              objectively, and near-optimally (given                                         
              the appropriate reinforcement).  To                                            
              fully realize the potential benefits                                           
              of this approach, new conceptual and                                           
              empirical tools for designing and                                              
              analyzing ANNs for feedback control                                            
              will have to be developed.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The main objective of this project is                                          
              to develop the techniques, algorithms,                                         
              and theory required to  implement ANNs                                         
              for the control of complex multi-                                              
              input/multi-output systems having                                              
              spatial nonlinearities and time-                                               
              varying dynamics.  An important                                                
              underlying is to develop a sound                                               
              theoretical framework that may be used                                         
              to refine, formalize, and extend                                               
              research results in this area.
