Title       : U.S.-Finland Cooperative Research on Quantum Liquid Mixtures in 2, 2+1 and 3
               Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1991    
File        : a9014040

Award Number: 9014040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eckhard Krotscheck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 5935      FINLAND
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1250,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Eckhard Krotscheck of Texas A & M                
              University (TAMU) to collaborate in theoretical physics with                   
              Professor Mikko Saarela of the Department of Theoretical                       
              Physics of the University of Oulu, Finland.  They have two                     
              principle lines of joint research.  One is to produce a                        
              microscopic description of the structure and the excitations of                
              uniform mixtures of the quantum fluids Helium-4 and Helium-3 in                
              two and three dimensions.  They are particularly interested in                 
              critical concentrations and in the collective excitations, the                 
              effective mass, and the dynamic form factor of the mixture.  As                
              a second line of research, they are working on questions                       
              related to  the symmetry-broken geometry of films of these                     
              isotopic elements adsorbed to a substrate.  Here they are                      
              seeking to produce a semi-quantitative description of the                      
              interface between the Helium-4 and the Helium-3 liquid and its                 
              collective excitation.  This research relies heavily upon the                  
              complementary expertise of the collaborating scientists which                  
              is the basis for an effective division of labor.  All of the                   
              numerical work on time-dependent correlation functions will be                 
              done in Finland, and all the work on non-uniform systems at                    
              TAMU.  The work on bulk mixtures will continue to be done at                   
              both locations.  Professor Saarela has derived most of the                     
              results necessary for the inclusion and optimization of three-                 
              body correlations, and Professor Krotscheck has worked out the                 
              CBF (correlated basis functions) corrections of ring diagrams                  
              and is presently working on the elementary diagrams.                           
                                                                                             
              The proposed work builds on a productive collaboration in the                  
              general area of the theory of strongly interacting many-body                   
              systems.  A thorough investigation of the problem of mixtures                  
              of Helium-3 and Helium-4 requires state-of-the-art many body                   
              theory at a level that is beyond what has been done previously                 
              in microscopic attempts to understand quantum liquid mixtures.                 
              The proposed research will contribute to such strengthening of                 
              many-body theory in quantum physics.  It applies state-of-the-                 
              art approaches to several interesting questions and is linked                  
              in a timely fashion to experimental research being done by                     
              others which will refine the theory.
