Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9014439

Award Number: 9014439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5495               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Tyler  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Increasing use of modern household fuels in developing countries          
              undergoing rapid urbanization poses serious economic and environmental         
              problems.  Theoretical frameworks and practical tools to assist                
              planners in addressing these problems have been limited and                    
              contradictory.  This doctoral dissertation research will examine two           
              factors that are particularly relevant to the use of fuels in Third            
              World urban households but that have not been addressed adequately in          
              previous research:  commercial activity in the home and the value of           
              women's time.  It will also identify potential policy measures to              
              influence household demand through the quality of appliance technology,        
              instead of through the more conventional price approaches.  The                
              project will use survey questionnaires administered to randomly                
              selected households in three cities in Thailand.  Socio-economic and           
              energy-use data from the surveys will be supplemented by measurements          
              of individual appliance electricity use in representative homes.  Semi-        
              structured interviews with appliance industry representatives and              
              government authorities will provide background for a qualitative               
              assessment of the market, the structure of the industry, and the               
              potential for technological changes to increase energy efficiency.             
              Statistical tests will be used to isolate the influence of specific            
              factors of interest while controlling for others.                              
                                                                                             
                   This research will identify socio-economic, behavioral, and               
              physical characteristics of urban households that are related to the           
              choice and quantity of fuels used in households.  These data will be           
              used to identify the factors driving the rapid changes in the household        
              use of energy resources that are taking place in Third World cities and        
              to pinpoint the ways in which those factors are amenable to policy             
              influence.  The theoretically grounded answers to these questions of           
              household energy use are of enormous practical significance for                
              planners and policy makers concerned with urban growth, environmental          
              quality, and economic planning in developing countries.  The project           
              also will provide an excellent opportunity for a promising young               
              scholar to continue to develop independent research skills.
