Title       : U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research: Regulation of Antibody lass Switching to IgG1
               and IgG2a
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1994      
File        : a9014226

Award Number: 9014226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6475               (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Stavnezer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Med Sch Worceste
	      55 Lake Avenue North
	      Worcester, MA  016550002    508/856-0011

NSF Program : 5937      SWEDEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in genetics                     
              between Dr. Janet Stavnezer, University of Massachusetts                       
              Medical School, and Dr. Eva Severinson, Department of                          
              Immunology, University of Stockholm, Sweden. The objective of                  
              the proposed project is to study the molecular basis of                        
              expression of "genomic" or "sterile" transcripts of                            
              unrearranged immunoglobin constant region genes. Such                        
              transcription has been demonstrated to be a prelude to                         
              immunoglobin class switching.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The ability of B cells to switch from production of one class                  
              of immunoglobin (Ig) to another is essential to the immune                    
              system, since different classes of Ig perform different                        
              functions. This process of class switching is highly regulated,                
              as different classes are expressed in response to different                    
              antigens and at different sites in the body.  In this                          
              project, the investigators propose to study the regulation of                  
              production of sterile transcripts.   After determining the                     
              initiation sites for germline transcription of certain                         
              constant region genes and determining their promoters, the                     
              investigators will attempt to identify and characterize the                    
              DNA.binding proteins that bind to the promoter and then to                     
              obtain evidence of the roles these protein play in the                         
              regulation of such transcription.   Drs. Stavnezer and                         
              Severinson are leaders in the field of the analysis of class                   
              switching, the former in the molecular analysis of                             
              transcription and expression of constant region genes, and the                
              latter in the study of the biological mechanisms of switching.                 
              The results of this research will make an important                            
              contribution to the understanding of the immune system.
