Title       : Fundamental Limits to the Performance of InP-Based Monolithic Integrated
               Receivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1992     
File        : a9014701

Award Number: 9014701
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : July 1,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42816              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Forrest   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant is for numerous optical system                                      
              architectures for transmission and manipulation of                             
              data require common device structures which have                               
              been difficult to attain because of stringent                                  
              demands such structures place on the materials                                 
              growth capabilities presently available.  Chief                                
              among these devices are photoreceivers which                                   
              combine a photodetection element, such as a                                    
              photodiode or photoconductor, with a preamplifier.                             
              Success with such "building-block" circuits is                                 
              essential if more sophisticated, more highly                                   
              functional monolithic integrated optoelectronic                                
              circuits are to be realized.  In this award a program                          
              will be aimed at systematically addressing several of                          
              the most fundamental issues involved in fabricating                            
              high-performance, monolithic photoreceivers and                                
              receiver arrays based on InP and related materials.                            
              High bandwidth, highly functional monolithic                                   
              photoreceivers will be designed, fabricated, and                               
              tested for use in both high density and wide                                   
              bandwidth system architectures.  Several transistor                            
              and circuit configurations will be optimized for                               
              these applications using both a theoretical and                                
              empirical approach.  The completed monolithic                                  
              receivers will be utilized in optical system                                   
              experiments.  This project is a renewal of a                                   
              previous three year NSF funded program, and                                    
              significantly extends prior results toward the                                 
              understanding of the limits of receiver performance.
