Title       : Inter- and Intramolecular Interactions of Luminescent Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1993  
File        : a9118034

Award Number: 9118034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233050             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Demas jnd@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9108,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides continued support from the Inorganic,                      
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program for studies of the                    
              photophysics of d6 diimine complexes by Dr. James N. Demas,                    
              Chemistry Department, University of Virginia.  The overall goal                
              of the project is to develop rationally designed luminescent                   
              molecular probes for specific molecular sites.  He will                        
              investigate the effect of the proximity of a long hydrophobic                  
              hydrocarbon chain on the emission properties of the d6 metal                   
              center.  He will also study luminescent complexes intercalated                 
              into DNA with special emphasis on identification of                            
              fluorescence due to multiple bonding sites, and the rotational                 
              reorientation of the probe while bound to DNA.  In the course                  
              of the study, Demas will assess the effectiveness of time                      
              resolved phase sensitive emission in characterizing                            
              environmental effects on excited state properties.                             
              Steady-state, pulsed, and phase fluorimetry, as well as NMR and                
              crystallography, will be used to examine variations in state                   
              ordering and decay paths of luminescent Ru(II), Os(II), Ir(II),                
              and Re(I) photosensitizers.                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              The electronic structure of luminescent metal complexes is                     
              sensitive to changes in local molecular environment.  When such                
              complexes are bound to species like DNA, their electronic                      
              characteristics may be modified by the location or the symmetry                
              of the site.  Conversely, complexes can be designed to detect                  
              the presence of certain sites.  In this project, the                           
              sensitivity of a new technique to detect changes in the                        
              flouresence of the probe due to its molecular environment will                 
              be tested.  In addition, the effect of changes in the                          
              hydrophobic environment on the luminescence of the metal                       
              complex will be investigated.  The project has implications for                
              sensor technology and for the design and application of new                    
              probes for the structure and dynamics of DNA and other chiral                  
              biopolymers.
