Title       : Structure/Function Studies of Lipid Binding Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1994      
File        : a9118658

Award Number: 9118658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Bernlohr david-b@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The central focus of this proposal is the establishment of a                   
              structural basis for biological recognition.  Macromolecular                   
              recognition between two proteins is a combinatorial process                    
              bought about by the collective interactions of a variety of                    
              amino acids on a protein surface.  Our studies are designed to                 
              address the issues of protein structure and the basis for                      
              protein-protein interaction.  Two central issues will be                       
              addressed within this study: 1) What effects do small molecule                 
              ligands have upon protein structure and, 2) What domains on a                  
              protein surface are most critical for protein-protein                          
              interaction.  Our experimental system revolves around the fatty                
              acid binding protein of adipose cells, its interaction with                    
              fatty acid, and its phosphorylation by the insulin receptor.                   
              Fatty acid binding to the carrier protein allows for its                       
              tyrosyl phosphorylation by the insulin receptor.                               
              Phosphorylation of the holo fatty acid binding protein blocks                  
              fatty acid exchange and the release of the lipid from the                      
              binding domain.  Dephosphorylation of the protein by a specific                
              tyrosine phosphatase allows for ligand release and returns the                 
              fatty acid binding protein to the basal state.  The association                
              of the lipid binding protein with the insulin receptor kinase                  
              is thought to occur via interactions with both and acidic                      
              domain adjacent to the site of tyrosyl phosphorylation and a                   
              second domain, termed the SH2 domain, postulated to play a                     
              primary role in kinase recognition.  We hypothesize that by a                  
              combinant of molecular and structural biology we will define                   
              these domains in protein-protein recognition.  Specifically                    
              during the granting period we propose to examine molecular                     
              recognition by these two proteins by:                                          
                     1.  Determine the structure of the holo adipocyte fatty                 
                         acid binding protein by X-ray crystallography.                      
                         Examine the effect of the fatty acid on tyrosine-19                 
                         and on the SH2 domain.                                              
                     2.  Mutagenize the SH2 domain of ALBP. Create a dominant                
                         by generation of S101E, T103L and V118E. mutations.                 
                         Examine the role of the SH2 domain in kinase                        
                         recognition.  Create a Y19F, dominant SH2 mutation,                 
                         test as and inhibitor of the kinase.                                
                     3.  Co-crystalize the Y19F, dominant SH2 ALBP with the                  
                         soluble kinase domain of the receptor and ATP to                    
                         form a ternary complex.  Map the molecular                          
                         interaction sites between the two proteins.                         
                                                                                             
              The most significant aspects of this study will be the                         
              description at the molecular level how small molecules will                    
              affect protein structure and how that can be translated into                   
              differences in protein-protein recognition.  For our particular                
              system we will determine how the bound fatty acid influences                   
              the binding protein V and how that translates into a more                      
              favorable interaction with the insulin receptor kinase.  Also                  
              we will be able, at the molecular level, to assess the relative                
              contributions of acidic and SH2 domains on substrate proteins                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              in tyrosine kinase interactiolns.  In the long-term, the                       
              information gained here wil allow us to design specific in-situ                
              tests of the role of the ALBP in lipid metabolism and its                      
              regulation be phosphorylation.
