Title       : Trophic Coupling Between Mesopelagic and Sea-Ice Communities in the Weddell Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1991   
File        : a9118997

Award Number: 9118997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Smith ksmith@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The discovery of deep-sea fish in the stomachs of surface-feeding              
              seabirds foraging in open areas of pack ice has presented the                  
              surprising possibility of prey-predator coupling between two                   
              apparently disjunct communities.  Although many of the deep-sea                
              species found in birds stomachs are known to migrate vertically                
              on a daily basis, most have not been caught at depths of less                  
              than 100 m in open waters away from the ice, while the seabird                 
              species sampled are not known to forage deeper than 5 m.  This                 
              prey-predator coupling is intriguing but difficult to address                  
              with conventional methods because of the many problems associated              
              with sampling in pack ice.  As a first step in examining the                   
              interaction between the under-ice mesopelagic (100 to 1000 m) and              
              epipelagic (surface to 100 m) communities, scientists propose to               
              use moored, upward-looking hydroacoustic instruments to compare                
              the distribution, abundance and movements of acoustically                      
              -detectable deep-sea fish in the epipelagic of the water column at             
              two stations in the Weddell Sea, one in the pack ice and one in the            
              ice-free area to the north.  Three null hypotheses will be                     
              addressed: 1) the vertical distribution of acoustically-detectable             
              fish in the epipelagic zone is the same in ice-free and ice-cover              
              regions; 2) the abundance of acoustically-detectable fish in the               
              epipelagic zone is the same in ice-covered and ice-free oceanic                
              regions; and 3) the movements of acoustically-detectable fish in               
              the epipelagic zone are the same in ice-covered and ice-free                   
              oceanic regions.  This research constitutes a short-term                       
              feasibility study.  If hydroacoustic techniques prove successful,              
              scientists will then propose a more comprehensive, long-term                   
              study to quantitatively examine prey-predator links between                    
              deep-sea and sea-ice fish and bird communities.  Given the broad               
              extent of oceanic ice cover and the wide dispersal capabilities                
              of the extensive seabird populations in polar seas, scientists                 
              expect such links to be important in the overall cycling of                    
              carbon in polar regions.
