Title       : Heme Proteins in Sulfide-Oxidizing Bacteria/Mollusc Symbioses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1995   
File        : a9118048

Award Number: 9118048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Kraus doeller@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeannette E. Doeller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Several bivalve molluscs from sulfide-rich sediments harbor                    
              sulfide-oxidizing bacteria in gills as intracellular symbionts.                
              Symbionts oxidize reduced sulfur and synthesize organic compounds              
              for translocation to the host.  To maintain intracellular oxygen               
              and sulfide at levels conducive for bacterial autotrophy, the host             
              must prevent spontaneous reaction between oxygen and sulfide and               
              avoid sulfide inhibition.  In symbiont-harboring gills and in free-            
              living sulfur-oxidizing bacteria, mechanisms for this include                  
              hemoglobins, flavohemoproteins and cytochromes.  Three purified                
              cytoplasmic hemoglobins from Lucina pectinata gills exhibit vastly             
              different reaction rates with oxygen and sulfide, suggesting                   
              distinct functions.  Studies with living gills suggest that ferric             
              Solemya velum hemoglobin reacts with sulfide whereas ferrous                   
              Solemya reidi hemoglobin may mediate sulfide reduction of symbiont             
              cytochrome c.  To define heme protein function in symbiotic                    
              associations and to study hemoglobin-mediated sulfide reduction of             
              cytochrome c, biochemical characteristics of purified heme proteins            
              will be established and used as tools to selectively identify and              
              block individual heme proteins in living gills while measuring                 
              levels of cytochrome c reduction and rates of oxygen consumption               
              and carbon fixation.  These experiments will highlight the                     
              molecular mechanisms that have ensured intracellular transfer of               
              oxygen and sulfide to their sites of consumption.
