Title       : Metabolism of Abscisic Acid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1995      
File        : a9118377

Award Number: 9118377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans J. Bohnert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan A. D. Zeevaart zeevaart@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1145,
Abstract    :
              The plant growth substance abscisic acid is involved in a number               
              of physiological responses, such as closure of stomata, seed                   
              maturation and dormancy, amelioration of environmental stresses                
              through gene activation, etc.  During water stress there is a large            
              increase in the content of abscisic acid.  To understand the many              
              roles of abscisic acid in plants, it is essential to know how its              
              concentration is regulated at the tissue and cellular level.  This             
              project deals with the biosynthesis and catabolism of abscisic                 
              acid.  Biochemical as well as genetic approaches are proposed.  The            
              research is based on the hypothesis that all abscisic acid in green            
              plants is derived by oxidative cleavage of 9-cis-epoxy-carotenoids             
              and that the cleavage step is stimulated by water stress.                      
              Objectives are 1) to identify the cleavage substrate(s) and                    
              products; 2) to prepare a cell-free system for the cleavage enzyme;            
              3) to isolate novel biosynthetic mutants in Arabidopsis; 4) to                 
              purify the enzyme that converts abscisic acid to phaseic acid; 5)              
              to select for a mutant in Arabidopsis that is blocked in the                   
              conversion of abscisic acid to phaseic acid; and 6) to determine               
              the mechanism by which different osmotica stimulate abscisic acid              
              biosynthesis in the wall-less alga Dunaliella.  Once the pathways              
              for abscisic acid synthesis and degradation have been worked out,              
              it will be possible to find out at the biochemical and molecular               
              level how a water deficit stimulates abscisic biosynthesis, and how            
              restoration of turgor results in the conversion of abscisic acid               
              to phaseic acid.  These studies are therefore of interest in                   
              connection with the response of plants to drought.
