Title       : Japan Long-Term Research Visit: The Effect of Vortex Generation Devices on
               Diffuser Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1994       
File        : a9118435

Award Number: 9118435
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130810             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley A. Skebe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Technolog Res Ctr
	      
	      East Hartford, CT  06108    /   -

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1443,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a 24 month long-term visit by Dr. Stanley              
              Skebe, Aerodynamics and Environmental Sciences Division, United                
              Technologies Research Corporation (UTRC), Hartford, Connecticut,               
              to Japan for a cooperative research project with Professor                     
              Shunichi Tsuge, Institute of Engineering Mechanics, University of              
              Tsukuba.  The research will include a study of the effect of                   
              vortex generation devices on diffuser performance.  The focus                  
              would be to conduct an experimental investigation into the                     
              application of several standard and advanced vortex generator                  
              shapes within a family of rectangular diffuser geometries and                  
              over a range of flow parameters and to quantify their ability to               
              alleviate diffuser stall and improve diffuser performance through              
              mixing enhancement.  Supporting theoretical calculations, based                
              on 'first principles' analyses, would also be performed.  Smoke                
              trace, tuft motion, and surface oil flow visualization techniques              
              would be used to document diffuser stall reduction while                       
              pneumatic pressure transducer measurements would yield diffuser                
              pressure coefficient values upon which to base performance                     
              improvement.  Finally, they will undertake a detailed boundary                 
              layer survey and state-of-the-art laser sheet flow visualization               
              measurements.  These measurements are expected to broaden the                  
              applicability of the program results and deepen their                          
              significance with respect to the field of fluid mechanics by                   
              providing a fundamental understanding of the effect of embedded                
              axial vortex arrays on adverse pressure gradient boundary layer                
              flow separation characteristics.                                               
                                                                                             
              Diffusers see frequent component application in a wide variety of              
              fluid dynamic-based products, such as consumer appliances, home                
              and building air handling systems, chemical plants, automobile                 
              components, and aircraft engines.  They are also often the key                 
              product component, with their efficiency level restricting the                 
              upper limit of overall product efficiency.  Improved diffuser                  
              designs could improve product performance and allow for a                      
              reduction in product noise generation and/or energy consumption.               
              This research combining United Technologies Research Center's                  
              accumulated experience on vortex generation and forced mixing                  
              flowfields with the University of Tsukuba's theoretical and                    
              experimental experience on the behavior of vortex generation                   
              should provide a productive climate for advancing the research in              
              this important area.  It is expected that this collaborative                   
              effort will continue after the formal agreement has terminated.
