Title       : Measurement of Marine Cloud Droplet Size Distributions and Analysis of
               Relationships to Chemical Fluxes, CCN Concentration, and Boundary Layer Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1994       
File        : a9118316

Award Number: 9118316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Vong vong@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator plans to make optical measurements of cloud              
              droplet size spectra and liquid water content (LWC) with                       
              simultaneous measurements of cloud and rain water composition,                 
              aerosol size spectra, and three dimensional winds at a marine                  
              site on the NW coast of Washington State.  By combining the                    
              droplet spectra and LWC with the other measurement the                         
              investigators will address both:  1) droplet and chemical eddy                 
              fluxes associated with interception of cloud water by vegetation               
              and 2) the relationship between droplet and CCN number                         
              concentration in the marine boundary layer.                                    
                   Cloud droplet- cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) relationships              
              will be studied by comparing CCN concentrations (inferred from                 
              aerosol size spectra) in clear air to cloud droplet                            
              concentrations.  Vertical wind speed, LWC, and droplet                         
              concentration will be combined to produce eddy covariance                      
              estimates of integrated cloud droplet fluxes and the size                      
              dependence of droplet deposition velocity.   The measured cloud                
              water eddy fluxes will be compared to calculated droplet                       
              sedimentation fluxes and cloud water interception by an                        
              artificial tree.  The chemical fluxes associated with rain will                
              be compared to those associated with intercepted cloud water.                  
                   Understanding droplet/chemical flux and CCN/droplet                       
              relationships is important for characterizing the chemical                     
              cycling of trace species between  the atmosphere and the                       
              biosphere and for understanding the response of climate to CCN                 
              cycling in the marine atmospheric.
