Title       : Mitochondrial Factors Associated With Pollen Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1992  
File        : a9118937

Award Number: 9118937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally A. Mackenzie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Some of the most interesting questions being addressed in                 
              higher eukaryotic organisms concern the regulation of gene                     
              expression at particular stages of development that involve                    
              communication between subcellular organelles.  The model system                
              that has been developed in cytoplasmic male sterile common bean                
              provides ideal genetic materials to address these questions.  The              
              system has a number of unique features.  Two distinct nuclear-mito-            
              chondrial genetic interactions have been identified that result in             
              an altered pollen phenotype.  Evidence suggests that at least some             
              aspects of this interorganellar interaction are developmentally                
              regulated.  The focus of this study is a mitochondrial sequence,               
              designated pvs, associated with abnormal pollen development.  The              
              project includes development of antibodies against the putative                
              products of two open reading frames within pvs.  These antibodies              
              will characterize the expression of the two predicted mitochondrial            
              products in response to the presence of nuclear gene Fr.  Fr                   
              results in the elimination of the pvs sequence together with the               
              surrounding mitochondrial region.  A second nuclear gene, Fr2, is              
              predicted to alter expression of pvs.  Both Fr and Fr2 restore                 
              normal pollen development.  The experiments will include Western               
              blot analysis, immunoprecipitations, and in situ backcross and F2              
              populations, the cytoplasmic male sterile line, a number of                    
              spontaneous cytoplasmic fertile revertants, and a normal control               
              line.  The proposed research will also include characterization of             
              transcription of the mitochondrial pvs region.                                 
                   The experiments will characterize the developmental expression            
              of a mitochondrial sequence in response to two distinct nuclear                
              genes that alter pollen development.  The experiments will also                
              identify potential regulatory sites within this mitochondrial                  
              sequence.
