Title       : Laboratory Experiments to Determine the Origin of High Molecular Weight
               Hydrocarbons (>C40) in Geological Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1992   
File        : a9118133

Award Number: 9118133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51669              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Philp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Biomarkers are compounds in geologic samples whose basic carbon                
              skeleton resembles that of their precursors which occur in source              
              materials such as algae, bacteria and higher plants.  For the most             
              part the biomarkers discovered to date have been in the C10-C40                
              range.  Limitations in both chromatography and mass spectrometry               
              in the past, have prevented the successful investigation of                    
              biomarkers in the region above C40.  In the past two years we have             
              taken advantage in the development of high temperature capillary               
              columns and tandem mass spectrometers to enter into the frontier               
              area of biomarker geochemistry in the range of C40-C100.  Extracts             
              from a variety of samples have been investigated by tandem mass                
              spectrometry in combination with gas chromatography or the direct              
              insertion probe.  Tandem mass spectrometry has been used in                    
              combination with micropyrolysis techniques to investigate the high             
              molecular weight fragments produced by pyrolytic degradation of                
              kerogens and asphaltenes.  This work has clearly demonstrated the              
              presence of complex mixtures of high molecular weight components               
              in a wide variety of samples.  These compounds are dominated by                
              n-alkanes and alkylclohexanes extending to at least C100.  In                  
              addition to analytical limitations, another reason why these                   
              components have not been investigated as thoroughly as components              
              below C40 is that in many cases their low volatility precludes their           
              presence in crude oils collected at the well head for example.                 
              Furthermore the low volatility of these components also means it               
              is possible that they may not necessarily occur in the saturate                
              fraction containing compounds below C40.                                       
              The present goal is to investigate how these molecular weight                  
              compounds are formed.  In some preliminary experiments we have                 
              shown that artificial maturation of fatty acids will lead to                   
              polymerization of these compounds to form high molecular weight                
              alkanes, cyclohexanes and complex mixtures of alkylated                        
              naphthalenes.  It is proposed to expand these experiments and                  
              perform them with a variety of lipids, as well as naturally                    
              occurring organic material such as higher plant material and algae,            
              in the presence and absence of catalysts, such as bentonite, and               
              at a variety of temperatures.  Preliminary experiments have also               
              been conducted in the presence of elemental sulphur and it has been            
              shown that sulphur is incorporated into many of these reaction                 
              products.                                                                      
              Although similar maturation experiments have been                              
              performed previously, the earlier experiments were typically                   
              designed to examine thermal degradation products and not                       
              polymerization products.  The work described herein will provide               
              us with information on the way in which these high molecular                   
              components may be produced and conditions under which these                    
              compounds will be formed.
