Title       : Physiological Basis of Metabolism and Activity: The Thermal Dependence of Muscle
               Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1994     
File        : a9118346

Award Number: 9118346
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert F. Bennett abennett@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                   Temperature is an important environmental variable that                  
              directly influences all levels of biological function.  In spite               
              of years of study, our knowledge of how temperature affects                    
              organisms is still sketchy, especially in terms of maximal                     
              behavioral capacities.  This study will be the first comprehensive             
              examination of how body temperature influences burst escape and                
              feeding capacities in fish.  These are probably important behaviors            
              ensuring successful survival, growth, and reproduction in natural              
              populations, but we do not understand how rapid changes in                     
              temperature may affect these capacities.  Further, it will be the              
              first study to examine the plasticity of the of these behaviors                
              during long term temperature exposure (acclimation).  The study                
              will also begin to examine how genetic structure (ploidy level) may            
              influence acclimation ability, as previously hypothesized by other             
              workers.  This study will also examine evolutionary responses to               
              different temperatures in a group of fish, some taxa of which have             
              very narrow and others very broad thermal environments.  These                 
              types of information, that is, understanding of how animals respond            
              to acute and long term temperature exposure, in both organismal and            
              evolutionary time frames, is important to both fisheries management            
              (e.g., likely effects of water temperature on stock performance in             
              nature and the ability of those stocks to adjust performance over              
              longer term temperature exposure) and to our understanding of how              
              fish populations may adjust to range extension or climate change.
