Title       : Placental Transport in Viviparous Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1994  
File        : a9118702

Award Number: 9118702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31400              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Wourms wjohn@Clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Viviparity in the vertebrates first evolved in fishes. The                     
              transition from ovipairty to viviparity established a series of new            
              maternal-embryonic relationships, one of which involves the                    
              transfer of metabolites from mother to embryo. The proposed                    
              research will investigate the cellular basis of maternal-embryonic             
              transfer of metabolites across a placenta and test an hypothesis               
              about the evolutionary origin of that placenta. Goodeid fish will              
              be used as a model system because their gut-derived placenta                   
              exemplifies one of the two major routes of placental evolution.                
              Goodeid embryos develop within the ovarian lumen where they grow               
              considerably (150X) due to absorption of maternal nutrients.                   
              Maternal nutrients are transported across the ovarian lumenal                  
              epithelium into the ovarian fluid where they are absorbed by the               
              trophotaenial epithelium of the embryo. Trophotaeniae are external             
              perianal projections of the embryonic intestinal epithelium. There             
              are two types of trophotaeniae: long, ribbon trophotaeniae whose               
              cells function in macromolecular endocytosis, and short, rosette               
              trophotaeniae whose cells function in the transport of small                   
              molecules. The lumenal epithelium of the maternal ovary and the                
              trophotaeniae of the embryo constitute a placenta. We will                     
              investigate the endocytotic and small molecule transport function              
              of the trophotaeniae. We will also test our hypothesis that                    
              trophotaeniae are embryological and evolutionary derivatives of the            
              embryonic hindgut and that the endocytotic and small molecule                  
              transport configurations of ribbon and rosette trophotaenial cells             
              are alternative  and successive states in one sequence of                      
              differentiation. To achieve these goals, we will determine the                 
              kinetics of small molecule uptake and macromolecular endocytosis,              
              elucidate the receptor recycling pathway, characterize enzymes of              
              the endosomal-lysosomal pathway, and analyze the structural                    
              differentiation of trophotaenial cells and their putative                      
              evolutionary and embryological precursor, the  intestinal                      
              absorptive cell.
