Title       : Retinoids and Homeobox Genes in Pattern Formation: A Feather Morphogenesis Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1992     
File        : a9118972

Award Number: 9118972
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheng-Ming Chuong chuong@pathfinder.hsc.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Identification of molecules and mechanisms involved in pattern                 
              formation in embryonic development has been a central problem of               
              developmental biology. Recently, studies of homeobox genes and                 
              retinoic acid have brought exciting new insights to the                        
              understanding of pattern formation. Dr. Chuong has recently found              
              homeoprotein gradients in developing feather buds and position                 
              specific homeoprotein expression patterns in different cutaneous               
              appendages. He also has showed retinoic acid causes a                          
              disorientation of feather axes and converted feathers into scale-              
              like structures in a concentration dependent manner. He                        
              hypothesizes that Hox gene expression is involved in determining               
              the phenotypes and orientation of cutaneous appendages in birds                
              as has been found for appendage phenotypes in Drosophila. He will              
              examine the distribution of the Hox 4 complex during feather                   
              morphogenesis. He will analyze the effect of a retinoic acid                   
              gradient on feather pattern formation by arranging retinoic acid               
              soaked beads in a geometric pattern on cultured feather explants.              
              The function of the homeoprotein gradient will be tested directly              
              by disrupting the gradients with ectopically expressed Hox genes.              
              This work will combine classical feather morphogenesis                         
              experiments with modern molecular biology and offers an excellent              
              opportunity to provide clear answers to some fundamental issues                
              of morphogenesis.
