Title       : Relative Influences of Climatic Change, Dust Flux, and Lithology on Soil
               Hydrology and Soil-Geomorphic Processes in Arid and Semiarid Transitional
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1991   
File        : a9118335

Award Number: 9118335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54890              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie D. McFadden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A multi-disciplinary project is proposed to determine how                 
              variations in climate, dust flux, and lithology are genetically                
              linked to soil-landscape evolution on alluvial fans in desert                  
              environments.  Important variables can be examined because the                 
              study area contains an arid to semi-arid climatic gradient, an                 
              independent record of Quaternary climate change and dust flux,                 
              excellent chronostratigraphic resolution, and sequences of                     
              lithologically distinct deposits (granite, limestone, mixed).  The             
              project objectives are to:  determine variation in rates of soil-              
              geomorphic processes among different lithologies, determine spatial            
              and temporal changes in dust flux, climate, surface permeability,              
              and soil-water balance, and determine how changes in these factors             
              control formation of calcic soils.  Soil-geomorphic properties                 
              related to spatial and temporal changes in climate and dust flux               
              will be documented through field descriptions and laboratory                   
              analysis of soils, morphometric measurements of fan-surfaces, and              
              evaluation of soil and fan-surface hydrology.  A novel approach of             
              this study will be to integrate empirically measured soil-                     
              geomorphic properties with computer simulations of soil water                  
              movement and pedogenic accumulation of carbonate.  Isotopic studies            
              of soil carbonate will provide additional information concerning               
              the timing and processes of calcic soil formation and paleoclimate.            
              Results will provide information for developing criteria for                   
              recognition of signals of climatic change preserved in soil-                   
              geomorphic systems, for evaluating the effect of climate change on             
              the rates of soil-geomorphic components commonly used for age                  
              estimations, and for developing regional stratigraphic correlations            
              to other Quaternary deposits in the southwest U.S.
