Title       : Development, Structure, and Metabolic Role of Membranes of Methanotrophic
               Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1996  
File        : a9118653

Award Number: 9118653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208038             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Lynne P. Collins mlpcolli@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles C. Remsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  All biological production and consumption of methane (a                   
              greenhouse gas) is due to bacterial metabolism.  Methanothrophs are            
              bacteria that use methane as a sole source of carbon and energy.               
              Unlike most bacteria that lack internal membrane structure, the                
              methanotrophs have an intracytoplasmic membrane that is suggested              
              to play a role in the metabolism of one carbon compounds.  The                 
              presence and structure of this membrane is subject to regulation               
              making methanotrophs an attractive model system for studies of                 
              membrane biology.  In the proposed study, the effect of                        
              environmental stimuli on intracytoplasmic membrane formation and               
              other aspects of methanotroph cell biology will be evaluated.  In              
              cell fractionation studies, intracytoplasmic membranes and other               
              subcellular fractions will be isolated and characterized to                    
              elucidate their role in one carbon metabolism.  These experiments              
              will form the basis of other studies in which the details of the               
              cellular response to environmental stimuli and membrane development            
              are investigated.                                                              
                                                                                             
                   The proposed research should contribute to our understanding              
              of cell biology through studies in a methanotrophic bacteric model             
              system.  Additionally, these studies should provide information                
              that will be useful for other purposes since methanotrophs are                 
              important in the biotechnology industry due to numerous potential              
              applications including biotransformation and biodegradation.  This             
              research will facilitate biotechnological exploitation of                      
              methanotrophs.  //
