Title       : Leaf Structural Properties that Influence Photosynthesis: Interactions Between
               Gradients of Light, CO2, and Photosynthetic Capacity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1992   
File        : a9118729

Award Number: 9118729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Vogelmann tvogel@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Photosynthesis os the process whereby plants convert solar                
              energy into chemical energy. This process supports all life on this            
              planet. A detailed knowledge of how photosynthesis occurs in leaves            
              is necessary for understanding  solar energy conversion in land                
              plants. The project "Leaf Structural Properties that Influence                 
              Photosynthesis: Interactions Between gradients of light, CO2, and              
              Photosynthetic Capacity" will examine how leaf anatomy is related              
              to the photosynthetic performance of the whole leaf. The overall               
              goal is to examine the mechanisms that lead to optimization of                 
              photosynthetic performance in different types of plants. Species               
              have been selected that have specific leaf anatomical features and             
              we plan to make correlations between leaf anatomy, penetration of              
              light into the leaf, and internal gradients in carbon dioxide                  
              concentration. Internal concentrations of both light and CO2 must              
              be optimized for maximum photosynthetic performance of the whole               
              leaf. Experimental results should allow us to establish a baseline             
              for a more mechanistic understanding of why some plants are more               
              productive than others.                                                        
                                                                                             
                   Microscopy, CO2 exchange measurements and a new fiber optic               
              microprobe technique will be used to accomplish the objectives of              
              this project. The resulting information may be applied to problems             
              that relate to understanding the physiological basis for plant                 
              productivity and increasing crop yield, and how plants may respond             
              to global climate change resulting from increases in atmospheric               
              concentrations of greenhouse gases.
