Title       : Genetic Regulation of the Glycerol 3-Phosphate Regulon of
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1994  
File        : a9118757

Award Number: 9118757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248611             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Larson tilarson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research is aimed at elucidation of the means by which                    
              the five operons which comprise the sn glycerol 3-phosphate (glp)              
              regulon of Escherichia coli are negatively controlled by the                   
              proteins encoded by the glpEGR  operon.  The glpR gene encodes a               
              repressor protein which interacts specifically with operator sites             
              on DNA in each of the operons of the regulon.  The glpE- and glpG-             
              encoded proteins are needed together with the repressor to achieve             
              efficient repression.  This type of regulatory system containing               
              three components has not been described previously in prokaryotes.             
              Results of the proposed research will provide molecular details                
              regarding the interaction of repressor with operator DNA, and will             
              reveal the roles of the GlpE and G1pG proteins in repression.  In              
              addition, the mechanism of action of the repression system in each             
              of the operons of the regulon will be defined in greater detail.               
              Specifically, the role of repressor-mediated DNA looping and of                
              integration host factor (IHF) will be determined.  The objectives              
              will be achieved by using genetic and biochemical approaches.  The             
              structure and function of the DNA-binding domain of the repressor              
              will be studied through characterization of altered forms of the               
              repressor generated by site-directed mutagenesis.  The roles of                
              G1pE in repression will be determined by isolation and                         
              characterization of mutants altered in G1pE and/or G1pG action, and            
              by isolation and characterization of the G1pE and G1pG proteins.               
              The role of IHF-binding sites and of additional potential operators            
              in repression will be defined by determining repression in mutants             
              deficient in IHF, and by identification of these sites on the DNA.             
              All of the results will provide molecular details regarding the                
              mechanism of action of this "three-component" regulatory system.               
              This knowledge will shed light on how the cell uses specific DNA-              
              protein interactions to respond to changes in the supply of                    
              nutrients.
