Title       : Geochemical Investigations of Major Environmental and Tectonic Changes in the
               Permian and Triassic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1994  
File        : a9118319

Award Number: 9118319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158511             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Douglas Macdougall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The record the chemical and isotopic composition of seawater                   
              through time contains a wealth of information about climate,                   
              tectonics, hydrothermal activity on the sea floor, and perhaps even            
              about the details of sea level change, ocean circulation and                   
              atmospheric composition.  The problem is to unravel the various                
              signals recorded in sediments in terms of these processes.  Here               
              we will examine the time period spanning the Permian and early                 
              Triassic, a time of global environmental change.  Our study will               
              concentrate on the SR and Nd isotopic record, but will also include            
              various other, probably related, geochemical indicators.  Through              
              collaborators, we have acquired a suite of samples for this work               
              from geographically widespread, stratigraphically controlled,                  
              overlapping sections.  Much of our work will be done on conodonts,             
              which provide stratigraphic information as well as having                      
              conveniently high concentrations of most of the elements of                    
              interest, so that analyses can be made on single individuals or                
              fragments in most cases.  We will carefully investigate possible               
              diagenetic effects, and attempt to delineate much more precisely               
              than has been done previously the timing and magnitude of the                  
              observed large changes in Sr and Nd isotopic ratios in seawater                
              during this time period.  The data will be examined in terms of                
              current knowledge of paleotectonics, paleoclimate and                          
              paleogeography.  In addition, we will explore the feasibility of               
              U-Th dating of conodonts in this time interval, in order to refine             
              the temporal framework for our isotopic studies and to aid in                  
              section-to-section correlation.
