Title       : tRNA Splicing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1994  
File        : a9118571

Award Number: 9118571
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric M. Phizicky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9251,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              tRNA splicing is essential for the survival of some, if not                    
              all, eukaryotes.  The mechanism of tRNA splicing is highly                     
              conserved in eukaryotes, and best understood in the yeast                      
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  Superficially, tRNA splicing appears                
              simple; an endonuclease excises the intron; a ligase joins the                 
              two half-molecules; and a 2'-dephosphorylating activity removes                
              the 2'-phosphate left at the splice junction.  Yet the mechanism               
              of splicing, particularly of the last step, is much more                       
              complicated than one would imagine.  Removal of the splice                     
              junction 2'-phosphatase, rather than being catalyzed by a                      
              phosphatase, is catalyzed by an NAD-dependent, 2'-phosphate                    
              specific phosphotransferase.  A protein like this has never                    
              been described, yet it is likely essential in some, if not all,                
              eukaryotes in order to make functional TRNA.  Moreover, the                    
              phosphate from the splice junction of TRNA ultimately ends up                  
              as a cyclic phosphate on NAD, or on a molecule similar to NAD.                 
              Such a molecule has also not been previously described.  The                   
              objects of this proposal are to identify the proteins                          
              catalyzing this unusual but important dephosphorylation step in                
              TRNA splicing and to determine the structure (and mechanism of                 
              formation) of the unusual phosphotransfer product.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The process of processing newly synthesized transfer RNA (TRNA) in             
              yeast is essential for the TRNA to act in the synthesis of a                   
              protein.  A significant part of the processing involves editing out            
              particular sequences of bases in the strand.  This research                    
              involves an enzyme which closes a gap in the TRNA strand (much like            
              the process by which train cars are linked up after the cars in the            
              center have been removed).  The enzyme has some novel properties               
              which merit investigation  to distinguish it from other ligating               
              enzymes .  The information resulting from these studies will be new            
              and important since the research is original.
