Title       : The Evolutionary Dynamics of a Dormant Egg Pool
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1995     
File        : a9118894

Award Number: 9118894
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lisa D. Brooks                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434924             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nelson G. Hairston ngh1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1577,9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   The dormant life-history stages of many organisms, including              
              most terrestrial plants, many terrestrial and freshwater                       
              invertebrate animals, and even a few vertebrates, represent a                  
              storage of species and genetic diversity.  When environments                   
              change through time, these resistent stages (typically though not              
              always seeds and eggs) prevent extinction of those types of                    
              organisms that could not withstand the change in their active                  
              states.  This research explores a series of questions about how                
              dormant stages affect survival and maintenance of variation in                 
              the presence of a changing environment.  The work combines                     
              development of new mathematical theory with the use of a species               
              of lake-inhabiting crustacean copepods (ca. 1 mm long) as a model              
              system.  It is one for which considerable information is already               
              known.  Four major questions will be addressed:  (1) What is the               
              environmental and physiological basis for the long-term dormancy,              
              (2) Does a temporally-fluctuating environment combined with long-              
              term dormancy provide a mechanism for maintaining greater                      
              variation than would otherwise occur, (3) How do sediment                      
              processes (mixing, settling, mortality of dormant stages) affect               
              the distribution of variable stages, and (4) Can observations                  
              already made on the copepod population in question be explained                
              through an understanding of storage of dormant stages?  The                    
              research involves a combination of field sampling of lake                      
              sediments, rearing of copepods in the laboratory, and a careful                
              matching of mathematical theory with known processes.  Theory                  
              will be generalized after its application to the copepod system                
              is established.                                                                
                   Current predictions are for climates to become both drier in              
              the northeastern US and to become more variable.  Understanding                
              how species with dormant stages are likely to respond to these                 
              changes will help guide predictions of changes in plant and                    
              animal abundance and distribution.
