Title       : Marginal Band Formation and Cellular Morphogenesis in Nucleated Erythrocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1997   
File        : a9118773

Award Number: 9118773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325128             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Cohen cohen@genectr.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1227,9119,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 Nucleated erythrocytes are utilized as a model system for                   
              studying biogenesis of the cytoskeleton and its relationship to                
              cellular morphogenesis. The focus is on formation of the marginal              
              band (MB) of microtubules (MTs) and its function in effecting the              
              change of cell shape from spheroidal erythroblast to flattened                 
              ellipsoid.  A major objective is to analyze MT bundling as a basis             
              for MB formation, using a recently developed in vitro system.                  
              Here, MT bundling is followed by real-time video microscopy during             
              reassembly of MT protein obtained simply by low temperature                    
              extraction of cytoskeletons or isolated MBs.  The analysis includes            
              identification and ultrastructural localization of MT-associated               
              proteins (MAPs) involved in MT-MT crossbridging, and the use of                
              antibodies as potential bundling inhibitors.  The second major                 
              objective is to test our working hypothesis for stages of MB                   
              biogenesis and their functional correlation with cell shape                    
              changes.  This work exploits anemic Xenopus in which erythroblasts             
              differentiate in the circulation.  Erythroid cells which are singly            
              and doubly pointed and which contain pointed, incomplete MBs have              
              been discovered in the circulation of such anemic frogs; these may             
              represent morphogenetic intermediates.  Experiments include BrdU               
              nuclear labelling to determine the morphogenetic sequence in vivo              
              and in vitro, testing of predicted MT polarity in pointed cells,               
              and study of ;the causal relationship between MB structure and cell            
              shape.  The work is expected to help settle current controversy                
              regarding MT bundle formation and function, and to enhance general             
              understanding of cytoskeletal function in eukaryotic cells.                    
                                                                                             
              The red blood cells of nonmammalian vertebrates are quite different            
              from those of mammals, in that mammalian red cells lose their                  
              nuclei during maturation while nonmammalian red cells retain their             
              nuclei. During frog red cell differentiation, there is a marked                
              shape change from the rounded, spheroid shape of the erythroblast              
              precursor to the flattened ellipsoid shape of the mature                       
              erythrocyte.  This shape change is associated with the development             
              of a set of circumferential bundles of microtubules in the plane of            
              flattening, known as the marginal band (MB), which presumably                  
              functions to maintain the unique shape of these cells.  This                   
              proposal addresses two questions with respect to the mechanism by              
              which MBs develop and function: 1, what non-microtubular proteins              
              are involved in the bundling process; and 2, what is the role of               
              the MB in cellular morphogenesis?  In addition to increasing our               
              understanding of how nonmammalian vertebrate erythrocytes develop,             
              this project may shed new light on general principles of                       
              microtubule bundling and microtubule interactions with associated              
              proteins.
