Title       : Biosynthesis of Methylketones and 2-Alkany l Acetates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1992       
File        : a9118188

Award Number: 9118188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Jackson ljackson@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research will determine the optimal conditions, the active                
              subcellular fraction(s), and whether and elongation of chain-                  
              shortening pathway is responsible for biosynthesis of medium chain-            
              length methylketones and 2-alkanyl acetates in Drosophila.  The                
              specificity of key enzymes at branch points in the pathways are                
              determined using a series of radiolabeled and heavy-atom labeled               
              specific saturated and unsaturated putative precursors.  The                   
              possibility exists that intermediates in the biosynthesis pathway              
              are identified during the investigation giving additional detail to            
              the pathway.  The results are critical to subsequent isolation and             
              further characterization of the enzymes involved in the unique                 
              steps of biosynthesis of these methylketones and 2-alkanyl                     
              acetates.  Appropriate assays for each enzyme in the pathway will              
              allow for investigations of potentially conserved pathways in other            
              insects and plants, potential regulation, molecular biology and                
              subsequent genetic analysis of medium chain-length methylketone and            
              2-alkanyl acetate biosynthesis.                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              This research will elucidate steps in the synthetic pathways of                
              insect pheromones and allomones, compounds that are vital in insect            
              communications.  Four species of fruit flies will be used as model             
              systems.  These communication compounds have proven useful in                  
              integrated pest management.  Understanding their synthesis may lead            
              to the development of additional insect control strategies.
