Title       : Simulation of Aquifer Architecture and Analysis of Media Heterogeneity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1991  
File        : a9118400

Award Number: 9118400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151065             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Gorelick gorelick@geo.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The architecture of aquifers is of key concern in hydrogeology            
              because it largely controls the transport of subsurface fluids.                
              Although geostatistical models can describe some aspects of aquifer            
              heterogeneity, there is information about geologic processes and               
              environments that has not been accounted for using models of                   
              spatial correlation and connectedness.  Using sedimentary process              
              simulation, petrophysics, geostatistics, and groundwater modelling,            
              this proposal aims to develop a geologic perspective on aquifer                
              architecture.  This simulation approach explicitly considers the               
              geologic processes which control the evolution of aquifers and                 
              their resulting patterns of heterogeneity.  The proposed work will             
              focus on alluvial environments and study local facies within them.             
              Large-scale sedimentary process modelling provides complete three-             
              dimensional images.  The effect of the alluvial architecture on                
              groundwater transport will be analyzed using three-dimensional                 
              groundwater flow and particle tracking.  Transport through                     
              simulated aquifers derived using geostatistical models will be                 
              compared with those derived using geologic process simulation.  It             
              is the ultimate aim of this work to develop a unified approach to              
              describe aquifer architecture by combining large-scale information             
              developed from geologic process simulation with geostatistical                 
              descriptions of local-scale variability.
