Title       : Identification of the Humoral Lectin Receptor on Insect Hemocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1992     
File        : a9118622

Award Number: 9118622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45115              (Estimated)
Investigator: Drion G. Boucias dgb@gnv.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                The overall objective of the proposed research is to delineate               
              the mechanism of opsonin-mediated cell recognition of nonself in               
              insects.  The hemolymph lectin of the beet armyworm having                     
              characteristics similar to those reported for soluble vertebrate               
              lectins, has been demonstrated to e an effective opsonin of fungal             
              cells.  Based on prior experiments we believe that when the S.                 
              exigua lectin binds to the fungal wall, it undergoes a                         
              conformational change, exposing sites which bind to receptors on               
              the hemocyte membrane.  Initial experiments will examine the                   
              ability of 125I-labeled S. exigua lectin-substrate complexes to                
              bind to hemocyte monolayers.  Secondly, S. exigua lectin affinity              
              matrices will be utilized to pluck the receptors from labeled                  
              hemocytes and identify the receptor complex present in the hemocyte            
              cell membrane.  The data generated form these experiments will                 
              provide novel information as to how humoral lectins operate as                 
              opsonins or transport molecules in insects.                                    
                                                                                             
              This proposal addresses a fundamental issue in insect immunology.              
              The prevailing belief in the field is that lectins, proteins which             
              recognize and bind specific carbohydrate structures, function as               
              immune surveillance proteins in the primitive insect circulatory               
              system, much as immunoglobulin antibodies recognize and bind                   
              specific haptenic structures in the vertebrate circulatory system.             
              The hypothesis being explored in this project is that, once bound,             
              the lectin "opsonizes" the pathogen much as antibodies opsonize                
              bacteria, enabling phagocytic cells of the immune system to                    
              recognize the antibody-antigen complex and to engulf and degrade               
              the invading microorganism.  The results of this research will                 
              expand our understanding of the role of lectins in invertebrate                
              immune responses.
