Title       : Regulation and Function of Urea Synthesis in Teleost Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1994   
File        : a9118819

Award Number: 9118819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Walsh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              When animals eat, digest and assimilate a protein-containing meal,             
              nitrogen atoms in the form of ammonia are produced as waste.                   
              Ammonia is a very potent toxin to the central nervous system, so               
              it must be rapidly removed from their bodies.  In fish and other               
              water-dwelling animals, the surrounding water is a virtually                   
              limitless sink for this ammonia, so nitrogen waste is simply and               
              rapidly removed to the water as ammonia.  Land-dwelling animals,               
              however, not being immersed in water, have the need to conserve                
              water, so they cannot readily remove ammonia as such.  They                    
              transform ammonia to urea, which since it is less toxic to the                 
              central nervous system, can be stored in higher concentrations                 
              before being eliminated in a concentrated urine which conserves                
              water.  Transforming ammonia to urea diverts energy from other                 
              bodily functions (e.g., growth, reproduction, etc.), so in an                  
              evolutionary sense making urea is not a trivial investment.  We                
              have discovered a higher teleost (bony) marine fish, the gulf                  
              toadfish, that unexpectedly makes and excretes urea.  This grant               
              will allow us to study why and how this phenomenon occurs and its              
              ecological and evolutionary significance.  In addition to enhancing            
              our basic knowledge in this area of physiology processes, these                
              studies may at some point provide information useful to practical              
              developments in aquaculture and environmental management.
