Title       : Functional Analysis of a Conserved Plant Histone H3 Variant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1991  
File        : a9118999

Award Number: 9118999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jakob H. Waterborg WaterborgJ@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1132,9145,
Abstract    :
                 In all plants, one of the isoprotein variants of histone H3, a              
              packaging protein for genes in chromatin, appears conserved.  It               
              is not, as most histones, synthesized only when cell DNA is                    
              doubled.  Such a continuously synthesized histone H3 form is known             
              in mammals and birds as a Replacement Variant because it replaces              
              DNA packaging whenever chromatin packaging units, nucleosomes, have            
              been lost.  This can occur when polymerases transcribe or replicate            
              genes.  Nucleosome re-assembly uses available histones and these               
              are the Replacement histones in cells not involved in DNA                      
              replication.  These histones can be different in structure and this            
              allows one to follow them by gel electrophoresis and high                      
              performance liquid chromatography.  This project studies, in                   
              alfalfa and Arabidopsis, the expression in the cell cycle of the               
              first core histone variant in plants to test the predictions of a              
              function as Replacement Variant.  RNA is measured by variant                   
              specific RT-PCR and protein by histone labeling and purification.              
              Is its high level of acetylation, a modification of histones in                
              transcriptionally active chromatin, the result of preferential                 
              assembly on active genes?  Does histone turnover vary with                     
              chromatin conformation?  Possible modulation of expression by                  
              development and environment (osmolarity, heat, phytohormones) will             
              be evaluated.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Histones are a major class of DNA-associated proteins which are                
              involved in the "packaging" of DNA into chromatin, particularly                
              into the nucleosome structure which represents the "bead" of the               
              "bead on a string" description of chromatin organization.  This                
              project will elucidate the role of a putative Replacement Variant              
              histone which is synthesized throughout the cell cycle and serves              
              to package pre-existing DNA, unlike other histone variants which               
              are synthesized during the period of DNA synthesis and serve to                
              package the newly synthesized DNA prior to mitosis.
