Title       : Ligands for the Mannose 6-Phosphate/Insulin-Like Growth Factor II Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1994  
File        : a9118681

Award Number: 9118681
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Lobel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 The overall objective is to understand the biological function              
              of the mannose-6-phosphate / insulin-like growth factor II receptor            
              (M6P/IGF-IIR) in targeting lysosomal enzymes to lysosomes.  This               
              protein binds at least two distinct classes of ligands:                        
              phosphorylated lysosomal enzymes and IGF-II.  The biophysical                  
              properties and primary structure of the receptor strongly suggest              
              that other ligands not yet identified exist.  Preliminary studies              
              indicate that new classes of ligands and variant forms of IGF-II               
              bind to the receptor.  This proposal has three specific aims:  1,              
              protein ligands which bind to the receptor will be purified; 2, new            
              ligands will be identified, and their primary structures determined            
              by chemical methods and, if necessary, molecular cloning; and 3,               
              the new ligands will be characterized in terms of the parameters of            
              the receptor-ligand interaction and their biological effects on                
              cultured cells.                                                                
                                                                                             
              One of the most fascinating and provocative findings in cell                   
              biology in recent years was the discovery that the membrane bound              
              receptor for phosphorylated lysosomal enzymes, which is responsible            
              for targeting of lysosomal enzymes to the lysosomes and has binding            
              specificity for the phosphorylated mannose residues on these                   
              enzymes, and the cell surface IGF-II receptor, which is responsible            
              for detecting and binding a hormone-like growth factor termed                  
              insulin-like growth factor II, were in fact the identical molecule.            
              Subsequent work has shown that the two ligands bind to different               
              regions of the receptor.  Results from other laboratories suggest              
              that the receptor is vital for fetal development in mice, whereas              
              the two known ligands are not.  The hypothesis underlying this                 
              research project is that there are other biologically important                
              ligands for this receptor, which bind at a region or regions                   
              distinct from those involved in the binding of either IGF-II or                
              lysosomal enzymes.  This research will provide fundamental insights            
              into the function of this important membrane protein.
