Title       : Relationship of Electronic States to d -> f Emission Efficiency of Lanthanide
               Activated Phosphors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0331387

Award Number: 0331387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 28,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin L. Bray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses fundamental questions associated with the energy level
              structure and efficiency of blue, x-ray storage and photostimulable phosphor
              materials, divalent (Eu 2+ , Sm 2+ ) and trivalent (Ce 3+ ) rare earth ions in
              insulating oxide and sulfide lattices. These materials are currently being used
              or considered for applications that include tunable blue solid state lasers,
              the blue phosphor component of electroluminescent displays, x-ray storage
              phosphors for medical imaging, and optical memory based on electron trapping or
              spectral holeburning. Key materials issues relevant to the performance of the
              proposed materials for these applications include the dependence of 5d to ?4f
              luminescence transitions on host lattice structure and bonding, the
              relationship of excited 5d levels to the band structure of the host lattice,
              and mechanisms of excitation and stimulation processes in co-activated
              materials. The first of these issue requires the ability to predict effects of
              local coordination environment, defects, crystal field strength and bonding
              covalency on the energies and splittings of the 5d levels. The second issue
              concerns the position of the excited 5d levels relative to the conduction
              bandedge and its consequences for photoionization, thermalization, and electron
              transfer. The third issue involves charge migration, interactions between
              co-activators, and defect mediated phenomena. The approach is based on using
              high pressure to vary lattice structure, local coordination environment, 5d
              energy states, defect energy states and host lattice band structure in blue-UV
              emitting, x-ray storage and photostimulable phosphor materials. Through control
              of underlying electronic and structural factors responsible for determining
              phosphor properties, new insight is sought into excitation, emission, storage
              and stimulation mechanisms. The objectives of the proposed work include:
              understanding the dependence of the energy and intensity of 4f n-1 5d to ?4f n
              electronic transitions in Ce 3+ -, Eu 2+ -, and Sm 2+ -activated phosphors on
              local coordination environment; examining the influence of 5d electronic states
              on 4f to ?4f luminescence transitions; investigating the energy of 5d
              electronic states relative to the host lattice conduction band and its effect
              on luminescence, photoionization, and photostimulation processes in Ce 3+ -, Eu
              2+ -, and Sm 2+ -activated phosphors; determining the relative importance of
              covalency and crystal field strength in establishing the energy of the emitting
              5d level in blue and UV phosphors based on Ce 3+ and Eu 2+ ; elucidating the
              fundamental excitation, storage and photostimulation processes in Eu 2+
              -activated mixed halide x-ray storage phosphors and Eu 2+ , Sm 3+ co-activated
              photostimulable phosphors; examining the effect of pressure on F-center
              formation and aggregation in Eu 2+ -activated mixed halide storage phosphors in
              the presence of x-ray and UV radiation; demonstrating the ability of high
              pressure studies to contribute to predictive capability at ambient conditions
              through correlations of phosphor properties with band structure, electronic
              states, covalency and crystal field effects.
%%% 
The project addresses basic
              research issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological
              relevance. These studies are expected to improve fundamental understanding of
              factors limiting the efficiency of solid state laser materials and a variety of
              optical display applications. An important feature of the program is the
              integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area. 
*** 

