Title       : Topics in Infinite Dimensional Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0331290

Award Number: 0331290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25285              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Bates bates@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract
Bates/Lu

Geometrical theory of infinite-dimensional dynamical
              systems will be developed.  Included here are conditions giving the existence
              and persistence of invariant manifolds and foliations.  These will be used to
              describe global qualitative behavior of trajectories and to establish
              conditions which guarantee structural stability.  Applications of this theory
              to topics such as lattice dynamics, cellular neural networks, nonlinear
              parabolic partial differential equations and some nonlinear hyperbolic partial
              differential equations will be considered.  Efficient computational approaches
              to simulate some of these will be sought, based upon the geometrical theory
              developed.
Since most physical systems are highly complex, it is usually
              impossible to solve the equations which are proposed to describe and predict
              the relevant physical phenomena.  Even if it were possible to solve one of
              these equations, the imprecision in measurement and our imperfect understanding
              of the actual physical laws may call into question the meaning of the
              solutions.  This project will develop a theory whereby, under certain
              conditions, one can describe the nature of solutions and guarantee that the
              physical system behaves according to this description to a reasonable degree of
              accuracy.  Special attention will be given to equations describing phenomena in
              material science, including phase transitions and superconductivity. 




