Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Identification, Modeling, and Prediction of Arabidopsis
               thaliana mRNA 3'-processing Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0331497

Award Number: 0331497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel H. Graber jhgraber@jax.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson Laboratory
	      600 Main Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    /   -

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Post-transcriptional processing of mRNA is an important mechanism of gene
              regulation.  This project is concerned with 3'-processing of mRNA, a process
              that includes cleavage of the precursor RNA sequence and subsequent
              polyadenylation.  3'-processing sites are determined by cis-acting signal
              elements, short control sequences within the immature precursor mRNA.  The
              signals in yeast have been well characterized, but those in Arabidopsis have
              only begun to identify the precise sequence and positioning characteristics of
              the required cis-elements.

Alternative 3'-processing of a specific mRNA,
              similar to alternative splicing, is a mechanism for regulating the sequence of
              the mature mRNA.  Unlike alternative splicing, however, alternative
              3'-processing typically changes only the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the
              mRNA, leaving the protein coding sequence unaltered.  Variation of the 3'-UTR
              sequence results in altered regulatory elements specific to the 3'-UTR, such as
              mRNA stability, translation, or localization elements. 
 
The specific goals
              of this are project are: (1) establishment of a curated database of
              experimentally determined 3'-processing sites for Arabidopsis, (2) construction
              of a discrete state-space model (DSM) based predictive tool for Arabidopsis
              mRNA 3'-processing sites, and (3) creation of a freely accessible web server
              interface to both the database and the predictive tools.  DSM models are a form
              of Hidden Markov Models (HMM), in which the model structure is manually, rather
              than automatically, designed.  DSM based models have previously been used to
              predict 3'-processing sites in the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which has
              3'-processing control elements similar to those found in plants.  

Public
              access to predictive tools will make it possible for external researchers to
              analyze any gene or group of genes of interest, even in the absence of
              experimentally determined sites in the curated database.  Prediction of
              3'-processing sites can also be coupled with gene prediction software to make
              the prediction more complete, including probable 3'-UTR sequences.  The web
              site is:  http://bmerc-www.bu.edu/polyA/.




