Title       : Perceptrons Play Repeated Games: New Approach to Bounded Rationality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9223483

Award Number: 9223483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101465             (Estimated)
Investigator: In-Koo Cho   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Traditional economic theory presumes that decision makers have no              
              limits on their ability to absorb and process information, to carry            
              out calculations, or to explore the implications of alternative                
              courses of action.  In reality, however, economic agents often face            
              problems that are too complex for any individual to treat in this              
              way.  Therefore, it is important to examine whether the results of             
              traditional models are robust when the assumption of unlimited                 
              informational capacity is relaxed.                                             
                                                                                             
              The focus of this project is to analyze a new way of describing                
              limits on this capacity.  Specifically, each decision maker is                 
              represented by a network of simple computers.  The aggregate                   
              computational power of a network often exceeds the sum of the                  
              capabilities of individual machines.  Small but well designed                  
              computer networks can store and process substantial amounts of                 
              information.  Notion of complexity will be formalized, and the                 
              implications of limited capacity to handle complexity will be                  
              investigated.  In addition, such networks will be used to study                
              adaptive learning processes.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Some of the initial results obtained in this framework are                     
              strikingly different from those found in the existing literature on            
              bounded rationality.  It is then essential to further this research            
              by critically reviewing the existing tools for modeling the limited            
              informational capability of economic agents.
