Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Rewriting Systems for Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1993      
File        : a9223826

Award Number: 9223826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Hermiller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Susan                                       
              Hermiller of New Mexico State University to the                                
              University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia,                                  
              to work with Dr. John R. J. Groves.                                            
                                                                                             
              A finite complete rewriting system for a group                                 
              is a presentation which solves the word problem                                
              for the group in a way that is particularly                                    
              easy to implement on a computer, and which                                     
              provides a regular language of normal forms.                                   
              The proposed research is a study of the class                                  
              of groups with such rewriting systems.  Several                                
              questions will be pursued.  The first - Given a                                
              group with a finite complete rewriting system,                                 
              must every finite index subgroup also have one?                                
              The second - Does an automatic group                                           
              necessarily have a finite complete rewriting                                   
              system?  The third - If a finitely presented                                   
              group has finite derivation type, does it have                                 
              a finite complete rewriting system?  To answer                                 
              these questions, it would be helpful to                                        
              construct rewriting systems for more families                                  
              of groups, especially Artin groups, if                                         
              possible.  They also intend to study a weaker                                  
              property for a group, given by a subword closed                                
              regular language of normal forms.                                              
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel and a stipend for                                   
              twelve months.
