Title       : Privately Provided Public Goods: Theoretical, Econometric and Experimental
               Studies of Cooperation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9223555

Award Number: 9223555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123234             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Andreoni   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
              Millions of people contribute money or volunteer time to                       
              charitable organizations, and the levels and frequency of these                
              donations far exceed what could be predicted by standard economic              
              models.  Such cooperation is also seen in laboratory experiments.              
              Many scholars have explored cooperation with the prisoner's                    
              dilemma, and over recent years, there have been many experiments               
              on the private provision of public goods.  The general results of              
              these experiments is that subjects cooperate well in excess of                 
              that predicted by theory.  This project carries out experimental,              
              theoretical and econometric research on cooperative behavior.                  
              The results are important because they could lead to a better                  
              understanding of why people cooperate and how to encourage                     
              cooperation.  For example, cooperation is an important element in              
              human adaption to global environmental change.                                 
                                                                                             
              Four major experimental projects are conducted to determine how                
              much of the cooperative behavior observed in experiments can be                
              attributed to things other than altruism or warm-glow.  There are              
              four major econometric projects.  The first looks at both the                  
              Survey of Consumer Finance and the Independent Sector survey on                
              gifts and time.  By combining the strengths of these two surveys,              
              the project provides the first detailed study of the                           
              interdependence of volunteerism and charitable giving.  Three                  
              other projects examine the data from the 1989 Current Population               
              Survey to study household decisions on labor force status, hours               
              of work, and volunteerism.  This project explores the puzzle of                
              why American corporations contribute almost 2% of pretax profits               
              to charity.  Currently there are almost no studies of corporate                
              philanthropy in the economics literature.  Another project                     
              addresses the "fund raising puzzle," which is that charitable                  
              organizations rely heavily on "leadership gifts" in fund raising               
              campaign.  A new model is developed of how personal charitable                 
              contributions can be influenced by peer pressure or "social                    
              comparisons."
