Title       : Causation and Uncertainty in Twentieth-Century U.S. Industrial Safety Law
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1994     
File        : a9223512

Award Number: 9223512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87244              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur F. McEvoy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Bar Foundation
	      750 North Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606114403    312/988-6589

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Workplace safety problems have played a significant role in US                 
              history since the onset of industrialization in the mid-nineteenth             
              century.  Workplace accidents and their prevention are crucial                 
              factors in the evolution of, among other things, technological                 
              development, labor organization and tort law.  This project                    
              focusses particularly on changing scientific, legal and popular                
              explanations for why industrial accidents occur: how different                 
              groups at different times have understood the causes of accidents              
              in different ways and how they have translated that changing                   
              knowledge into demands for legal reform has been a significant                 
              catalyst for the growth of American liability law in general since             
              the 1850's.  Existing scholarship in labor history, however, has               
              all but ignored the role of accidents and of accident liability law            
              in determining the nature of factory production, while the legal               
              and scientific literature on industrial health and safety has paid             
              little attention to the role of culture and politics in determining            
              what factors the law has been able to recognize as significant                 
              threats to industrial health and safety.  This study aims to                   
              synthesize those two bodies of knowledge so as to answer that                  
              question, and to analyze the critical role that industrial                     
              accidents and disease have played in American economic development.            
                                                                                             
              The study will rely on extensive research into workers'                        
              compensation decisions and the case law on industrial accidents in             
              several states from the late nineteenth century to the present.                
              Primary sources in labor history such as the labor press, union                
              archives, and the personal records of individual workers will show             
              how accidents and disease figured in the lives of industrial                   
              workers and how they attributed responsibility for them.  To                   
              explain changes in common sense notions of causality and their                 
              application to workplace safety problems, the study will rely on               
              contemporary works in physics, economics, psychology, anthropology,            
              law, and industrial hygiene.  The study will show how the law both             
              reflects and contributes to accepted notions about causality in the            
              natural and social sciences.  It will clarify the theoretical and              
              practical problems that underlie ongoing crises in tort and                    
              administrative law where the control of hazardous technology is at             
              issue.
