Title       : DNA Variation in Skeletal Samples from Utah and Integration with Archaeological
               Data to Refine the Numic Expansion Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9223227

Award Number: 9223227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70809              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Simms   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin T. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis H. O'Rourke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Steven Simms and his             
              colleagues will analyze both skeletal and archaeological remains               
              recovered in the area around the Great Salt Lake in Utah. In recent            
              years the water level in the lake was extremely high and wave                  
              action resulted in the exposure of many prehistoric Native American            
              burials. Associated with these are archaeological materials which              
              permit the skeletal remains to be placed within a broader cultural             
              context. In this project, two related kinds of analysis will take              
              place. With the permission of the Shoshoni Nation the skeletal                 
              materials will be studied and DNA will be extracted from bone. With            
              this information it will be possible to compare groups across time             
              to examine the question of population continuity. The                          
              archaeological materials will also be studied to construct a                   
              chronology, assign cultural designations, and determine how                    
              lifestyle changed over time.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Both archaeological and linguistic data suggest that at                        
              approximately A.D. 1350 a major change took place in the Great                 
              Basin. Prior to this time "Fremont peoples" practiced a partially              
              settled agricultural way of life. In the following Late Prehistoric            
              period agriculture was abandoned and both material culture and                 
              settlement pattern changed. Shifts in this direction - away from               
              agriculture and back to older hunting and gathering practices - are            
              unusual and the goal of this research is to gain insight into how              
              and why this happened.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. First, it will                 
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists and physical                   
              anthropologists. Perhaps more importantly it is path-breaking work.            
              Scientists are just learning how to extract DNA from bone and                  
              information from bone and more traditional archaeological sources              
              has never been combined to address a question of prehistory. Thus              
              the research is significant from a methodological perspective.
