Title       : Light Regulation of Carbon Partitioning and Growth of Eelgrass
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1994  
File        : a9223265

Award Number: 9223265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Zimmerman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall S. Alberte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Seagrasses are distributed along the margins of all but the most               
              polar seas and form the basis of some of the most productive plant             
              communities in the world.  They play important ecological roles in             
              nutrient cycling, sediment deposition and binding, provision of                
              habitat for a large and diverse fauna, and contribute significantly            
              to nearshore food webs.  Eelgrass, Zostera marina, is found                    
              typically in monotypic stands in nearshore waters characterized by             
              light limitation and the presence of anoxic, organic-rich                      
              sediments.  The very nature of eelgrass habitats imposes diurnal               
              and often prolonged hypoxia/anoxia on subterranean tissues and                 
              severe restrictions on carbon gain.  The ability of eelgrass to                
              withstand and recover from these conditions must underlie its                  
              ecological success.  Ongoing studies have begun to examine the                 
              physiological and biochemical mechanisms responsible for the                   
              success of eelgrass in these habitats.  This research project will             
              build on prior research and advance current understanding, beyond              
              a simple accounting of whole plant carbon budgets, to the                      
              biochemical and molecular features that dictate integrated plant               
              responses to submarine light environments and anoxic sediments.                
              This research will address the fundamental mechanisms by which                 
              submarine light regimes control the survival depth, growth and                 
              productivity of Zostera marina, and elucidate the primary                      
              physiological, biochemical and molecular features of this species              
              that ensure its ecological success in littoral environments.  In               
              particular, this project will investigate the controls on carbon               
              partitioning between shoots and roots in Zostera marina,  and                  
              initiate molecular examinations to determine the relative                      
              importance of translational and transcription events in regulating             
              root responses to diurnal and prolonged anoxia.  This project                  
              should provide the needed mechanistic understanding of the major               
              factors that control the distribution and carbon allocation                    
              strategies of eelgrass, so that this level of sophistication can be            
              incorporated into a predictive numerical model of growth and                   
              productivity for this species.  The knowledge gained form these                
              studies will not only advance our understanding of factors that                
              control marine benthic productivity and contribute to our basic                
              understanding of the adaptive mechanisms that function in plants,              
              but provide information essential to sound and informed management             
              of submerged macrophytes.
