Title       : Dissertation Research: The Use of Satellite Remote Sensing in Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9223763

Award Number: 9223763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo Neves  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the guidance of Drs. Geoffrey Conrad and Emilio Moran, Mr.               
              Eduardo Neves will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.                 
              Through remote sensing techniques as well as on the ground survey              
              and excavation Mr. Neves will conduct an archaeological study in               
              the Uaupes river basin area of Amazonia. While in the Brazilian                
              rainforest considerable archaeological research has been conducted             
              in floodplain regions, very little is known about more upland areas            
              which are not regularly inundated. The Uaupes basin was selected               
              because it represents such an area. Extant groups have been the                
              subject of ethnographic research and Mr. Neves work will help to               
              set them into a deeper chronological framework.                                
                                                                                             
              The research itself consists of three stages. The initial phase                
              includes an analysis of digitalized Landsat 5 Thematic Mapper                  
              satellite images. The objective is to identify potential loci of               
              archaeological sites according to criteria derived from                        
              ethnographic and ethnohistoric sources. Secondly, a systematic                 
              archaeological survey will be carried out in selected study units.             
              The goal is to asses the predictive power of the spectral                      
              reflectance analysis and to obtain data on the culture history of              
              the region. Finally, further work will be performed to correlate               
              the data obtained in the field with the image analysis of the                  
              spectral data.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This work is important for several reasons. First it will provide              
              data of great interest to many archaeologists and social                       
              anthropologists. Secondly, it will help to develop an analytic                 
              technique which may prove useful in many heavily vegetated parts of            
              the world. Finally it will assist in the training of an extremely              
              promising young scientist.
