Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1993  
File        : a9223539

Award Number: 9223539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9100               (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly B. Wiggins bwiggins@irss.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth M. Coleman  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This doctoral dissertation research project uses survey research               
              and multivariate data analysis to investigate how Protestantism                
              affects the propensity of Guatemalan and Costa Rican citizens to               
              engage in various forms of political action, including voting,                 
              campaign activity, contacting public officials, and community                  
              activism.  The study focuses on the direct effects (of religious               
              affiliation and beliefs), the indirect effects (via the effects of             
              Protestantism on literacy, gender roles, and economic status), and             
              interactive effects (between Protestantism and variant political               
              and social environments) of Protestantism.                                     
                                                                                             
              The significance of this research is that it will lead to a) a                 
              description of the multiple forms of Protestantism that are                    
              currently diffusing throughout Latin America, and b) analysis of               
              the multiplicity of effects that any given kind of Protestantism               
              may have in different social and political contexts in Latin                   
              America.  The study will address both traditional concerns with                
              religion as a predictor of political attitudes and actions and                 
              questions of how religion may be viewed by politicians and parties             
              as a vehicle for mobilizing or demobilizing various populations.               
              This research will also have implications for the study of religion            
              and politics in other regions where variant forms of religion                  
              interact within a larger social context to produce regognizable                
              patterns of political action.
