Title       : Far Infrared and Microwave Magneto-Optical Studies of Strongly Correlated
               Electronic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9223217

Award Number: 9223217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Dennis Drew hdrew@physics.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research concerns far infrared and microwave magneto-optical              
              studies of type II superconductors and semiconductor                           
              heterostructures.  A systematic investigation of vortex core                   
              excitation resonance and the magneto-optical activity of type II               
              superconductors will be made.  The goal is to gain an understanding            
              of high temperature superconductors and vortex dynamics in general.            
              The magneto-optical studies will look for direct evidence for                  
              cyclotron resonance and optical activity and search for helicon                
              propagation and the ac Hall effect in superconductors.  These                  
              investigations will break new ground in superconductivity research             
              and hold the promise of opening new paths for the science and                  
              technology of superconductors.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The work on semiconductor heterostructures will be directed toward             
              the study of the low lying collective excitations in low                       
              dimensional electron systems.  The goal of these studies is to                 
              elucidate electron correlation effects in these strongly                       
              interacting systems.  Magneto-optical and magneto-transport studies            
              will be carried out.  These studies may lead to the discovery of               
              novel condensed phases such as the Wigner crystal or new correlated            
              liquid phases in 3D or quasi 3D electron systems.  The infrared                
              techniques will also be used to study magneto plasmons in 2                    
              dimensional electron systems.  In this case the interest is the                
              observation and study of the magneto-rotons associated with the                
              fractional quantum Hall effect.                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              This research concerns fundamental studies of superconductors and              
              semiconductor heterostructures in high magnetic fields.  The                   
              studies on superconductors are directed toward improving the                   
              understanding of the electrodynamics of these materials at                     
              microwave and infrared frequencies.  They are based on the recent              
              observation of new magneto-optical effects in these materials and              
              will be systematically studied in both high temperature                        
              superconductors and in conventional superconductors.  These studies            
              are likely to break new ground in superconductivity research and               
              they hold the promise of opening new paths for the science and                 
              technology of superconductors.  The work on semiconductor                      
              heterostructures will be directed toward the investigation of                  
              collective excitations in low dimensional electron systems.  The               
              goal of these studies is to elucidate electron correlation effects             
              in these strongly interacting electron systems.  Magneto-optical               
              and magneto-transport studies will be carried out and may lead to              
              the discovery of novel condensed pahses in electron systems.  The              
              program involves collaboration with both industrial and government             
              laboratories.
