Title       : Motions and Conformational Properties of Macromolecules in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1995   
File        : a9223212

Award Number: 9223212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Schrag schrag@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9223212  Schrag    This research is in the general area of conformational
              dynamics in  polymer molecules in solution.  Experimental studies of the 
              oscillatory flow birefringence (OFB) and viscoelasticity (VE) of  polymer
              solutions subjected to small-amplitude, periodically time-  varying shear flows
              will be carried out under conditions that will  explore the entire motional
              regime of importance in these  experiments.  Some investigations will utilize
              custom  instrumentation  for wide effective frequency range measurements in 
              highly viscous solvents which also provide important temperature  dependence
              information; other instruments providing moderate to  high frequency data will
              be employed to obtain wide frequency  coverage in low viscosity solvents. 
              Detailed experimental studies  of the effects of solute-induced solvent
              dynamics modifications,  solute concentration, temperature, molecular weight,
              overall chain   geometry (branching), solvent quality and different polymer and
               solvent species on OFB and VE properties will be initiated or  continued, and
              compared with various theoretical predictions.   Generalized bead-spring model
              calculations of the frequency  dependence of the polymer contribution to VE and
              OFB properties  (dilute solutions) will be carried out for irregular combs 
              (randomly placed branch sites), randomly branched chains and chains  with
              spatially varying hydrodynamic interaction to assess the  potential of chain
              dynamics in general, and these techniques in  particular, for detailed
              branching characterization of polymers.   Experimental studies and theoretical
              predictions of OFB and VE  properties of dilute block copolymer solutions will
              also be  undertaken to quantitatively assess the characterization potential  of
              this combination of dynamics experiments for block copolymers.    This research
              is a combined experimental and modeling study of the  behavior of polymers in
              solution, especially with respect to the  influence of the solvent of the
              motions of the macromolecules.   ***
