Title       : Biology, Materialism and Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1993       
File        : a9223330

Award Number: 9223330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley A. Roe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The image which many scientists wish to convey is that the pursuit             
              of "pure" science is "objective" and unsullied by practical                    
              economic, political and social concerns.  Developments within the              
              Science and Technology Studies (STS) community over the past two               
              decades, however, have sought to break down the supposed barriers              
              between science and society.  Leading theorists argue that not only            
              do science and technology influence society, but that, as a human              
              endeavor, society must necessarily affect both the way science and             
              technology develop but also the content of scientific and                      
              technological thought.  Researchers within STS are now engaged in              
              detailed case studies of how this interaction between science and              
              society occurs.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Dr. Shirley Roe is engaged in an important study of the nature of              
              the science-society interaction when biologists struggled to                   
              determine the nature and origins of life.  Even today, scientists              
              argue about how life began on earth: either by creation,                       
              spontaneous generation or transportation from another planet.  The             
              last view, however, begs the question since one is then left with              
              the question of how life arose on the planet from which life was               
              transported to earth.  Scientists who reject creation argue that               
              conditions on earth in primordial times coalesced in some way so               
              that living organisms sprang to life and evolved.  Scientists are              
              trying to reproduce these conditions in order to prove that life               
              could have generated on earth without external interference.  Dr.              
              Roe is examining the origins of these debates in French biology of             
              the 18th century.  In famous experiments, Tuberville Needham and               
              Georges Buffon tried to demonstrate the existence of conditions in             
              which life can arise.  Their opponent, Lazzaro Spallanzani, in a               
              series of brilliant experiments, demonstrated sources of contagion             
              which led to the seeming "spontaneous" growth of new organisms                 
              within Needham's primordial brew.   Objectivists wishing to defend             
              "pure" science would argue that these are all straight-forward                 
              scientific experiments uninfluenced by social concerns.  Dr. Roe is            
              challenging this view.  She has found that the new biological                  
              discoveries of Needham and Buffon became controversial precisely               
              because they were seen at the time as having daring implications               
              for religion and morality.  She situates both proponents and                   
              opponents of the new biology within the crisis over the philosophes            
              that was so prominent at the time and argues that the new                      
              biological evidence for active matter struck at the heart of the               
              notion of a divinely ordered world.   By lending support to atheism            
              and materialism the new biology called into question the religious             
              basis for social morality and political order.  Attacks on the new             
              biology were motivated by a conservative defense of the established            
              order.  The parallelism with contemporary issues of science,                   
              religion, and morality are striking.  Hence, Dr. Roe's study not               
              only will illuminate the interactions of science and society in the            
              18th century but will also illuminate many of the concerns of                  
              modern religion with advances of contemporary science.
