Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Fine Structure of Superstable Theories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9223767

Award Number: 9223767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Buechler steven.a.buechler.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Professor Buechler's research is in stability theory, a                   
              subfield of model theory.  In recent years several general                     
              model-theoretic problems have been systematically approached via               
              the stability-theoretic hierarchy.  Even though a problem itself               
              may not involve stability-theoretic notions, considering                       
              separately the cases: totally transcendental, superstable, etc.,               
              brings into play a mass of technical machinery.  Such is the case              
              for Vaught's conjecture, which was proved by Shelah for totally                
              transcendental theories and (over the past 5 years) by Buechler                
              for the superstable theories of finite rank.  Buechler intends to              
              continue using the methods of geometrical stability theory to                  
              gain insight into Vaught's conjecture for all superstable                      
              theories.  The geometrical methods bring modules into the                      
              picture, allowing for the use of representation theory and other               
              algebra to pin down further the models of these theories.                      
                   This research lies in the general setting of abstract                     
              "Classification Theory."  In many diverse branches of mathematics              
              researchers attempt to code each element of a class of structures              
              with an element of a "simpler" class of structures.  The original              
              class is then more easily analyzed, using the more detailed                    
              information that one can obtain for this simpler class.                        
              Classification Theory is the abstract study of such codings.                   
              Researchers have shown that it is possible to determine when such              
              a simplification exists by using only rather basic information                 
              about the original class.  Buechler intends to study when an                   
              abstract class can be simplified down to a very precise class of               
              objects called "modules," which have been studied in great detail              
              by algebraists.
