Title       : Optimization Principles for General Equilibrium Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1994   
File        : a9223694

Award Number: 9223694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138606             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Luenberger luen@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9218,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Two major foundations of modern microeconomic theory are the                   
              concepts of efficiency and that of equilibria.  These concepts                 
              are of practical significance as well, for efficiency is a                     
              frequent objective of policy analysis, and an equilibrium is                   
              taken as a close approximation to what would happen under various              
              policy alternatives.  This project is based on a new approach to               
              the study of competitive equilibria, using two new optimization                
              principles  These principles lead very naturally to algorithms to              
              actually compute economic equilibria, and these algorithms offer               
              advantages over existing methods in terms of execution time and                
              reliability.  This project extends the theory, mainly in the area              
              of economies with externalities, and continues the development of              
              algorithms.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The work in this project is based on two optimization principles               
              that characterize economic equilibria and efficiency.  These                   
              principles lead to a new proof of the existence of a general                   
              competitive equilibrium, to new characterizations of economic                  
              efficiency in the presence of externalities, and to new                        
              algorithms for computing equilibria.  Underlying this work is a                
              new microeconomic construct termed the benefit function.  This                 
              function measures an individual's preferences and has the                      
              property that it can be meaningfully summed across individuals to              
              obtain a total benefit for the economy.  The first optimization                
              principle, the zero-maximum principle, states that an allocation               
              of resources is efficient if and only if it maximizes the total                
              benefit and makes that benefit equal to zero.  The second                      
              optimization principle, the zero-minimum principle, is the dual                
              to the first.  It states that the total surplus of income, equal               
              to the total value of profit plus endowment minus the total                    
              consumer expenditure required to achieve fixed preference levels,              
              is minimized the rendered equal to zero by an efficient price                  
              vector.
