Title       : Veto Bargaining and Legislative Outcomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9223396

Award Number: 9223396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Cameron cmc1@Columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              One of the most distinguishing features of the American national               
              government is the way separated institutions, especially Congress              
              and president, share the power to make public policy.  For example,            
              the executive branch implements the laws the legislative branch                
              creates; the Senate approves or rejects the president's                        
              appointments to the Supreme Court.  Most striking, the president               
              can block a bill passed by Congress by exercising the veto power               
              and Congress may then attempt to override the veto.                            
                                                                                             
              Although the separated powers system is a critical element of                  
              public policy making in the United States, many parts of it are                
              only poorly understood by political scientists.  For example,                  
              consider the presidential veto:  what happens to a bill after it is            
              vetoed?  Under what circumstances does it die?  When Congress                  
              repasses a vetoed bill, does Congress make concessions to the                  
              president?  Under what circumstances are the concessions large, and            
              when are they small?  More broadly, what causes a bill to be                   
              vetoed?  Although vetoes are rare events, many involve the great               
              legislative issues of the day.  So, answers to these questions                 
              would help us understand an important aspect of the American system            
              of separated powers.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Unfortunately, although political scientists know quite a lot about            
              the frequency of vetoes, they do not know the answers to the above             
              questions.  Thre are two reasons for this.  First, these questions             
              approach vetoes from an unusual perspective.  They assume a single             
              veto is not an isolated event but just one stage in a bargaining               
              process between Congress and president.  They assume a sequential              
              bargaining approach to the veto.  Most political scientists have               
              tended to approach each veto as a separate event, obscuring the                
              bargaining dynamic between the two branches of government.  Second,            
              answering these questions requires data on individual vetoed bills,            
              or even a random sample of all bills, rather than simply the                   
              aggregate number of vetoes per time period.  These types of data               
              have never been collected, and the process of collecting them is               
              tedious and time consuming.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research project targets both of these problems.  First, the              
              investigators examine vetoes from a sequential bargaining                      
              perspective.  Second, they collect data on individual bills.  The              
              researchers will collect data on about one hundred fifty bills in              
              veto "chains" (bills vetoed and repassed), a random sample of four             
              hundred vetoed bills (about fifty five per cent of all vetoes since            
              1946), and a random sample of about four hundred general bills; a              
              total of about nine hundred bills (allowing for some overlap among             
              the samples).  By combining theory and data, the investigators will            
              substantially enhance our understanding of the veto process and the            
              role it plays in policy formulation.
