Title       : Systematic Development of New Organic Conductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1995   
File        : a9223481

Award Number: 9223481
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dwaine O. Cowan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Raul Fainchtein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore O. Poehler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this research is to develop systematically new organic             
              semiconductors, metals, and superconductors through a detailed                 
              understanding and chemical control of the electronic properties.               
              The research will initially focus on the synthesis of                          
              tetramethyltetratellurafulvalene and its charge-transfer and                   
              complex radical cation salts; preparation of a series of                       
              dicyclobutenotetrachalcogenafulvalenes and their corresponding                 
              salts; and the synthesis of a number of tetraoxafulvalenes and                 
              their salts.  To guide the synthetic program, studies will be                  
              conducted on physical properties, electrical conductivity,                     
              themoelectric power, magnetic susceptibility, and scanning                     
              tunneling microscopy on these salts as well as on new charge-                  
              transfer and complex radical cation salts from known donors.                   
                                                                                             
              The next generation of microelectronic devices is likely to depend             
              on the development of new organic, organometallic, and inorganic               
              materials.  Thus, the aim of this research is to develop                       
              systematically new organic semiconductors, metal, and                          
              superconductors through a detailed understanding and chemical                  
              control of the electronic properties.  The research will initially             
              focus on the synthesis of selected compounds and their charge-                 
              transfer and complex radical cation salts.  To guide the synthetic             
              program, studies will be conducted on physical properties,                     
              electrical conductivity, thermoelectric power, magnetic                        
              susceptibility, and scanning tunneling microscopy on these salts               
              and on new charge-transfer and complex radical cation salts from               
              known donors.  A number of new chemical and physical studies are               
              designed to help elucidate the switching and memory mechanism in               
              metal-organic charge transfer salts.
