Title       : Science and the Origins of a National Historical Consciousness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1993      
File        : a9223098

Award Number: 9223098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Myles W. Jackson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The interaction of science, technology and national culture is a               
              frequently mentioned but too rarely examined phenomenon.                       
              Historians and social scientists have long maintained that there is            
              such a thing as a national style of doing science and technology.              
              The standard example is physics: the British required mechanical               
              models to facilitate understanding of physical forces while the                
              French disdained such models in favor of mathematical equations                
              which allow calculation of how forces act.  But beyond this                    
              example, there have been too few studies.  Correspondingly, there              
              have been too few studies of the influence of science and                      
              technology on national culture.  Dr. Jackson, working with Dr.                 
              Peter Galison of Harvard University, is examining these                        
              relationships in the context of the science and technology of                  
              optics in Germany, contrasting them with optics in Great Britain.              
              Under this grant, Dr. Jackson is analyzing the switch in optical               
              hegemony from London to Munich in the 19th century and how leading             
              German scholars retrospectively reconstituted this historical                  
              episode in order to legitimize their scientific, social, economic              
              and political interests.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Among other things, Dr. Jackson is examining how the advances in               
              glass technology in Bavaria made possible the creation of                      
              scientific disciplines such as astrophysics, spectroscopy,                     
              photochemistry and x-ray technology.  Glass technology was to                  
              revolutionize the way scientists literally saw the world.  Bavarian            
              optical instruments combined with Gaussian mathematics were to                 
              enable German physicists and astronomers to surpass their British              
              colleagues.  Optics was also crucial to the development of Germany             
              as a political and economic power, as evidenced by the rise of                 
              companies such as the Carl Zeiss Works.  This company not only                 
              produced superior optical instruments, but also provided imperial              
              Germany with instruments and technologies applicable to war.  This             
              important history was incorporated into the German culture as an               
              example of the German superiority in technical, scientific research            
              and development.  An examination of both the technical and the                 
              cultural history of German optics will greatly contribute to our               
              understanding of the interaction of science, technology and                    
              society.
