Title       : An Examination of Theoretical Predictions of the Strength of Economic Forces.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1993     
File        : a9223175

Award Number: 9223175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57224              (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Levine dlevine@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              At times powerful governments seem to be seized by economic forces             
              beyond their ability to control: during a twenty-four hour period,             
              for example, the British government raised interest rates to                   
              astronomical levels, swearing under no circumstances to devalue the            
              pound, only to do exactly that.  At other times, seemingly minor               
              tinkering with policy can unleash profound and unplanned change:               
              the enormous changes in the former Soviet Union, for example, seem             
              to have been triggered by relatively mild political reforms                    
              introduced by Gorbachev in the mid-eighties.                                   
                                                                                             
              Although it is not widely recognized, economic theory predicts that            
              under certain circumstances economic forces will be overpoweringly             
              strong, and at other times extremely weak and susceptible to                   
              manipulation.  Indeed, the theory can make quantitative predictions            
              about the strength of economic forces.  To the extent that such                
              predictions are correct, they are of great value, directing our                
              attention to those types of problems and situations where policy               
              can make a real difference.  There are two broad goals of this                 
              research: first to use data from experimental economics to validate            
              the theory, and second, to advance the theory to improve its                   
              predictive power in assessing situations where economic forces are             
              weak.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              Experimental data in economics is extremely mixed: sometimes the               
              theory predicts extremely well, and at other times strange                     
              anomalies occur, often changing with seemingly trivial                         
              modifications in experimental design.  What has not been examined              
              carefully is the extent to which the anomalies are correlated with             
              the strength of economic forces involved.  Our hypothesis is that              
              the theory predicts well when economic forces are strong, and that             
              it predicts poorly when economic forces are weak.  This research               
              plans to review a broad cross-section of economic experiments in an            
              effort to determine whether the anomalies are due to the weakness              
              of the economic forces.  To the extent that they are, this                     
              validates the idea that current theory can assess the strength of              
              economic forces in a useful way.                                               
                                                                                             
              Unfortunately, an implication of our hypothesis is that predictions            
              made by theory will be weakest exactly when the consequences of                
              policy changes will be most profound.  Many economists feel that               
              under these circumstances, the ability of individuals to learn and             
              adapt plays an important role.  (This is clearly the case in the               
              changes unfolding in the former Soviet Union.)  The second major               
              component of this research is to examine the theoretical                       
              consequences of learning, and the types of predictions such a                  
              theory makes.  The goal is to develop useful mathematical                      
              approximations for making quantitative predictions.
