Title       : The Spatial Modeling and Forecasting of the Aids Epidemic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9223985

Award Number: 9223985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93876              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emilio Casetti   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Spatial dimensions of the spread of AIDS (Acquired Immune                 
              Deficiency Syndrome) have not attracted significant scientific                 
              attention.  Most epidemiological studies of the spread of AIDS                 
              focus on male homosexuals and intravenous drug users.  These                   
              studies imply that the spatial spread of AIDS will occur across                
              geographical environments, but they have not been followed by                  
              systematic investigations of the geographic and temporal patterns              
              of AIDS dispersal, or the types of geographical environments                   
              through which the spread of AIDS is most rapid.  This project                  
              attempts to fill this gap in knowledge by investigating the                    
              spatial diffusion and forecasting of the AIDS epidemic.  It will               
              test hypotheses concerning the spatial diffusion of the epidemic               
              in the aggregate and separately for the three major risk groups:               
              male homosexuals and bisexuals, intravenous drug users, and                    
              heterosexuals.  The hypotheses to be tested are drawn from the                 
              geographic literature on diffusion theory and spatial                          
              epidemiology and are set within conceptual understandings of the               
              mechanisms and behaviors specific to the disease.  At the core of              
              the project, mathematical models will be developed relating                    
              incidences of AIDS to various temporal and spatial variables.                  
              The explanatory and predictive capabilities of these models will               
              be tested at a number of different spatial scales, including                   
              counties.  More focused tests will also be conducted for major                 
              risk groups in the 100 largest metropolitan areas, by counties                 
              within six states, and by census tracts for four major cities.                 
              Investigations of the spatial diffusion of AIDS are few, but they              
              provide crucial inputs to knowledge about this critical problem.               
              Further research on the spatial aspects of the spread of the                   
              epidemic is necessary to inform planners and policy makers as                  
              they formulate strategies to contain the epidemic.  The spread of              
              AIDS has an important spatial dimension, and this research will                
              add significantly to the theoretical and empirical body of                     
              knowledge related to this important societal problem.  This                    
              research will also enhance general understandings of the process               
              of spatial diffusion.
