Title       : US-Poland Joint Fund Research on Reactivity of Silver Clusters in Zeolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1993      
File        : a9223865

Award Number: 9223865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : December 15,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacek Michalik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Nuclear Chemistry
	      u1 Dorodna 16 03-195
	      Poland, PL  000000000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Poland Marie Sklodowska-Curie Joint                                    
              Fund research project between Dr. Jacek                                        
              Michalik of the Department of Radiation                                        
              Chemistry and Technology, Institute of Nuclear                                 
              Chemistry and Technology, Warsaw, and Dr. Larry                                
              Kevan, Department of Chemistry, University of                                  
              Houston, is on "Reactivity of Silver Clusters                                  
              in Zeolites."  The researchers will explore the                                
              reactivity of small silver clusters as an entry                                
              into the utilization of silver cluster species                                 
              in heterogenous catalysis.  The critical aspect                                
              of this study is to control the cluster size                                   
              within narrow range.  Many generation methods                                  
              lead to a broad size distribution.  One method                                 
              to limit this is to produce the metal clusters                                 
              within a molecular size cage or channel as one                                 
              finds in molecular sieves called zeolites.  In                                 
              addition to ESR and associated optical                                         
              spectroscopies (infared and diffuse                                            
              reflectance), the researchers propose a pulse                                  
              ESR method known as Electron Spin Echo                                         
              Modulation (ESEM) as a major new tool in                                       
              characterizing the reactivity of silver cluster                                
              species in zeolites.  By analyzing the                                         
              modulation signal associated with weak                                         
              electron-nuclear dipolar interactions, it is                                   
              possible to determine the coordination geometry                                
              of paramagnetic species with adsorbed                                          
              molecules.  In favorable cases this should                                     
              provide the structure details, not readily                                     
              obtainable by other techniques, such as the                                    
              number of adsorbate molecules, their                                           
              orientation as well as the changes of                                          
              coordination geometry in the course of                                         
              reaction.  Thus, rather detailed structural                                    
              information about reaction intermediates can be                                
              obtained by using a combination of ESR, ESEM,                                  
              diffuse relectance and infrared spectroscopies                                 
              which will improve our knowledge about the                                     
              mechanism of heterogenous catalysis on metal                                   
              clusters.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This project in radiation chemistry fulfills                                   
              the program objective of advancing scientific                                  
              knowledge by enabling leading experts in Poland                                
              and the United States to combine complementary                                 
              talents and pool resources in areas of strong                                  
              mutual interest and competence.
