Title       : Interfacial Transport and Liposome Formation in the Artery Wall
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1997       
File        : a9223089

Award Number: 9223089
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Rumschitzki david@ees1sO.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sheldon Weinbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1414,5345,9181,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9223089  Rumschitzki    This biotechnology project deals with biomedical
              processes in  the artery from an engineering point of view.  It sets forth a 
              new hypothesis that the initiation and growth of  subendothelial extracellular
              lipid packets known as lipsomes  depend on the localized endothelial leakage
              sites in artery  walls.  Subendothelial transport parallel to the surface 
              associates an effective radius to each leak.  The project  explores the
              hypothesis that a new spot that overlaps a recent  one greatly increases the
              probability of liposome formation.   This approach incorporates artery wall
              architecture, and in  particular, intimal ultrastructural details, to derive 
              transport coefficients and a convective-transport theory to  predict spot sizes
              and to quantitatively link leakages to  liposomes.  Together with the support
              of a complementary NIH  grant to biological collaborators at Columbia
              University,  the  project includes the design experiments to determine 
              parameters needed for these models (e.g., internal elastic  laminar fenestral
              sizes and spacing, leakage frequency and  duration) and to prove this
              colocalization.  Finally,  preliminary models are expanded that track liposome
              initiation  and growth, design experiments to test them and to determine  their
              parameters and tie these models to the lipoprotein  leakage processes just
              mentioned.    The novelty of the this project lies in the model's serious 
              consideration of actual artery wall architecture to formulate  a transport
              theory that appears much more able to account for  observation than previous
              models and in its unique co-  development with animal experiments.  It ties
              together a group  of phenomena, each of which is under study and is of interest
               in its own right, in a new and unique way into comprehensive  view of foam
              cell lesion initiation .    (In particular, it combines work on
              transendothelial lipid  transport and work on water transport through normal
              junctions  by the PI's group, Truskey's group and others togeth er with  work
              by the Simionescus and by Frank and Fogelman on liposome  formation and with
              work by Wight's group on intimal and medial  proteoglycan structure.  Success
              of the project would firmly link the chain of events  leading to the early
              formation of foam cell lesions which can  progress to arteriolsclerosis.  It
              would firmly establish the  type of transport processes that carry elevated
              lumen levels  of cholesterol into the artery wall and connect them to 
              reaction-like liposome-forming processes that can trigger  endothelial  cells
              to recruit monocytes from the lumen to  enter the arterial intima.  This is one
              of the important  pieces still missing from the understanding of the early 
              disease process.    The project is jointly supported by two Engineering
              programs:   Interfacial, Transport, and Separation; Biomedical Engineering  and
              Aiding Persons with Disabilities.  ***
