Title       : Error and the Growth of Experimental Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9223505

Award Number: 9223505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39691              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah G. Mayo mayod@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              One of the primary challenges facing philosophy of science today is            
              to explain, if not to justify, scientific methodologies for                    
              learning about the world.  Dr. Mayo is developing a model of                   
              experimental testing that resolves key questions in philosophy of              
              statistics and answers the current challenge facing philosophers of            
              science to demonstrate the rationality of science.                             
                                                                                             
              Dr. Mayo's testing model is based on standard Neyman-Pearson (NP)              
              statistics.  Despite its widespread use in science, NP theory has              
              been the center of disputes raised by nearly all philosophers of               
              statistics and confirmation, and many scientists as well.  Dr. Mayo            
              aims to resolve these criticisms.   She is setting out a framework             
              in which statistical tests link data to hypotheses via a series of             
              models.  She shows how piecing together local statistical tests                
              permits errors to be detected and corrected, and argues that,                  
              suitably reinterpreted, NP methods provide an adequate account of              
              what permits us to learn from experiments.                                     
                                                                                             
              Dr. Mayo uses the resulting account of experimental inquiry to                 
              grapple with key obstacles to theory testing:  theory ladeness of              
              data, relativity to background assumptions, and underdetermination             
              of theory by data.  The challenge to overcome such obstacles,                  
              raised by Thomas Kuhn and many others, has influenced the thinking             
              in many fields.  The audience for this project includes                        
              philosophers, statisticians, scientists, historians, sociologists,             
              and students of interdisciplinary studies in science and society.
