Title       : U.S.-Slovak Research on SCENEDESMUS Systematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9223115

Award Number: 9223115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32911              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis R. Trainor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5930,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Slovak Research on SCENEDESMUS                                       
              Systematics is between Dr. Francis R. Trainor of                               
              the University of Connecticut and Dr. Frantisek                                
              Hindak of the Institute of Botany, Bratislava.                                 
              The reseachers' work will focus on the phenotypic                              
              variability and plasticity of this well-known                                  
              group of freshwater planktonic algae.  Numerous                                
              recent laboratory studies of several species of                                
              SCENEDESMUS confirm that phenotypic plasticity is                              
              common within the genus; some species are far                                  
              more plastic than others.  In their efforts Drs.                               
              Trainor and Hindak will work with both light                                   
              microscope (LM) and ultrastructural features                                   
              (EM).  First, they will complete analysis of the                               
              full range of plasticity in S. ARMATUS.  They                                  
              then intend to propose an amended species                                      
              description with which one could identify the                                  
              species in the field relying on an ecomorph or                                 
              two.  Studies with additional species (e.g., S.                                
              COMMUNIS, S. MAXIMUS. S. ABUNDANS, and S.                                      
              OBLIQUUS) would follow.  Simultaneously, they                                  
              hope to confirm plasticity in EM features and                                  
              hypothesize that they can place the individual                                 
              wall ultrastructural features in an ordered                                    
              sequence of development.  Results will contribute                              
              to our knowledge of fundamental aspects of                                     
              morphological plasticity in phytoplankton and are                              
              expected to advance the fields of algal                                        
              systematics and freshwater ecology.                                            
                                                                                             
              This project in botany fulfills the program                                    
              objectives of advancing science by enabling                                    
              leading experts in the U.S. and Slovakia to                                    
              combine complementary talents and pool research                                
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest and                               
              competence.
