Title       : Knowledge Shifts in the Study of Crime and Criminal Justice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1994      
File        : a9223969

Award Number: 9223969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48728              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim J. Savelsberg savelsbrg@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Over the past two decades the United States has experienced an                 
              exceptional 200% increase in incarceration rates and other forms of            
              criminal punishment.  At the same time crime rates were almost                 
              stable according to the National Crime Victimization Survey.  There            
              is increasing evidence that the trends in criminal punishment can              
              only be explained if the production of knowledge and beliefs about             
              the causes of crime and effects of punishment is considered.  Such             
              beliefs have also undergone radical shifts during this decade.                 
              They shifted, for example, from an image of offenders as socially              
              and psychologically conditioned to an image of offenders as                    
              rational or innately bad, from reform and treatment strategies to              
              deterrence, retribution and incapacitation, and from discretionary             
              to mandatory judicial decision-making.  The proposed study aims at             
              the measurement and explanation of knowledge shifts in criminology             
              and criminal justice studies between 1950 and 1992.  This project              
              tests the hypotheses that the development of scientific knowledge              
              about crime and punishment is a function of: (1) the emergence of              
              specialized institutions of criminology and criminal justice                   
              studies (i.e., university departments, journals, and professional              
              associations); (2) extensive government involvement in these trends            
              through research funding programs; and (3) simultaneous changes in             
              policy positions on crime and punishment.  The findings will                   
              improve our understanding of the relationship between the                      
              construction of knowledge and ideology in criminal justice policy.             
                                                                                             
              Data will be collected through content analysis of selected                    
              journals, and validated through surveys of journal editors and                 
              interviews with senior scholars.  The source for the content                   
              analysis is a sample of 3,800 articles on crime and criminal                   
              punishment in scholarly journals.  In-depth analysis will be                   
              applied to a smaller subset of articles using the cognitive mapping            
              approach.  The data sets so established will descriptively measure             
              the actual trends in criminological knowledge between 1950 and 1992            
              (time series analysis using SPSS/PC+ Trends).  The data set will               
              further undergo multivariate causal analysis to test the                       
              hypothesized impacts of institutional arrangements on published                
              knowledge, especially the impact of historic time, type of                     
              researcher, research institution, funding source (if any), and                 
              place of publication.  This data set will later be combined with               
              other data on knowledge shifts in media, the political sector,                 
              public opinion, and trends in criminal policy and punishment.
