Title       : Connectionist Models Summer School
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1993     
File        : a9223711

Award Number: 9223711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Mozer mozer@cs.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Smolensky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The interdisciplinary field of "connectionism", or "neural                     
              networks," explores computer systems that are loosely modeled on               
              the human brain.  These systems, composed of large numbers of                  
              simple neuron-like computing elements, exhibit a variety of                    
              intelligent behaviors, including the ability to recognize visual               
              images (e.g., handwriting recognition), store and remember facts by            
              association, control complex mechanical systems (e.g., robot arms),            
              understand natural language, and learn from experience.  The field             
              has experienced rapid growth in recent years and is now enjoying an            
              explosion of popularity, due in large part to the rapid rate of                
              advances and practical applications of recent theoretical                      
              developments.  Connectionism provides a possible approach to                   
              solving complex problems in artificial intelligence and pattern                
              recognition for which no other approaches appear viable.                       
              Connectionist models are being used successfully in the real world             
              and have opened new possibilities for explaining aspects of human              
              cognition and perception.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Research in the field requires remarkably broad and deep training              
              in a number of areas--neurobiology, cognitive science, theoretical             
              foundations, computational methods, engineering applications, and              
              hardware implementation.  Some students are fortunate enough to                
              receive training from leaders in one or two areas, but few if any              
              have access to the full breadth of high-quality training required.             
              For this reason, Summer Schools have been organized to train top               
              young researchers and to encourage interdisciplinary research                  
              collaboration.  These Summer Schools provide an intense and                    
              stimulating opportunity for graduate students to become immersed in            
              the latest research in this fast-changing field.  The success of               
              the previous Summer Schools has been widely acknowledged; they have            
              had an extremely important catalytic effect on the field.  Many of             
              the leading young researchers in the field today attended a                    
              previous Summer School, and their research directions and                      
              contributions were influenced by the experience.                               
                                                                                             
              The next Summer School will be held in Boulder, Colorado from June             
              21 through July 3, 1993.  The faculty of the 1993 Summer School                
              will consist of approximately twenty leading researchers from the              
              US and Canada.  Sixty-five graduate students will be selected by a             
              competitive admissions process for the 12-day intensive program.               
              This funding will allow graduate students to be selected on the                
              basis of merit and potential for contributing to the field.
