Title       : Scientists on Line: Expanding Access to Scholarly Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1993   
File        : a9223222

Award Number: 9223222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Kargon kargon@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Easy access to scholarly resources is at once a frustration and a              
              challenge. Both archivists and scholars in the history of science              
              have become increasingly aware of the opportunities afforded by the            
              use of electronic media.  The possibility of integrating                       
              productivity-enhancing tools with the resources themselves holds               
              great promise for more efficient, and more thorough, archive use.              
                                                                                             
              By its close, Scientists on Disk, will have processed more than 20,000         
              pages from the J. Robert Oppenheimer archives at the Library of                
              Congress.  Under a previous grant, Dr. Kargon has assessed and                 
              tested several delivery media, including CD-ROM and digital tape.              
              Yet an important consequence of their investigations has been to               
              realize the current and future significance of network-based                   
              information.  They have concluded that the existing research                   
              network, Internet, is the best way to allow world-wide scholarly               
              access to electronic media archives.                                           
                                                                                             
              Existing communications software can be adapted to facilitate                  
              Internet access to the Oppenheimer archives already converted to               
              digital form.  Doing so would make possible the near-instantaneous             
              use of these resources by scholars and students world-wide.  Under             
              this grant, Dr. Kargon and his collaborator Jeremy Kargon are:                 
                                                                                             
              1) extending an existing network protocol (WAIS) to accommodate                
              electronic resources such as images and multiple-type documents so             
              that electronic archives might more accurately represent scholarly             
              documents;                                                                     
                                                                                             
              2) making a prototype and disseminating a model information client             
              to handle better such extensions, as well as a wider range of data             
              types (including compressed images and bibliographic information);             
                                                                                             
              3) implementing and maintaining an information server integrating              
              these changes, using the previously scanned Oppenheimer documents.             
                                                                                             
              Properly equipped users around the world will be able to access                
              this and other archives in a single, integrated fashion.  Together             
              with other fast-developing network tools, these efforts should                 
              encourage the proliferation of network-based, multi-media                      
              resources.
