Title       : Amplification and Refinement of Bayesian Scientific Methodology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1993      
File        : a9223678

Award Number: 9223678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Abner E. Shimony   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Scientific inference, the process of going from particular                     
              instances to general laws, has been a matter of philosophical                  
              concern since the time of Aristotle.  Not until Thomas Bayes                   
              (1763), however, was there any explicit method presented to use                
              probability theory to justify the inference from particulars to                
              general laws.  The entire family of Bayesian scientific                        
              methodologies formulates scientific inference in terms of the                  
              concept of epistemic probability, considers the prior probability              
              of scientific hypothesis to be a meaningful concept, and makes use             
              of Bayes's theorem for evaluating posterior probabilities.  A                  
              version of Bayesianism proposed by Professor Shimony in 1970,                  
              called "tempered personalism," recommends that personal probability            
              evaluations be "tempered" by openmindedness towards all seriously              
              proposed hypotheses in an investigation.  Among the virtues of                 
              tempered personalism is the possibility of arriving at a non-                  
              negligible posterior probability for a strong scientific                       
              generalization.  There are, however, some weaknesses in tempered               
              personalism which require modifications:  notably, a difficulty in             
              justifying the axioms of probability, the vagueness of "seriously              
              proposed," and uncertainty regarding the evaluation of the "catch-             
              all" hypothesis.  Under this grant, Professor Shimony, working with            
              two graduate students, is amplifying and refining his original                 
              positions to take account of these difficulties.  He expects to                
              remove the first difficulty by a procedure of "tempering without               
              tempering."  He believes the second and third difficulties are                 
              ameliorated by properly combining analytic propositions of                     
              probability with a posteriori principles.  He and his students are             
              undertaking a number of scientific case studies for the purpose                
              both of illustrating the power of this refined methodology and for             
              heuristics in formulating the a posteriori principles in inductive             
              inference.
