Title       : Approaches to Communication in Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9223091

Award Number: 9223091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166653             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Sobel jsobel@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research consists of four projects related to effective                   
              transmission of information between agents.  One study will                    
              investigate evolutionarily stable outcomes in cheap-talk games.                
              Communication about private information cannot be ignored in an                
              evolutionary framework.  It forces players to obtain efficient                 
              payoffs when no conflicts of interest exist.  The goal is to study             
              whether evolutionary forces favor the informed party, whether                  
              messages are used efficiently when talk is cheap but not free, and             
              whether nontrivial communication must occur when players' interests            
              partially coincide.  The project will also characterize how much               
              must be communicated when agents have different interests.                     
                                                                                             
              A related study will investigate games of communication that change            
              over time in order to discover whether words will take on meanings             
              that apply in more than one context and whether agents will use                
              words honestly in complicated settings even if it is against their             
              short-term strategic interests.  The third project will provide a              
              general framework for studying deviation-based equilibrium                     
              refinements and dynamic behavior in games.  This topic has strong              
              connections with communication, although it is not directly related            
              to communication.  This study will better our understanding of                 
              results in situations where evolutionarily stable sets of                      
              strategies fail to exist.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The fourth project will study a specific model of communication in             
              order to describe conditions under which it is optimal to delegate             
              decision-making authority to an informed expert (the doctor in a               
              doctor-patient relationship).  In the model the patient may be                 
              unable to acquire perfect information either because he is                     
              boundedly rational or because it is not in the best interests of               
              the doctor to communicate completely.  It may be inappropriate for             
              the patient to give complete decision-making authority to the                  
              doctor either because the doctor's preference is different from the            
              patient's or because the doctor does not know the patient's                    
              preference.  Preliminary study suggests that full communication may            
              be impossible whenever the doctor and the patient have different               
              preferences.
