Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Movements Materialize: The Technology and
               Culture of Development Anthropology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9223757

Award Number: 9223757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Henrika Kuklick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynette Schumaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              "Applied social science" have been too little studied in the                   
              history of science.  To study it requires full understanding not               
              only of the science, but of the culture in which it is applied.  In            
              perhaps no other area is the mutual interaction of science and                 
              society clearer than in the applied social sciences.  Ms. Lynette              
              Schumaker, under the direction of Dr. Kuklick, is exploring the                
              growth of such an "applied" area, developmental anthropology, in               
              Zambia in the late colonial and early postcolonial periods, 1945-              
              75.  She is aiming to show how the development science movement                
              took material shape in the technology, work organization, and field            
              practices of a path-breaking school of anthropology--the                       
              "Manchester School," famous for its theoretical advances.  Her                 
              study follows development anthropology through three important                 
              stages in its evolution.  The first part of the study considers the            
              models and precedents available to anthropology in the Central                 
              African environment, and shows how anthropologists negotiated a                
              place for their research in the colonial governments's aggressive              
              new post-war development strategy.  The second part focuses on                 
              changes in field practices and technology created by the challenges            
              of urban research, and shows how the relationship between                      
              anthropologists, their assistants, and the subjects of research was            
              transformed by the rise of African nationalism.  The third part                
              discusses the work culture of anthropology and its influence on the            
              work culture of the international development organizations.  It               
              also appraises anthropology as a colonial science and the role it              
              played in conceptualizing Africa and Africans for the other                    
              sciences.
