Title       : Conflicts of Interest in the Practice of Law and the Regulation of
               Disinterestedness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1993     
File        : a9223615

Award Number: 9223615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119531             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan P. Shapiro   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Bar Foundation
	      750 North Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606114403    312/988-6589

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate the social organization of conflict             
              of interest and its regulation in the world of private legal                   
              practice.  The core precept of fiduciary or professional obligation            
              is that trustees cannot serve two masters.  This "duty of loyalty,"            
              which requires that fiduciaries be disinterested, that they put the            
              interests of those they act for or represent before their own, is              
              particularly intriguing, not only because "real world" trustees                
              routinely serve many masters, but because their masters often want             
              them to.  The providers and consumers of trust, therefore, devise              
              strategies to exploit the desirable features of conflicts of                   
              interest while searching out more disinterested trustees or at                 
              least devising regulatory strategies to disable the persistent                 
              temptations of those who are not.  This research asks how law firms            
              and lawyers construe conflicts of interest and how they formally               
              and informally manage them.  How often and from what sources do                
              potential conflicts arise for individual lawyers and their firms?              
              How are law firms structured to identify, evaluate and respond to              
              them?  How do lawyers evaluate the potential risks and trade-offs              
              in accepting or declining a piece of business?  What steps do they             
              take to minimize these risks?  Do the incidence and sources of                 
              conflict of interest or the strategies by which lawyers regulate               
              them vary by the type and setting of the law practice?  What impact            
              do these self-regulatory activities have on the everyday practice              
              of law?                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The research, set in Illinois, will be conducted at two levels of              
              analysis: (1) firms or collections of lawyers and (2) individual               
              lawyers.  In the first phase of the study, law firm partners with              
              greatest authority over conflict matters will be questioned about              
              firm policies, practices, and procedures regarding issues that                 
              create potential conflicts of interest for the firm or for lawyers             
              within the firm.  These interviews will explore the sources of                 
              conflicts of interest and the self-regulatory mechanisms through               
              which the firm routinely anticipates, neutralizes and adjudicates              
              them.  In the second phase, a sample of lawyers in various areas               
              of legal practice will be interviewed about how, as individuals,               
              they encounter, construe, manage, avoid, disregard, or neutralize              
              conflicts of interest.  In order to investigate how structural                 
              variations in the organization of the law firm, its location in the            
              community, career trajectories of its lawyers, and configurations              
              of and relations with clients give rise to different role conflicts            
              and unique self-regulatory responses, samples will be stratified               
              by firm size and location (Chicago/downstate and urban/rural).                 
              Individual and firm samples will be randomly drawn from a                      
              triangulated composite of four independent lawyer registries or                
              directories.  A total of 165 interviews will be conducted.                     
                                                                                             
              This research will make a major contribution to understanding an               
              important policy issue and to the theoretical literature on                    
              organizational and professional behavior.
