Title       : A Subjective Approach to Dynamic Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9223156

Award Number: 9223156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ehud Kalai kalai@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ehud Lehrer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Existing economic equilibrium models assume that agents,                       
              participating in interactive systems, have precise knowledge of the            
              system, the environment in which it operates, and the behavior of              
              the other agents.  When such knowledge is not available, or when               
              differential information is possessed by different agents, the                 
              models assume that uncertain parameters are drawn from prior                   
              probability distributions which are known to the agents.  Since the            
              parameters and distributions assumed known are the correct ones,               
              these models may be considered objective.                                      
                                                                                             
              While some of the data available in interactive situations is                  
              objective, the vast majority is not.  For example, when one models             
              competition with uncertainty about production costs, any                       
              probability distribution over these parameters must be highly                  
              subjective.  Probability distributions over future prices and                  
              competitors' actions, which compound uncertainties about basic                 
              primitives with uncertainties about other agents' responses to such            
              uncertainties, become even more subjective.  A second criticism of             
              economic equilibria is the lack of dynamical systems describing the            
              learning processes that lead agents to equilibrium.  Without such              
              a process it is difficult to justify equilibrium analysis as a                 
              predictive model of agents' actual behavior.                                   
                                                                                             
              This project aims to address the above two issues.  Some well-                 
              established dynamic equilibrium concepts will be expanded to allow             
              economic agents to hold subjective beliefs.  The research will                 
              concentrate on (1) developing further theoretical methods in the               
              theory of Bayesian and Bounded Bayesian forecasting, and (2)                   
              applying these methods to some well-established equilibrium                    
              concepts in economic theory.  These include equilibrium analysis in            
              strategic environments, rational expectations equilibrium, and                 
              equilibrium analysis of more general social dynamics.
