Title       : Diffusion and Segregation in Polymer Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1997   
File        : a9223099

Award Number: 9223099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $660500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Kramer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              We will continue our experiments on diffusion and segregation in               
              polymer films,  exploiting the complementary depth profiling                   
              capabilities of forward recoil spectrometry, nuclear reaction                  
              analysis, dynamic secondary ion mass spectrometry and neutron                  
              reflectometry for polymer molecules labelled with deuterium.                   
              Emphasis will be placed on understanding diffusion in microphase-              
              separated block copolymer melts with spherical morphologies, where             
              we will investigate both the diffusion of individual block                     
              copolymer chains and the diffusion of micelles.  Emphasis will also            
              be placed on understanding surface segregation in model mixtures of            
              polymers, with both the details of the equilibrium concentration               
              profile and the kinetics with which such equilibrium profiles are              
              approached being of interest.  Finally the influence of a surface              
              attraction on phase separation by spinodal decomposition in polymer            
              films will be further explored.                                                
                                                                                             
              The goals of this research are to develop new experimental methods             
              for investigating the fundamental aspects of diffusion in polymers             
              and to use these methods to critically test models of these                    
              processes.  Diffusion of one polymer into another plays an                     
              important role in a variety of industrial processes ranging for                
              melt blending of miscible polymers to friction welding and heat                
              sealing of plastics.  Basic information on diffusion rates is also             
              required to allow predictions on the kinetics of phase separation              
              in partially compatible polymers and to permit comparison between              
              theory and experiments on polymer crystallization.  On an even more            
              basic level, diffusion measurements in polymers are of interest for            
              the light they can shed on the fundamentals of viscoelastic                    
              processes ("molecular rheology") in polymer melts.
