Title       : Smart Computer Coordinated Markets for Planning and Supply in Electrical Power
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1994   
File        : a9223267

Award Number: 9223267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1993  
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon L. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin A. McCabe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Rassenti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              The general trend in the world economy to substitute markets and               
              competition for economic regulation, and the heightened                        
              international consciousness for energy efficient resource                      
              utilization motivate this study of the technical and economic                  
              feasibility of deregulating electric power transmission networks.              
              The project focuses on the development of computer coordinated                 
              market mechanisms for the generation and transmission of                       
              electrical energy and for the building and exchange of capacity                
              rights in the power network.  Previous related work by the                     
              investigators has attracted the attention of various government                
              agencies in New Zealand, England, France, Poland, Norway, Hungary              
              and the United States.  A useful byproduct of this grant is                    
              computer software for hands-on laboratory demonstration                        
              experiment to better inform non-technical decision makers of the               
              potential advantages of institutional reform.                                  
                                                                                             
              The approach taken to defining the structure and property rights               
              in the deregulated form of this industry is based on two                       
              fundamental concepts that are at the core of a deregulation                    
              scenario.  The first is central economic dispatch (regional or                 
              national) of energy in pipeline or transmission networks.  An                  
              economic dispatch center uses optimization algorithms that                     
              compute prices and allocations so as to maximize system surplus                
              as revealed in the dispersed location-specific bids of all                     
              agents.  The idea is to combine the coordination advantages of                 
              centralization with the informational advantages of decentralized              
              ownership.  Decentralization cannot alone serve well the needs of              
              competition in markets that have the complex interdependencies                 
              that characterize power networks.  The second concept at the core              
              of a restructure is cotenancy or joint ownership of capacity                   
              rights to "natural monopoly" elements of the network, and the                  
              opportunity to exchange these rights as agents' circumstances                  
              change.  The research methodology is that of the controlled                    
              laboratory experiment.  The laboratory is used as a test bed to                
              examine the performance and equilibrium properties of price-                   
              allocation mechanisms far too difficult to model formally as                   
              noncooperative games.
