Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1996      
File        : a9157920

Award Number: 9157920
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay P. Gore gore@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              National energy policy must address the greenhouse effect due to               
              CO2 and the continuing threat to world peace caused partly by                  
              dependence on foreign oil.  Effective use of environmentally benign            
              alternate fuels should be on the national agenda.  This PYI Award              
              will enable Professor Gore and his group to contribute more                    
              effectively to the efforts now underway to reconcile energy needs,             
              environmental safety and world peace.                                          
                                                                                             
              In the first two years of the PYI award, Professor Gore will                   
              concentrate on exploring the advantages of nonpremixed combustion              
              in porous ceramic matrices, recirculating ceramic fibers and                   
              particles.  Porosity, fiber thickness and strength requirements                
              will be defined and communicated to material scientists.  In the               
              third and the fourth year, experimental and theoretical research               
              concerning the basic flame structure and radiative transfer with               
              directional scattering in a participating reacting medium will be              
              undertaken.  In the final year of the award, optimum fiber loading             
              for preventing flame quenching and excessive radiation blockage in             
              different furnace configurations will be studied.  Proposals for               
              matching support and transfer of technology to practical scales                
              will be developed throughout the grant period.  The experimental               
              research approach will involve optical measurements of heat                    
              transfer and combustion properties using infrared imaging and                  
              multidirectional scattering spectroscopy.  Theoretical approach                
              will involve transient solutions of reacting flow and radiation                
              properties.  In addition to the development of an environmentally              
              attractive strategic technology, the research is expected to result            
              in much needed property data for high temperature ceramics and                 
              advance the understanding in two relatively unexplored areas:  (1)             
              highly nonadiabatic combustion, (2) radiative transport in                     
              participating media with directional scattering.
