Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award: City Structure and Regional Change in
               Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1996       
File        : a9157667

Award Number: 9157667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268711             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander B. Murphy abmurphy@oregon.uoredon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This award provides support for Dr. Alexander Murphy through the          
              National Science Foundation's Presidential Young Investigator Program.         
              The objective of this program is to provide research support for some          
              of the nation's most outstanding and promising young science and               
              engineering faculty members.  The awards are intended to improve the           
              capability of U.S. academic institutions to respond to the demand for          
              highly qualified scientists and engineers for academic and industrial          
              research and teaching.                                                         
                   This award will allow Dr. Murphy to continue his research in              
              political geography on evolving regional structures and ideologies in          
              the Europe and other parts of the globe.  He plans to pay special              
              attention to development of critical locales within the European               
              Community, starting with Brussels, a city that has played a central            
              role in the integration of Western Europe and that likely will undergo         
              dramatic transformation in the next decades.  In addition to studying          
              the role and relationships of specific places within dynamically               
              redefined regions, the investigator also will examine the                      
              concentration of power within central institutions that exert great            
              influence within regions, and he will explore the implications of such         
              concentrations on human use and misuse of the natural environment.             
              Studies of regional structures and water allocation in the Pacific             
              Northwest of the U.S. will be followed by analyses of water use and            
              pollution in along the Scheldt River of north central Europe, thereby          
              enhancing understandings of the environmental impacts of regional              
              restructuring.
