Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award: Membrane Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1995      
File        : a9157856

Award Number: 9157856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly W. Anderson kanderson@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The encapsulation of biologically active substances into                       
              membranes has emerged as an important research area with great                 
              potential for industrial applications.  These systems permit                   
              entrapped substances to be protected in vivo from inactivation                 
              or degradation and also permit delayed or controlled kinetics                  
              of release.  Systems which employ naturally occurring                          
              substances as carriers, such as phospholipid vesicles and                      
              resealed erythrocyte membranes, have certain advantages with                   
              respect to biocompatibility.  However, a major drawback of                     
              these carrier systems is their lack of specificity in site of                  
              delivery.  If this could be solved, great strides in their use                 
              would be made.  Two of the most important physical properties                  
              that can effect in vivo survival and targeting of these                        
              systems are deformability and adhesion.  It has been shown                     
              that large phospholipid vesicles become entrapped in the first                 
              capillary bed reached after i.v. administration and they also                  
              have difficulty in moving from the circulation into the                        
              interstitial space.  It is possible that these problems could                  
              be attributed to their lack of deformability.  Intact                          
              erythrocytes are able to deform during passage through                         
              capillaries and into the interstitial space.  However, it is                   
              possible that the morphology of these cells change drastically                 
              following the incorporation of molecules into the resealed                     
              erythrocyte.  To date, the deformation characteristics of                      
              these systems have not been quantified.  Targeting of these                    
              carriers to specific cells in vivo also depends a great deal                   
              on carrier-endothelial cell interactions during dissemination                  
              through the circulation and carrier-cell interactions                          
              following extravasation into the tissue space.  These                          
              interactions are strongly dependent on the adhesion properties                 
              of the systems.  Hence, it is possible that specific targeting                 
              could be accomplished by modifying the adhesion properties of                  
              the carriers.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Current research is focused on the investigation of                            
              deformability and adhesion properties of both normal and                       
              genetically altered cells.  The laboratory is equipped with a                  
              state-of-the-art video microscopy system that employs the                      
              micropipette aspiration technique and a microscopic flow                       
              chamber to quantify both deformation and adhesion properties                   
              of membranes, respectively.  Recent results show that                          
              genetically altering normal fibroblast cells, modify membrane                  
              adhesion and deformability properties.  The cells are                          
              currently being tested, using biochemical assays, to determine                 
              the adhesion molecules and structural characteristics                          
              responsible for the properties observed.  During the period of                 
              the PYI award, expertise in cellular membranes will be                         
              employed to investigate adhesion, deformation and transport                    
              properties of resealed erythrocytes membranes and phospholipid                 
              vesicles with the ultimate goal of producing optimal carrier                   
              systems.
