Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award/Synthesis of High-Spin Organic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9157704

Award Number: 9157704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Snyder g-snyder@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9227,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Organic molecules with high-spin ground states will be prepared                
              and studied as models for building ferromagetic organic materials.             
              Tetramethyleneallene (TMA) is one of the species that will be                  
              prepared and the electronic structure will be determined. This                 
              tetraradical can be viewed as a union of two planar pi-systems,                
              each a trimethylenemethane triplet biradical, in an orthogonal                 
              arrangement. TMA is expected to display an extremely strong                    
              quintet spin preference, since it provides powerful exchange                   
              coupling of the orthogonal triplet trimethylenemethane subunits.               
              This concept will be tested experimentally. A second class of                  
              high-spin ground state compounds will be prepared and studied,                 
              which consist of two carbons in a trimethylenemethane biradical                
              fused to an array of aromatic rings. These high-spin compounds                 
              will be characterized by cryogenic, matrix-isolation EPR and                   
              electronic spectroscopy. Another aspect of the research will                   
              employ photoacoustical calorimetry to acquire thermochemical data              
              on strained bridgehead olefins and imines via the enthalpies of                
              their photochemical generation and subsequent reactions.                       
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the research             
              of Professor Gary J. Snyder at the University of Chicago.                      
              Molecules in their lowest energy state ordinarily have all of                  
              their electron spins paired. A simplistic view is that electrons               
              normally travel in pairs, where one electron of the pair spins                 
              clockwise and the other spins counterclockwise. In this research               
              project, molecules will be prepared where the lowest energy state              
              has either two or four unpaired electrons. That is, electrons that             
              do not travel in pairs, which usually defines a higher energy                  
              state of a molecule. Specially designed molecules will be prepared             
              to have these so-called high-spin states and their electronic and              
              physical properties will be studied. This may be of practical                  
              importance to the preparation of organic ferromagnetic substances.
