Title       : Nuclear Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0070828

Award Number: 0070828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilding S. Kohler kohler@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0070828
Kohler
	This proposal concerns the properties of dense matter and in
              particular that of nuclear matter and nuclei. It is a theoretical study for
              example related to experiments involving collisions between heavy ions
              performed at laboratories around the world. The main object of my research is 
              to obtain an understanding of these many-particle systems in a state of
              non-equilibrium as well as equilibrium and especially the processes leading to
              equilibration. The interactions and collisions between the constituent
              particles are of utmost important in this study and are also a subject of my
              study.
	The study involves modern quantum-mechanical methods using a Green's
              function formulation of the problem. So-called transport equations were
              developped based on these techniques in the 60's but it is not until in the
              last few years that they have been the subject of numerical study.  The
              availability of high-speed and large memory computers have made it possible to
              obtain exact solutions of these equations for some particular cases. I have
              developped efficient computer-programs and have been in the forefront of these
              applications with publications related not only to nuclear problems but also to
              semiconductor and plasma physics problems.
	The study of non-equilibrium
              phenomena is not new in physics. They have in fact been the subject of intense
              study within the realm of Statistical Mechanics for over one-hundred years
              especially since the work of Boltzmann who gave us the H-theorem and the famous
              Boltzmann transport equation. An enormous amount of discussions regarding
              extensions and also critique of this equation has ensued. It has played an
              undisputed role in the development of both equilibrium and non-equlibrium
              statistical mechanics and for quantative microscopic calculations of matter
              properties like conduction of heat and viscosity. It has been used in analyzing
              experiments with collisions between heavy ions. Even so it is however a
              classical equation with limited applicability to quantum systems like nuclei.
              
   The quantum-mechanical methods used in my study supersedes the Boltzman
              equation which on the other hand can be derived as a classical limit.  Memory
              and correlation effects are included. Collective, pionic and relativistic
              effects are also within reach by these new methods. The quark-gluon plasma is
              another system that lies within reach.

