Title       : Complexity and Experiment Design in Identification for Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a0070146

Award Number: 0070146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Bitmead rbitmead@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Relationships and interactions between the two disciplines of system
              identification and model-based control design are the prime milieu of the
              proposed research.  The unanswered question, What is a good model for control
              design?, will be examined from a constructive viewpoint by considering a range
              of design choices within the methods of iterative identification and control,
              which deals with the recently developed techniques for successively generating
              controllers and models based on closed-loop data.  In this context of
              iteration, each choice of design variable is informed (or prejudiced) by the
              previous model and controller plus experimental data.  The design parameters
              which we study are connected with modeling in a framework where undermodeling
              and approximation are the norm, as opposed to the unrealistic aim of seeking
              exact descriptions.  Both theoretical and practical areas will be studied,
              since each is an important guide and adjunct to the other in this field, where
              successful applications appear to be running ahead of the prevailing available
              theoretical support. The research has high scientific and practical merit, as
              it deals with fundamental problems of understanding the nature of modeling for
              a purpose  and with issues of applied industrial control.  Outcomes should be
              expected in both arenas.  High performance control systems are regarded as a
              major enabling technology for many industrial applications.  Since the
              provision of a dynamic model is the starting point for most high-performance
              control design, an understanding of the methodology for deriving this model
              from closed-loop operating data is critical to realizing this potential.  The
              research areas addressed here are core issues whose resolution will provide the
              theoretical comprehension and guidance to yield useful practical techniques.   
               
