Title       : Gordon Research Conference on Electrodeposition, New London, NH, August 13-18,
               2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2000   
File        : a0070426

Award Number: 0070426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlyle B. Storm grc@grc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Stickney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0070426
Storm

Electrodeposition has been an important materials preparation
              technique since the turn of the century. The history of the Read Conference,
              and now the Electrodeposition GRC, has involved the formation of metals: Cu,
              Ag, Au, Cr and Ni, for car bumpers, contacts, electroforming, etc. The present
              organizers seek to change the focus of the conference from what is, to what
              could be. That is, the organizers feel the conference will have more impact if
              we can open up electrodeposition and investigate new, frontier, areas instead
              of discussing better ways to do what is already being done.  Understanding of
              electrodeposition at the atomic scale has increased dramatically in recent
              years, as new analytical methods like scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) have
              been developed. This has resulted in improved control over processes, and the
              ability to use electrodeposition in areas where control over the nanometer
              scale is required. The present topic areas for the conference include copper
              electrodeposition in VLSI, magnetic materials, micro electromechanical systems
              (MEMS), semiconductors, surface characterization, and nanostructures. Under
              these headings, fundamental aspects of electrocrystallization, the effects of
              additives on morphological evolution of electrodeposited films, autocatalytic
              processes, and functional coatings which show promising wear and/or corrosion
              behavior will be discussed. The conference has seen dramatic growth from the
              first to the second, and we would like to develop it into a premier materials
              conference. The NSF funds are used to subsidize the travel and fixed fees of
              students and young faculty who would not be able to participate without
              financial support. 
%%%
The Electrodeposition Gordon Research Conference
              (GRC) is relatively new, having started in 1996. It grew out of the Read
              Conference, one of the primary scientific forums for the electrodeposition
              community since the early 50's. Electrodeposition is becoming accepted as a
              standard thin film synthesis methodology in new areas. A clear example is the
              adoption of electrodeposition by the electronics industries to form Cu
              interconnects in VLSI. In addition, it is gaining importance in the formation
              of magnetic materials, alloys, and the formation of micromachined parts. New
              areas where it may play a roll include nanofabrication and the formation of
              compound semiconductor thin films.
***

