Title       : Theoretical Nuclear Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0070888

Award Number: 0070888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard S. Kisslinger kissling@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) is the theory of strong interactons, with quarks
              confined by gluonic forces to form protons and other baryons of nuclear
              physics, as well as quark-antiquark particles, the mesons.  It is also possible
              for the gluons to form particles, called glueballs, without quark constituents.
               The discovery and study of glueballs is one of the most important areas of
              nuclear/particle physics. Using QCD, we are investigating possible states of
              mesons and glueballs with emphasis on identifying experiments to test our
              theoretical picture.  Of particular importance is our recent prediction of a
              low-mass glueball which we feel is strongly coupled to a two-pion resonance,
              called the Sigma.  We are investigating decay rates of particles which will
              provide tests of this theory of the glueball/sigma.  It is possible to carry
              out some of these experimental tests at Jefferson Laboratory.
	We are also
              carrying out investigations of the Pomeron, whose exchange has long been known
              to dominate high energy elastic and diffractive processes.  It is almost
              certain that the Pomeron is composed largely of glue, and recently our group
              has given strong evidence that the Pomeron is closely related to glueballs,
              including our proposed glueball/sigma.  We shall calculate cross sections for
              sigma production to test the nature of the Pomeron.  Experiments could be
              carried out at the 50 GeV accelerators proposed at Los Alamos Laboratory and in
              Japan.  The proton-proton collider, using the RHIC facility at Brookhaven
              Laboratory, would be excellent for experimental measurements of the cross
              sections.
	Properties of hadrons at finite densities and temperatures are also
              being investigated.  We have completed a preliminary study for hadronic matter
              at temperatures below the chiral phase transition, which occurs at the
              temperature of the universe about a millionth of a second after the so-called
              big bang.  We shall study the effect of instantons, certain gluonic modes, on
              the properties of matter both below and above this phase transition, and
              propose tests at the RHIC accelarator.  We shall also investigate possible
              evidence for this early-universe phase transition in observational studies of
              the cosmic microwave background.  These interdisciplinary investigations of
              relationships between nuclear/particle physics and cosmology use field
              theoretic methods developed in studies of condensed matter physics.

