Title       : Enumerative Combinatorics and Probabilistic Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0070574

Award Number: 0070574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77682              (Estimated)
Investigator: Huafei C. Yan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Enumerative Combinatorics and Probabilistic Method
Catherine Huafei
              Yan
PROJECT SUMMARY

The Principal Investigator (PI) will study a series of
              interrelated problems in enumerative combinatorics and probabilistic method. 
              In recent years deep and unexpected connections have been found between
              algebraic enumeration and stochastic processes, in particular in the empirical
              process and in Brownian motion.  The primary objective of this research is to
              explore this connection.  The starting point is the probabilistic model of
              branching processes.  On one hand, branching processes encode various
              combinatorial structures such as rooted trees, parking functions, and
              multi-colored structures.  On the other hand, random graph evolution in the
              \double jump" can be described by branching processes with the expected family
              size near one.  From the algebraic standpoint, the PI plans to address the
              combi- natorial applications in branching processes and probabilistic results
              in combinatorics.  She will investigate the behavior of branching processes
              with near critical offspring distributions by applying well-developed
              techniques in algebraic enumeration.  She will also study the asymptotic
              properties of certain random structures from the probability theory of
              branching processes.  From the stochastic standpoint, the PI plans to develop
              stochastic models for the theory of random graphs and random generated trees
              via branching processes, and to relate such models to the theory of Brownian
              motion.  The emphasis is a combinatorial under- standing of the techniques and
              results of stochastic processes and calculus.  The PI expects to apply the
              model to graph enumeration, and to investigate the distributive asymptotics of
              random graphs and other random structures.

In addition to the core research
              program outlined above, the PI intends to pursue three algebraic problems
              arising from the probabilistic method and extremal combinatorics.  The first is
              a recurrence associated with Turan problems; the second is on discrepancy
              theory, and the third is on balancing vectors.  The objective here is to extend
              our knowledge of algebraic structures on discrete systems and to develop new
              approaches in combinatorics.

