Title       : Global Stability and Robustness Properties of Neural Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0070039

Award Number: 0070039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222787             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anuradha M. Annaswamy aanna@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0070039
Annaswamy

The use of neural networks in identification and control
              of engineering systems has been intensely debated over the past decade. 
              Despite the fact that several stability results have been derived in the
              literature concerning neural networks in identification and control, most of
              them are local in nature and/or include fairly restrictive conditions under
              which the stability is valid.  In contrast to these analytical results, the
              actual demonstration in applications and numerical simulations reports just the
              contrary: Neural networks indeed serve as powerful numerical computational
              units that are capable of very good approximations of nonlinear maps and
              provide complex functionalities of estimation, control, and optimization over a
              large region of operation. The goal of this project is to address this gap and
              develop global stability tools that are capable of explaining the true scope of
              operation of a neural network when used for nonlinear control.  The main idea
              here is to directly address and exploit the distinguishing feature of nonlinear
              regression in neural networks and derive the underlying convergence and
              stability properties. Preliminary results in [I] show that it is possible to
              derive conditions under which global convergence takes place in identification
              problems using neural networks.  The P.I. plans to derive training algorithms
              as well as conditions under which global system identification using neural
              networks as well as global stability using neural controllers can be derived. 
              Various neural network structures including multi-layered perceptrons and
              radial basis functions will be examined.  The applicability as well as
              limitations of gradient-like algorithms in these problems 
will be studied. 
              All theoretical derivations will be complemented by simulation studies.  The
              results from the proposed research will lead to fundamental advances in the
              analysis and design of complex dynamic systems in various engineering
              problems.
***

