Title       : An Automated Research Microscope for Visualization and Analysis of Environmental
               Biological Samples

Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a0070389

Award Number: 0070389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 15,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65186              (Estimated)
Investigator: Junko Munakata Marr jmmarr@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim R. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda A. Figueroa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Siegrist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin W. Mandernack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Munakata Marr 0070389

An automated research microscope with
              state-of-the-art digital imaging capabilities will be used to support a wide
              variety of biological research at the Colorado School of Mines (CSM), research
              that is currently performed off-campus or not at all.

Immediate use of the
              microscope will encompass a broad spectrum of environmental biological
              research.  One major application will be the use of fluorescent genetic probes
              to identify specific microorganisms in natural soils, in wastewater treatment
              systems, in biological systems that produce or consume greenhouse gases, and in
              bioremediation systems.  These microbes, for example, remove nitrogen from
              wastewater, transform chlorinated solvents or arsenic in groundwater, or
              produce methane or carbon dioxide.  In addition, fluorescent bacteria will be
              used to monitor the treatment of acid mine drainage and the removal of
              pathogens from drinking water and wastewater.  Finally, the microscope will be
              used to develop new methods of bacterial analyses for public health and food
              safety applications.

This microscope will allow CSM to more closely
              integrate microbiology with engineering and other sciences.  Because the
              projects described above are conducted primarily by engineers and chemists in
              collaboration with microbiologists, the ability to perform sophisticated
              microscopic analyses will provide new insights into microbial influences and
              interactions in engineered and human-impacted systems.  These insights are
              expected to have far-reaching implications in diverse fields ranging from
              drinking water safety to global warming.  In addition, the microscope will have
              a significant impact within the university.  The Colorado School of Mines has
              traditionally focused on the beneficial utilization of natural resources,
              excelling in such fields as mining, geological engineering and petroleum
              engineering.  CSM has recently recognized the importance of biological
              sciences, and this microscope will provide valuable support toward
              establishment of a viable, formal biology program.

