Title       : Operator inequalities, reproducing kernels, and invariant subspaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0070451

Award Number: 0070451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stefan Richter richter@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl Sundberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract
Richter/Sundberg

Richter and Sundberg will continue their study
              of linear operators  on Hilbert spaces modelled by multiplication operators on
              spaces  of analytic functions, in both one and several variables. The study  of
              such operators has a long history and has led to much progress  in operator
              theory and complex analysis. For instance the  unilateral shift, which is
              modelled by multiplication by z on the  Hardy space of the unit disc, has been
              used to enhance our  knowledge of contraction operators. Other classes of
              operators  characterized by operator inequalities may be studied using 
              operators modelled by multiplication by z on other Hilbert spaces  of analytic
              functions. Such spaces have associated with them  evaluation functionals called
              reproducing kernels, and there is an  intimate connection between properties of
              such a kernel and  properties of the multiplication operators on the
              corresponding  space. An important classical example where this correspondence 
              has been exploited is Nevanlinna-Pick interpolation. Recent work of  several
              researchers has extended the applicability of the ideas  behind Nevanlinna-Pick
              interpolation and introduced other types of  inequalities on operators and
              reproducing kernels that seem to be  very fruitful. Richter and Sundberg will
              investigate the connection  between operator inequalities, reproducing kernels,
              and the  structure of the lattice of invariant subspaces of multiplication 
              operators.   

The proposed work involves ideas and problems from several
              areas  of pure and applied mathematics. Operator Theory, which may be  thought
              of as an infinite dimensional version of linear algebra, grew  out of ideas
              used to study certain partial differential equations  arising in physics in the
              1800's, and became increasingly important  with the advent of Quantum Mechanics
              in the twentieth century.  Complex Analysis is a subject with a long and
              distinguished  history, and remains a very active and broad area of research. 
              These two areas have had a very fruitful interaction throughout this  century,
              owing to the fact that some interesting and useful  operators can be modelled
              by natural operations on spaces of  analytic functions. At least since the
              1960's it has been realized  that a series of related results concerning
              certain of these  operators are of importance in the study of Control Theory,
              an area  of importance in electrical engineering and other practical 
              applications. Among these results are the Beurling-Lax Theorem   on invariant
              subspaces, the Nevanlinna-Pick Interpolation Theorem,  and its close relative
              the Commutant Lifting Theorem. Work by a  number of researchers since the
              1980's has shown that the circle  of ideas concerned with these results are
              applicable to a much  wider class of objects than had previously been realized.
              This has  resulted in a much improved understanding of the underlying 
              mathematical systems   




