Title       : Collective Behavior in Ordered Arrays of Nanostructures - Physics and Technology
               Opportunities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a0070019

Award Number: 0070019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jimmy Xu Jimmy_Xu@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will study the collective behavior of coupled two-dimensional
              lateral superlattices of highly ordered nanostructures, in both theory and
              experiment. Due to significant flexibility in the choice of nanostructure
              materials, these systems' collective behavior could be of either electronic or
              magnetic nature. These unique nanolattices have potential technological
              implications for new optoelectronic, nanoelectronic and computational devices. 
              Over the past year, a new non-lithographic template fabrication method has been
              developed to produce highly ordered arrays or two-dimensional lateral
              superlattices of nanostructures-metal and semiconductor wires, and carbon
              nanotubes. Building on this capability, new experimental and theoretical
              investigations are needed to assess the scientific and technological
              opportunities which this new fabrication capability provides; additionally, the
              fabrication technology itself needs refinement. The main focus in this project
              is to understand the collective behaviors and interactions which take place
              within these nanolattices. This project will advance the goals of NSF
              Electronics, Photonics, and Device Technologies program by exploring device
              functions of individual nanostructures; extracting system functions from the
              collective behaviors of a large ensemble of nanoelements; extending the
              capabilities of our fabrication techniques; and advancing the frontier of this
              enabling technology for a new generation of electronics.  In the fabrication
              area, the methods of non-lithographic template fabrication of nanostructure
              lattices will be improved, extending the range of nanostructure sizes and
              spacings, and hence the couplings between adjacent nanoelements. Engineering
              and even lithographic steps will be introduced into this otherwise completely
              natural, self-organized nanofabrication process to enable better observation
              and/or use of the collective behaviors in the system.  Experimental exploration
              of the properties of these nanostructure lattices will be performed using a
              variety of approaches, including scanning probe microscopy and spectroscopy
              (topographical, electronic, magnetic and optical), and broad-area electronic,
              magnetic and optical measurements.  In these experiments, the physical
              properties of the nanostructures will be characterized in order to help
              understand the ways in which their collective electronic and magnetic behaviors
              are manifested. More advanced experiments will attempt to observe the
              collective behavior directly.

On the theoretical front, the electronic
              behavior of Coulomb-coupled nanostructure arrays, and
the domain ordering
              behavior of magnetic nanostructures coupled via dipole interactions will
              be
studied. In each case, the focus and ultimate objective will be to study
              the collective behavior
arising from the short-ranged interactions, and the
              implications which this behavior has on the
device applications of these
              structures. An exciting long-term possibility is the prospect of using
the
              collective behavior of the lattices for useful applications-memory devices,
              signal
processing, and possibly even as a testbed for new computation
              concepts. The theoretical work to
be performed will lay a foundation for these
              new potential applications, and will guide, inform
and enable understanding of
              experimental results. In conclusion, this is an ambitious project
designed to
              lay the foundations for long-term work. While the ultimate goals are extremely
              far-reaching,
the process of investigation has been designed to generate
              scientifically valuable and
technologically useful results beginning
              immediately, and continuing through the duration of the
project.

