Title       : Collaborative Research: Vector Bundles on Projective Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0070427

Award Number: 0070427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84591              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Prabhakar Rao rao@arch.umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              abstract

The investigator and his colleagues study small rank vector bundles
              on projective spaces.  New and simplified constructions are obtained both in
              finite and in zero characteristics.  In the case of rank two bundles, these
              constructions on projective four space are valid only in positive
              characteristics.  The investigator and his colleagues work on the question of
              extending these constructions to characteristic zero.  This is related to the
              deformation theory of these bundles.  They investigate whether these bundles
              can be deformed from positive to zero characteristic.  The deformation theory
              of such bundles also has applications to questions regarding degenerating sums
              of line bundles and the existence of exotic components of the Hilbert
              scheme.

The investigator and his colleagues give explicit constructions of
              objects called vector bundles.  Vector bundles are devices which encode
              algebraic information about huge numbers of geometric figures like curves and
              surfaces.  With their explicit knowledge of vector bundles, the investigator
              and his colleagues can then construct geometric figures with desired
              properties.  The work is done using matrices which are easily implemented on
              computer algebra systems.  Much of the work is done over finite fields which
              allows the use of computers to give exact answers.  Problems involving
              geometric modeling in the real world require approximating the answers, one
              method being the use of such finite fields.  The project studies the interplay
              between geometric objects existing in the real world (over fields of
              characteristic zero) and their approximations over finite fields.



