Title       : A Coherent Tunable Smith-Purcell Radiator for the Far Infrared
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0070491

Award Number: 0070491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255003             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Brownell hayden.brownell@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Walsh  (Principal Investigator former)
              Seth R. Trotz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Swartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0070491
Walsh

The purpose of the project is to develop a device which is
              defined by the term "grating coupled
oscillator" (GCO) [1,2]. The GCO is a
              tunable source of coherent radiation that, we anticipate, can provide power for
              spectroscopic investigations and function as a local oscillator over the entire
              THz-FIR range of the spectrum (0.3-30 THz). For nearly a century the FIR
              spectral regime has been relatively under-exploited, largely due to the lack of
              tunable, coherent sources. Despite this difficulty, the importance of a broad
              range of scientific questions extending from biophysics and condensed matter to
              plasma physics and radio astronomy have motivated research in the FIR spectral
              region. The unique characteristics of the GCO will add a powerful new tool to
              the arsenal of techniques used in these investigations.

The GCO is a novel
              adaptation of an old idea. The essential components are a very
              "bright"
electron beam and a diffraction grating. Smith and Purcell [3] first
              described experiments with
electron beams moving over a grating nearly fifty
              years ago.

A single electron passing over a grating induces a surface
              current footprint which in turn produces a radiative wake. The response of the
              grating to the passage of the electron is coherent in the same sense that a
              dielectric material will respond coherently to the passage of a fast particle.
              A diffuse beam of electrons passing over a grating will generate a total signal
              that is an incoherent superposition of the contributions from each electron. In
              this limit, the radiated power scales only linearly with beam current and the
              total power produced is modest. When the beam current density exceeds a
              critical value, distributed feedback on the grating will cause individual
              electron contributions to also add coherently. The power available increases
              dramatically. In experiments to date, this "start-oscillation" threshold has
              been crossed at frequencies up to 1.5 THz.

The GCO is superior to the other
              available FIR sources in several respects. First, the use of a free
electron
              beam avoids the bulk material response which limits the spectral range of solid
              state devices. Second, contrary to conventional microwave tube engineering, the
              use of bright, low current electron beams with a suitably low loss open
              resonator (grating) structure surmounts all four impediments that limit the
              tuning range of conventional electron tubes to less than 1 THz. As early as
              fifty years ago [4-6], these impediments had been identified as: (1) limits set
              by the need for precision in fabrication, (2) thermal stability, (3) "circuit" 
              losses, and (4) the rapid increase of the start current density with the
              operating frequency. Lastly, a complete GCO will be smaller than a briefcase,
              without cryogenics or intricate supporting hardware.

Theoretical estimates
              of the GCO output power are 10's of mW (CW) with efficiency exceeding 0.01. The
              operating frequency range is limited only by the quality of the electron beam.
              Current GCO output power and efficiency below 1 THz are 100 nW and 10-7
              respectively. The proposed course of research aims to lower the start current,
              thereby increasing the power and operating  frequency, through improved
              electron beam quality and grating coupling efficiency. This goal requires
              extensive theoretical and experimental studies to achieve the anticipated >1000
              increase in radiated and resolving powers.

In current experiments, a
              modified scanning electron microscope (SEM) generates the driving
beam. This
              SEM system will be improved to produce a much brighter electron beam. The
              signal collection optics and instrumentation will be developed in order to
              facilitate more precise monitoring of the experimental conditions. The grating
              resonator design will be investigated experimentally and theoretically to
              reduce losses, in order to lower the start oscillation threshold, and enhance
              the output coupling efficiency. The theory of GCO operation will be developed
              further to understand the dependence of output power on current. The final goal
              of the project is to operate the SEM with compact dc-dc converter based high
              voltage supplies and a single tip field emission cathode, thus providing proof
              of principle operation of a miniature GCO.
***

