Title       : Rational Landen Transformations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0070567

Award Number: 0070567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor Moll vhm@math.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Moll
0070567

     The problem of integration of rational functions was
              considered by J. Bernoulli in the 18th century.  He completed Leibniz's
              original attempt at a general partial fraction decomposition of the function. 
              The main difficulty associated with this procedure is to obtain a complete
              factorization of the denominator.  In the middle of the 19th century Hermite
              and Ostrogradsky developed algorithms to compute the rational part of the
              primitive for the function without factoring its denominator.  More recently
              Horowitz rediscovered this method and discussed its complexity.  The problem of
              computing the transcendental part of the primitive was finally solved by Lazard
              and Rioboo.  This algorithm has been implemented in the current versions of the
              most widely used symbolic integrators such as MATLAB, Maple V and Mathematica
              4.0.  Modern developments in the theory of integration of rational functions
              have been concentrated in the development of algorithms that reduce the cost of
              operations, thereby extending the range of problems that can be solved using
              realistic amounts of machine time.  In spite of the fact that the problem of
              integration of rational functions appears to be solved both from a theoretical
              and symbolic point of view, the reality is that much more work remains to be
              done.  Among the difficulties encountered in the use of symbolic integration
              packages is that the performance is dependent upon the way the rational
              function is entered into the algorithm.  The immediate goal of this project is
              twofold: to develop and implement an efficient and robust symbolic algorithm
              for the evaluation of definite integrals of rational functions; and to
              investigate the dynamical and geometrical properties of the rational Landen
              transformations.  The long term goal of this project is to develop a complete
              solution to the problem of definite integration in finite terms.  This will
              complement the work done by Lazard-Rioboo, Rioboo, Risch, and Trager in the
              case of indefinite integration.  Implementation of this solution will have a
              profound impact on
the current symbolic integrators.

     Many problems in
              physics and engineering require the exact evaluation of integrals in terms of
              the parameters appearing in those integrals.  These integrals come up in the
              study of particle physics and classical mechanics.  While it is not always
              possible to find such an expression, an efficient and robust symbolic software
              package should give the result in closed form, or decide whether such an
              expression is achievable.  The goal of this project is to develop algorithms
              that will expand upon the capabilities of existing software packages that are
              widely used in industry and universities.

