Title       : FABRICATION AND ANALYSIS OF MAGNETO-ELECTRONIC DEVICES BY ELECTROCHEMICAL
               TECHNIQUES
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0070236

Award Number: 0070236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299829             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rainer Schad rschad@bama.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Giovanni Zangari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Magneto-electronic devices, which exploit the spin-dependent transport in
              ferromagnetic materials, have a tremendous technological potential as sensors
              or memory elements. 
The performance of such devices is determined by
              structure, chemistry and magnetic properties of the interfaces. Growth of these
              materials should thus be controlled at the atomic scale, in order to reliably
              obtain structurally and magnetically well-defined interfaces. Current processes
              often fail to satisfy these requirements. Electrochemical methods are
              potentially able to control and monitor nucleation, growth and film
              modification at very small film thickness. Furthermore, the growth is highly
              selective, allowing formation of patterned structures and localized
              conditioning/etching.
First, we will develop electrochemical techniques for
              the synthesis of defined ferromagnet/insulator and ferromagnet/semiconductor
              interfaces. Tunneling barriers of magnetic tunnel junctions will be synthesized
              through anodization of aluminum films. Direct electrodeposition onto
              semiconductors for the formation of ferromagnet/semiconductor interfaces is
              expected to yield sharper interfaces.
Successively, electrochemical
              self-organization will be employed to synthesize arrays of nanometer-scale
              tunnel junctions. Fabrication of self-aligned patterned magnetic films on
              semiconductors will allow studies of spin-dependent transport in
              ferromagnet/semiconductor devices. 
The advanced training of the graduate
              students will provide them with the skills required for competitiveness on the
              job market, and companies with highly skilled workforce.

