Title       : A Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for Biological Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a0070099

Award Number: 0070099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Markus Friedrich mf@biology.biosci.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack E. Lilien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa A. Elferink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark VanBerkum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aleksandar Popadic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:

A Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for Biological
              Imaging

Laser Scanning Confocal Microscopy (LSCM) is an essential tool for
              cell, developmental and neurobiology. The Department of Biological Sciences
              will use LSCM to meet the biological imaging needs of several independent
              research programs within the department .

Dr. Lisa Elferink will examine if
              the GTPase protein rab15 regulates the endocytic recycling of synaptic vesicles
              during signal transmission at synaptic junctions. Dr. Markus Friedrich will
              analyze the cellular dynamics of pattern formation during grasshopper eye
              development in real time and assess the effects of perturbing wingless and
              decapentaplegic signaling during this
process. Drs. Balsamo and Lilien will
              examine the structure of the intact developing embryonic neural retina in the
              presence of cell permeable probes, which disrupt the function of specific
              adhesion molecules, unraveling their relative roles in development. Dr.
              Aleksandar Popadic will explore the cellular dynamics of myriapod embryogenesis
              and investigate the expression patterns of homeotic genes in early myriapod
              embryos. Dr. Mark Van Berkum will investigate the functional relationships
              between calmodulin and the signal transduction mediator molecules,
              son-of-sevenless and abelson tyrosine kinase, during Drosophila neural
              development, and analyze the pathfinding behaviour of Drosophila motorneurons
              in real time.

These studies will contribute significantly to our
              understanding of the molecular mechanisms regulating several pathways critical
              for normal neural and developmental function and to the molecular analysis of
              developmental evolution in animals.




