Title       : Theoretical Studies in Electroweak and Hadronic Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0070443

Award Number: 0070443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederick Cooper                        
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne W. Repko repko@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl R. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1286      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research in theoretical elementary particle physics will include analyses of
              Quantum ChromoDynamics (QCD - the strong force which binds quarks and gluons to
              form ordinary
protons and neutrons), possible top quark and Higgs boson
              signals at future colliders, studies of the interactions between photons and
              neutrinos in situations of astrophysical
interest, and the role of gravity in
              particle physics.
	The detailed interactions of QCD are very complex. 
              Therefore, in order to gain insight into this theory it is essential to study
              its effects in specific processes.  New
techniques will be used to investigate
              the production of heavy quarks at colliders over a range of energy scales and
              also to study the QCD scattering of particles at very high
energies.  In
              addition, the effects of QCD on the production and analyses of top quarks and
              Higgs bosons at colliders will be investigated.
	The number of Higgs bosons as
              well as their masses and charges must be determined in order to fully
              understand the origin of mass and the underlying symmetry of
              elementary
particle theory. Photon-neutrino interactions are only appreciable
              under extreme conditions such as those found in the early universe or in
              compact astrophysical objects.
Understanding these interactions may alter our
              view of the relic neutrino sea or the way in which heavy objects lose energy.
              Ordinary gravity is too weak to affect elementary
particle interactions, but
              recent developments in string theory suggest that some gravitational effects
              could be observable in high energy collisions.

