Title       : Equidistribution of Algebraic Points and Arithmetic Invariants of Modular Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a0070686

Award Number: 0070686
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101331             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmanuel Ullmo eullmo@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator main topic is number theory.  He is using Arakelov theory with
              a special eye on modular forms and automorphic forms.  He is studying
              equidistribution phenomenas for sequences of algebraic points on varieties over
              number fields.  His main result is the discreteness of the set of algebraic
              points of a curve of genus greater than one embedded in his Jacobian for the
              Neron-Tate topology.  He tries to have results in the direction of the
              Andre-Oort conjecture concerning the possible Zariski closures of a set of
              points with complex multiplication in the moduli space of abelian varieties. 
              Equidistribution  of Hecke (obtained by the author and Clozel) is a step
              towards equidistribution of Galois orbits of points  with complex
              multiplication.  In an other direction, the investigator studies the arithmetic
              invariants of modular curve from the Arakelov view-point.         
              

Diophantine geometry is one of the most aesthetic subject of mathematics. 
              Even if the questions are phrased in a very elementary way: Find all the
              rational or algebraic solutions of a system of polynomial equations; the
              solution to this type of problems requires in general the most advanced
              techniques of mathematics.  This work explains that the set of algebraic points
              of a curve (which is infinite) is not very big: We can think about it as a
              discrete set in a natural arithmetic set.  
