Title       : Automated DNA Sequencer for Microbial Ecology Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a0070139

Award Number: 0070139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54500              (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Gunderson jgunderson@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan H. Goss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon G. Berk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lenly J. Weathers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract  0070139 (Automated DNA Sequencer for Microbial Ecology Studies)
              Gunderson



A LICOR 4200L2 automated DNA sequencer will be used for
              microbial ecology studies being conducted at TennesseeTechnological University.
              An interdisciplinary nucleus of faculty and students interested in molecular
              microbial ecology has developed here, with representatives from the Department
              of Biology, the Center for the Management, Utilization and Protection of Water
              Resources, and the Department of Civil Engineering engaged in funded research
              in the area of microbial ecology. The research activities have grown beyond a
              level which can be supported by our manual sequencing facilities.

The
              research projects that would immediately employ an automated sequencer include
              an rRNA-based survey of the distribution of parasitic dinoflagellates in
              Chesapeake Bay, the analysis of protistan food vacuole contents, the
              determination of the identity of prokaryotic symbionts of termite flagellates,
              the screening of natural and man-made habitats for the presence
              of
Legionella-like amoebal pathogens, and the determination of the effects of
              pesticides on prokaryotic communities living in constructed wetlands. Although
              microbial ecologists would be the primary users of the machine, other faculty
              members would also use an automated sequencer if one were available.

An
              automated DNA sequencer would facilitate the ongoing research of faculty
              members at TTU, help provide necessary infrastructural support to a new Ph.D.
              program in environmental sciences, and allow both graduate and undergraduate
              students to be involved in DNA sequencing projects. It's presence would also
              eliminate the risk and inconvenience of radioisotope use.



