Title       : The Center of the Division Ring of pxp Generic Matrices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2000      
File        : a0070665

Award Number: 0070665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Helen G. Grundman                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69435              (Estimated)
Investigator: Esther Beneish   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Washington Univ
	      
	      Cheney, WA  990042444    509/458-6200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of the proposed work is to investigate the following problem.
              Let p be a prime.  Is the center, Cp, of the division ring of p x p generic
              matrices stably rational over the base field?  This is an old problem which has
              been studied extensively over several decades, in particular for its
              connections to important problems in other fields, such as geometric invariant
              theory and Brauer groups.  If G is a finite group, and M is a ZG-lattice, then
              F(M) denotes the quotient field of the group algebra of the abelian group M
              written multiplicatively.  Procesi and Formanek have shown that Cn is
              isomorphic to the fixed field under the action of Sn of F(M) for a specific
              ZSn-lattice M.  The findings of the investigator can be briefly described as
              two reduction steps. Let p be a prime.  First, the investigator has shown that
              under certain conditions induction-restriction from Sp to the normalizer N, of
              a p-sylow subgroup H of Sp, does not affect the stable type of the field..  
              Second, the investigator has proved that if we twist the Sp-action by a
              1-cocycle a in Ext1SP(J(A), L*), then Cp is stably isomorphic to La(J(A))Sp,
              where A is the root lattice, L=F(ZG/H) and,  J represents induction-restriction
              from Sp to H. Note that now we are inducing from H which is a cyclic group of
              order p. The cocycle a corresponds to an element of the relative Brauer group
              of L over LH.  The importance of this result lies in the connection, described
              by Saltman., between fixed fields under twisted H-actions and corresponding
              fixed fields under twisted Sp-actions.  The above results naturally lead to the
              study of a-twisted actions on fields, and this is also an area the investigator
              will study; more precisely actions induced from subgroups.  The investigator
              will be also working on Noether's problem which is naturally related to the
              above question.  In particular the investigator will study its connections with
              monomial and a-twisted group actions and on fields.

The focus of this
              project is to investigate the following problem. Let p be a prime number.  Is
              the center of the division ring of p x p generic matrices stably rational over
              the base field? Generic matrices over a field F are n x n matrices whose
              entries are independent variables. This problem has been studied extensively
              over several decades. Its importance lies in part, in its connections to
              problems in many other fields such as, geometric invariant theory,
              representation theory of algebras, and Brauer groups. Invariant theory and
              representation theory are classical mathematical fields whose results are also
              used in applied mathematics and physics. Brauer groups are a fundamental
              structure in the study of central simple algebras.  The importance of this
              problem also lies in the fact that matrices, which are rectangular arrays of
              elements, are an essential tool for storing data.  Little is known about this
              problem.  Positive results have been proved for the primes 2, 3,5 and 7, the
              first of which was found in 1883 by Sylvester. 

