Title       : 2000 Gordon Research Conference on the Biology of Spirochetes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a0070863

Award Number: 0070863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : February 1,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Norris   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlyle B. Storm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Zuerner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The fourth Gordon Research Conference on the Biology of Spirochetes is the only
              ongoing international meeting devoted to basic research on spirochetes, which
              comprise a separate phylum of the Bacteria. These organisms have a unique but
              common structure and mode of motility. There are free-living spirochetes,
              whereas others are parasitic for arthropod hosts including termites. Several
              other species cause disease in humans and animals. Recently, termite gut
              spirochetes have for the first time been cultured and were found to augment
              degradation of polymers such as cellulose. As a group, these organisms are
              difficult to study because of the lack of a system for continuous in vitro
              culture (in some cases) and adequate genetic systems. However, the recent
              publication of the genomic sequences for two spirochete species provide a
              wealth of information that is now being incorporated into studies on the
              biology of these bacteria. Furthermore, significant progress has recently been
              made in developing genetic exchange systems that should be applicable to both
              free living and pathogenic spirochetes. Additionally, the new developments of
              devising methods to cultivate termite gut spirochetes has broad application, as
              this basic knowledge is now being translated into cultivating spirochetes
              associated certain human diseases. The first three Biology of Spirochetes
              Gordon Conferences were well-received.  For the 2000 conference, 150 faculty,
              graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and industrial scientists are
              anticipated. Special attention will be made to obtain adequate representation
              of young investigators. The planned oral presentations and poster sessions will
              provide a forum for discussion and exchange of ideas. The past conferences have
              led to important collaborations between laboratories. 


