Title       : Gain Graphs: Topology, Algebra, and Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0070729

Award Number: 0070729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55565              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Zaslavsky zaslav@math.binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A "gain graph" is a graph together with a "gain function" that assigns to each
              edge an element of a group.  If the group has order 2, the gain graph is a
              "signed graph".  A gain graph has associated matroids, whose structure is more
              accessible than that of general matroids due to the relative simplicity of
              graphs.  For this reason gain graphs have been helpful in a variety of geometry
              problems, for instance several related to root systems (since the classical
              root systems are described by signed graphs), as well as in optimization on
              generalized networks (also called "networks with gains").  The investigator
              plans to study what can be achieved in deeper understanding and application of
              gain graphs by "thickening" the edges.  One way to do this is to replace each
              edge by its product with the boundary of a simplex of sufficiently high
              dimension to realize the action of the gain group, and then apply topology to
              the resulting thickened graph, for instance, calculating (co)homology and group
              actions on it.  It is hoped that this will reveal striking new phenomena,
              perhaps analogously to the way the complexification of a real arrangement of
              hyperplanes has revealed phenomena sometimes entirely new and sometimes
              refining what was previously known.

Think of a network, consisting of nodes
              connected by lines, in which each line has a "twist".  In previous
              investigations of networks with twist (technical name: "gain graphs"), the
              lines were infinitely thin so the twists were purely theoretical.  The
              investigator hopes to learn more about networks with twist by thickening the
              lines so the twists can have a real physical existence like the stripes on a
              barber pole and some candy canes or (more complexly) the strands of a braid. 
              Then a whole new range of mathematical methods will become applicable so one
              can hope for new discoveries.  The original reason for looking at twists was
              that they simplify some problems in geometry; they also turned out to be
              related to an economic optimization method.  A detailed understanding of
              twisted networks is needed to find good solutions to problems like these.  The
              hope for the thickening method is both to apply existing knowledge about
              twisted networks to simplify more mathematical problems and to find new
              techniques that reveal more about the twisted networks themselves.  Like most
              mathematics, this is not aimed at immediate applications but at exciting new
              knowledge whose usefulness may become apparent years later. 

