Title       : Scanning Electron Microscope for Systematic Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a0070362

Award Number: 0070362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : April 1,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118274             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustavo Hormiga hormiga@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diana L. Lipscomb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Lieberman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick S. Herendeen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Hormiga

	A variable pressure scanning
electron microscope (SEM), a
              critical point dryer and a sputter coater will be used for
research in the
              systematic biology of various groups of organisms.  This SEM
will be used to
              collect morphological data of a wide variety of living and
extinct organisms. 
              This equipment, together with existing dissecting and
light microscopes, a CCD
              digital camera for microscopy, scanners and
computer workstations will be used
              to establish a core microscopy and image
analysis facility in the Department
              of Biological Sciences at George
Washington University.  Access to SEM is
              essential to accomplish the goals
of six research groups (four of them with
              active projects currently funded
by NSF) in the departments of Biological
              Sciences and Anthropology at The
George Washington University.  At present at
              least seven faculty, two
postdocs, and 17 graduate students will be using this
              instrument.
	The following research projects will use the SEM
facility
              described in the proposal: Systematics of araneoid spiders; Evolutionary
              history of flowering plants; SEM analysis of skeletal tissue
              growth;
Systematics of Ciliated Protista; Anatomy and
phylogeny of dinosaurs
              and other mesozoic reptiles; and
SEM analysis of spermatozoa,
              spermatozeugmata, and secondary sex organs of
inseminating ostariophysan
              fishes.
	Over the next three years these researchers and
their collaborators
              and students will have to take an estimated 21,000 SEM
micrographs in the
              course of the research projects described in this
proposal.


