Title       : An LC/MS Instrument for Biological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a0070398

Award Number: 0070398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 1,  2001         (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luying Xun xun@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Kahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard D. Grimes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Petersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

0070398
Luying Xun
Washington State University
An LC/MS
              Instrumentation for Biological Research

A liquid chromatography/mass
              spectrometry (LC/MS) instrument is especially useful for the detection and
              identification of small organic compounds of biological interests, such as
              metabolic intermediates, organic hormones, antibiotics, and natural organic
              compounds.  The instrument can also determine the molecular weights of proteins
              and can be used to assess post-translational modifications.  Several research
              areas will benefit from this instrument.  The area that will benefit the most
              is the study of biodegradation of environmental pollutants.  The LC/MS will
              help elucidate biodegradation pathways of organic pollutants by detecting and
              identifying the metabolic intermediates.  There are many pollutants and it is
              important to know how they are degraded so that effective methods can be
              designed for bioremediation.  Another research area that will immediately
              benefit is plant biochemistry.  The LC/MS will help in the areas of
              biosynthetic pathways of plant organic compounds that have high economic
              values, protein production in plant cells, and nitrogen fixation by
              plant/microorganism symbionts. 
This award will allow Washington State
              University to purchase a Waters LC/MS instrument.  The LC component, which is
              the basic component in any high-performance LC instrument, is proposed to be
              the Waters' (Waters Corp., Milford, MA) 2690XE separation module consisting of
              two pumps and an autosampler.  The MS detector is proposed to be Waters' ZMD
              [4000] detector.  This detector operates in either electrospray mode or
              atmospheric pressure chemical ionization mode and detects a mass range from 50
              to 4,000 Daltons.
LC/MS instruments are essential for biological researchers. 
              This award allows the College of Science and the College of Engineering and
              Architecture at Washington State University to purchase the first LC/MS for the
              college.  It is expected that approximately 17 undergraduate students, 24
              graduate students, and 5 postdoctoral associates will be trained to use LC/MS. 
              Moreover, the instrument will be used by students participating in training
              programs at Washington State University, including those students participating
              in the NSF IGERT program in the Center for Multiphase Environmental Research. 
              

