Title       : Polynomial ergodic theorems and Ramsey theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0070566

Award Number: 0070566
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172416             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vitaly Bergelson vitaly@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Leibman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:
The project concentrates on multiple recurrence and convergence
              in
dynamical systems with a focus on polynomial actions of abelian
              and
nilpotent groups. The problems considered lead to diverse applications
              of
ergodic theory to combinatorics, number theory and algebra which
              are
inaccessible so far by conventional methods. The polynomial Szemeredi
              and
Hales-Jewett theorems proved by the proposers in the recent years
              have
since been extended by the proposers and their colleagues in
              different
directions, each providing a better understanding of the phenomenon
              of
multiple recurrence along polynomials and offering new vistas of
              research.
The directions of study touched upon in this proposal include
(but
              are not limited to) the deeper study of multiple recurrence for
nilpotent
              group actions and the investigation of polynomial multiple
recurrence in the
              framework of IP-systems. Another interesting area
considered in this proposal
              has to do with convergence of ergodic averages
naturally appearing in the
              theory of multiple recurrence and its
applications. The results recently
              obtained by the proposers indicate a
dichotomy between the behavior of ergodic
              averages depending on whether
the acting groups have polynomial or exponential
              growth. The
related conjectures formulated in the last section of the proposal
              are
shedding new light on these questions.
 
 The theory of multiple
              recurrence that we focus on in this project uses
the ideas from several
              diverse areas of mathematics and aims to advance
our knowledge about the
              intrinsic properties of dynamical systems which
are related to their long
              range behavior. An example of a highly
nontrivial fact stemming from our
              investigations is the regularity of the
behavior of dynamical systems along
              polynomial time measurements. This
fact, in its turn, has strong applications
              to seemingly distant areas of
number theory and combinatorics.




