Title       : Microscopy Imaging System for Department of Biology at Clark University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a0070241

Award Number: 0070241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 1,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42454              (Estimated)
Investigator: Denis A. Larochelle dlaroche@black.clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Hibbett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy A. Lyerla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Justin R. Thackeray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract Larochelle 0070241

Modern imaging facilities are essential for
              biological research in cell and developmental biology. The Department of
              Biology at Clark University is upgrading their imaging facility with a high
              quality research-grade compound microscope with phase contrast, differential
              interference contrast, and epifluorescence optics. In addition, a cooled CCD
              camera, a computer, and software for capturing, processing, and storing images,
              will be part of the system.  Together these constitute a complete system for
              the generation and analysis of photomicrographs. 

Specific research to be
              carried out with this system will include the microscopic analysis of cells
              defective in cell division, the examination of nuclear behavior of certain
              fungi as a means of gaining insights into fungal evolutionary relationships as
              well as fungal developmental evolution on a cellular level, the analysis of
              proteins required in the synthesis and regulation of membrane organelles, and
              the examination of the role of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling pathways in
              the growth and development of the Drosophila eye. 

Six new faculty members
              (out of nine total) have joined the Department of Biology within the last seven
              years.  With this turnover also comes an updating and improvement of the
              current facilities. Although the four co-PIs and their associated lab personnel
              will be the primary users of the facility, this imaging system will be
              available for research use by all faculty, graduate students, and advanced
              undergraduate students in the department. The addition of a research-grade
              microscopy imaging facility will become a cornerstone for the department. 
              Despite its small size, the Department of Biology has been very successful in
              involving undergraduate students in research and in preparing them for advanced
              studies.  Since 1989 over 350 students that have received their baccalaureate
              degrees in the sciences from Clark University have gone on to obtain advance
              degrees in biology or health-related disciplines.  This imaging system will
              contribute greatly to the ability to train students and will be an integral
              part of the research programs of the four co-PIs.

