Title       : Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0070480

Award Number: 0070480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence C. Evans evans@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Evans

I will continue my ongoing research in nonlinear PDE, 
with
              emphasis on these topics:  (i)   PDE methods for Hamiltonian dynamics:
The
              goal here is to use the (nonsmooth) solution of the appropriate cell
PDE to
              study Hamiltonian  dynamics on the Aubry-Mather set, for problems
with many
              degrees of freedom.  (ii) Regularity for optimal Lipschitz extensions:
The
              boundary value problem for the ``infinity-Laplacian'' is a highly
degenerate
              nonlinear PDE, which is  extremely interesting since
it is a sort of
              Euler-Lagrange equation for a calculus of variations
problem ``in the
              sup-norm''. I intend to study carefully the possible
regularity of weak
              solutions. (iii) Relaxation approximations for Hamilton-Jacobi
 equations:
              Formal asymptotics strongly suggest that perturbing a Hamilton-Jacobi
PDE by a
              wave operator, with large enough wave speed, should in the limit
produce a
              viscosity solution. A proof of this would dramatically extend
the
              applicability of viscosity solution methods, to cover approximations
with no
              maximum principle.  (iv) Mass transfer problems:
I continue to be interested
              in PDE methods for Monge-Kantorovich mass
transfer problems, especially those
              occurring on fast time scales, 
coupled with slower dynamics.


Partial
              differential equations (PDE) occur as  mathematical
descriptions of an
              extremely wide variety of physical and other phenomena,
and nonlinear PDE are
              especially difficult, since they do not permit us to decompose
complicated
              solutions into a superposition of simpler solutions. Many  important
nonlinear
              PDE do however have a variational structure, meaning that 
they correspond to
              a sort of optimization principle. The overall
goal of the calculus of
              varitations is finding ways to exploit these variational principles,
to help
              us understand the nature of solutions to the corresponding nonlinear PDE. 
In
              this project I will (mostly) continue to study several important classes of
              variational
problems, to understand more about (i) certain nondissipative
              dynamical systems, 
(ii) optimal extension problems, (iii) wave-like
              approximations to dissipative
phenomena, and (iv) optimal mass reallocation
              problems.    

