Title       : Structure and Stability of Cuspy Triaxial Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0070809

Award Number: 0070809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159555             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry E. Kandrup kandrup@astro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1206,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              AST-0070809
Kandrup, Henry E.
Structure and Stability of Cuspy Triaxial
              Galaxies

The goal of this project is to construct triaxial distribution
              functions (DFs) for cuspy elliptical galaxies and early-type bulges. This will
              involve the integration of  techniques from classical celestial mechanics,
              modern nonlinear dynamics and statistical mechanics, as well as numerical
              algorithms, such as modifications to Schwartzschild's technique for DF
              construction.  It aims to answer the question: What is the connection between
              the DF and the surface density profiles in triaxial galaxies, and what is the
              influence of chaos in this connection or are the surface density profiles
              relics of initial conditions?

Recent high resolution observations indicate
              that many (perhaps most) elliptical galaxies have a pronounced density cusp,
              possibly associated with the presence of a supermassive  black hole; in
              addition, for galaxies where the cusp is not too steep,  there is often
              evidence for moderate deviations from axisymmetry. However, theoretical
              arguments, corroborated by numerical investigations, suggest strongly that many
              of the stars in a cuspy, nonaxisymetric galaxy will
exhibit chaotic motions.
              Until very recently, almost all work in this area has completely ignored the
              possible effects of this chaos. This project will explore the physical
              implications of this chaos on  the structure and evolution of galaxies, with
              particular focus on determining  potentially observable signatures. Questions
              to be addressed include the following: 1. Is it reasonable to model such
              galaxies as being in a time-independent statistical equilibrium, or would  one
              anticipate that cuspy nonaxisymmetric galaxies should exhibit systematic
              evolutionary effects over astronomically interesting time scales? 2. How
              susceptible are such galaxies towards low amplitude gravitational
              irregularities associated with the presence of other comparatively nearby 
              galaxies? 3. How will such a galaxy respond to a collision or close encounter 
              with a very nearby galaxy? Much of this work involves applications of ideas
              which have been developed by physicists and applied mathematicians over the
              past thirty years and which have been confirmed repeatedly in the laboratory.
              However, an important  new feature arising in the context of galaxies is that
              the chaos is generated self-consistently: In most laboratory experiments, chaos
              is triggered by some external stimulus acting on the system being probed. When
              considering a galaxy one is confronted with a situation where the chaos is
              induced by the gravity associated with the matter in the galaxy itself.
              
Funding for this project  is provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic
              Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).

***




