Title       : A Multi-user 600 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Structural
               Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0070359

Award Number: 0070359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. VanDoren vandorens@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Henzl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy has developed into a powerful
              means of determining the structure and motions of proteins and nucleic acids in
              solution.  Such molecules form the machinery and blueprints of life.  NMR is a
              powerful method for studying how these biomolecules recognize and interact with
              their molecular partners from the cell.  NMR is also a crucial technique for
              investigating atomic-resolution details of how protein chains fold up into
              their 3-dimensional, functional shape.  Research using this 600 MHz NMR system
              will emphasize determination of atomic-resolution 3D protein structures.  Other
              work will include study of the motions and molecular interactions of these
              proteins and study of peptide and nucleic acid structures.  The new 600 MHz
              system will be used to study cancer and arthritis progression, hearing in the
              inner ear, communication within cells, development and differentiation of
              plants, certain RNA-catalyzed reactions in protein synthesis, protein
              interactions with cell membranes, and protein stability.

The state-of-the
              art 600 MHz NMR system features a 14.1 Tesla magnetic field that is actively
              shielded to minimize its space requirement.  It features four channels for
              simultaneous radiofrequency excitation of four kinds of atomic nuclei,
              particularly the proton, carbon, nitrogen, phosphorous, and deuterium widely
              important in biomolecules.  To ensure clean spectra with few artifacts and to
              enable measurement of biomolecular diffusion, the system includes pulsed field
              gradients.  Two probes triply tuned to proton, carbon, and nitrogen frequencies
              will enable characterization of proteins and nucleic acids.  The small volume
              of one probe accommodates concentrated samples, while the large volume of the
              second probe accommodates samples that can only be studied in more dilute
              solution. 

The 600 MHz NMR spectrometer will be used by five Ph.D. students
              and five postdoctoral fellows in biomolecular NMR from four participating
              laboratories and three departments.  Students with training in protein
              structure determination in solution are currently in demand, and this demand is
              expected to continue for many years.  The 600 MHz system features improved
              resolution and 1.5-fold greater sensitivity than the 500 MHz spectrometer on
              campus, facilitating more difficult projects.  This new spectrometer, in the
              campus-wide NMR facility at the University of Missouri-Columbia, will help
              structural biology contribute to the expansion of research in life sciences,
              with relevance ranging from medicine to agriculture.



