Title       : Geometric Measure Theory, Harmonic Analysis, and Calculus of Variations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a0070050

Award Number: 0070050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69877              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hany M. Farag farag@its.catltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Geometric measure theory, harmonic analysis, and calculus of variations
              

Abstract
This proposal is focused on three problems in three somewhat
              overlapping areas, namely geometric measure theory, harmonic analysis, and the
              calculus of variations. The first problem is Besicovitch's 1/2- conjecture
              regarding the sharpest bound for the (a.e.) lower spherical density for purely
              unrectifiable 1-sets in Euclidean space (or more general spaces as well). The
              second is the Harmonic Lip_1-Capacity problem (Mattila's conjecture and the
              related David-Semmes problem), regarding the characterization (in terms of
              rectifiability) of sets of co-dimension one which allow a Lipschitz harmonic
              function defined off the set to be extended to all of Euclidean space. This is
              precisely the higher dimensional analogue of the analytic capacity problem. The
              third problem is regarding the question of regularity of minimizers of the
              relaxed energy functional (introduced by Bethuel, Brezis, and Coron) which is
              basically the usual Dirichlet energy plus a cost function on singularities. On
              all three problems the PI has done a good deal of work (the third problem is
              joint with R. Hardt) advancing the state of knowledge. Our program on the first
              problem has met significant progress in the recent months exceeding the PI's
              expectations and appears close to completion. Our work on the other two appears
              to also be heading in direction of further progress as well. 

The first
              problem addresses one of the most fundamental questions regarding the
              geometrical properties of purely unrectifiable sets going back to Besicovitch's
              two classic papers which established the foundation of the subject (1928,
              1938). These sets are fractal-like, appearing in several contexts in the
              physical world and hence the sciences (e.g. dynamical systems, number theory
              etc.). Our work on the problem has required finding new algorithms dealing with
              very general closed sets, and we expect it to have an impact on the
              understanding of other related geometrical questions of densities and
              rectifiability not to mention our understanding of  the properties of these
              natural sets.. Our second problem combines geometry and harmonic analysis in a
              natural way, having impact on several areas of analysis and also to Physics,
              where harmonic functions have a special role (e.g. in electrostatics). Our
              third problem overlaps geometry, topology, partial differential equations, and
              geometric measure theory. It addresses deep questions in its area. It is of
              special importance in the theory of liquid crystals since the quantities being
              minimized are similar to the energies of such physical systems

