Title       : Heavy-ion Reactions at the Energy and Isospin Frontiers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0070818

Award Number: 0070818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $720000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott E. Pratt pratt@nscl.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wolfgang W. Bauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pawel Danielewicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0070818
Pratt
	Two important experimental nuclear physics facilities are
              becoming operational in the next two years. The Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider
              (RHIC) at Brookhaven National Laboratory will collide heavy nuclei at extremely
              high energy. Within the reaction volume, conditions should exist to temporarily
              alter the structure of matter, liberating quarks from their usual confinement
              within hadrons and
melting the non-perturbative structure of the QCD vacuum.
              The second facility is the Coupled Cyclotron Project (CCP) at the National
              Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory. The CCP upgrade will provide beams of
              nuclei with exceptionally high neutron-to-proton ratios, which can be used to
              perform experiments before the nuclei undergo beta decay to the usual isotopes.
              By colliding such nuclei and observing the outgoing nuclear fragments, we hope
              to infer information about the equation of state of neutron-rich matter and
              to
better understand the process of nuclear fragmentation. The principal aim
              of our work is to provide theoretical interpretations of the measurements in
              these facilities. Since the questions regarding bulk-matter properties are
              addressed only indirectly through detailed analyses of such experiments, theory
              plays an especially integral role in the analyses of such experimental
              results.


