Title       : Product, Process and System Monitoring and Diagnostics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0070189

Award Number: 0070189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sagar V. Kamarthi sagar@coe.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development and application of
              signal-processing and neural network methods that address monitoring and
              diagnostic issues commonly encountered in a variety of industries.  In the
              first phase of the research, generic algorithms and methods for addressing
              several high-impact problems will be developed.  A representative set of
              problems includes:   (1) the recognition of recurring patterns of arbitrary
              shape in time-domain sensor data, (2) the extraction of robust features from
              the wavelet representation of sensor data, (3) the identification of blurred or
              smeared surface defects in harsh environments, (4) the acceleration of the
              training process of a multilayer neural network without adversely affecting its
              natural course of learning, and (5) stopping criteria for neural network
              training to strike a balance between computational efforts and accuracy.  An
              important objective of the present research is to develop methods that are
              amenable to broad applicability, so that several crosscutting issues in a wide
              spectrum of industries can be addressed.  In the second phase of the research,
              the methods developed in the first phase will be applied to problems in
              industries collaborating with the project team.  The information and data
              collected from the industrial applications will be used for validating the
              knowledge generated through research and also for building living cases for
              classroom instruction. 

The outcome of this research will significantly
              contribute to building self-guiding, self-correcting, and self-protecting
              products, processes, and electro-mechanical systems ubiquitous in a broad
              spectrum of industries including manufacturing, aerospace, automotive, defense,
              and health care.  The monitoring and diagnostic methods developed during this
              project have a good potential to increase production yields by minimizing
              defective workpieces, preventing damage to machines, and avoiding idle times on
              machines.  These methods will also substantially improve work safety and
              provide better mechanisms for human-machine interfacing.

