Title       : Combinatorial K-theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a0070479

Award Number: 0070479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Stanley RSTAN@MATH.MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anders S. Buch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will study the cohomology theory and K-theory of partial
flag
              varieties and quiver varieties.  In particular he will look for
K-theory
              parallels of known results in cohomology.  A first target is the
cohomology
              and Grothendieck rings of a partial flag variety.  Since any
partial flag
              variety has a cell decomposition into Schubert cells, its
cohomology ring has
              a basis consisting of the cohomology classes of
Schubert varieties.  Likewise
              the Grothendieck ring of algebraic vector
bundles has a basis of structure
              sheaves of Schubert varieties.  The
investigator will study the structure
              constants for these rings with
respect to their bases indexed by Schubert
              varieties.  The main goal is to
find explicit formula for these constants, but
              also positivity questions
are of interest.  In cohomology the structure
              constants are known to be
positive for geometric reasons, but no combinatorial
              proof of this fact is
known.  In K-theory the investigator has conjectured
              that the structure
constants have alternating signs, i.e. they are
              non-negative in even
degrees and non-positive in odd degrees.  Finding a proof
              of this would be
very interesting.  An additional goal is to find efficient
              computer
algorithms for calculating these structure constants.  The
              investigator
will also try to find a formula for the K-theory class of the
              structure
sheaf of a general quiver variety.  Such a formula will generalize
              a
formula for the cohomology class of a quiver variety, which
              the
investigator has proved earlier with Fulton.  The investigator hopes
              that
proving such a formula will be of help for constructing an
              explicit
resolution of the structure sheaf of a quiver variety.  This
              would
generalize classical constructions such as the Koszul complex, which is
              of
fundamental importance in homological algebra.

The development of
              cohomology theory was motivated in part by the problem
of classifying
              topological spaces.  This is important for addressing
questions such as "what
              is the shape of our universe?".  Cohomology theory
is also an important tool
              for solving problems in enumerative geometry, in
which one seeks to determine
              and count all the solutions to a geometric
problem.  For example, if the
              geometric problem is to find lines which
intersect or are tangent to a given
              collection of fixed geometric figures,
then the number of such lines is
              desired.  A very powerful technique for
solving this type of problems is to
              construct a space consisting of all
objects which could potentially be a
              solution.  Counting the number of
solutions to a problem is often equivalent
              to performing a calculation in
the cohomology ring of this space of potential
              solutions.  The objects to
be counted can in many situations be identified
              with flags of subspaces in
a given vector space.  Flag varieties, whose points
              correspond to such
flags of subspaces, are therefore typical candidates to act
              as the space of
potential solutions.  This makes it important to be able to do
              efficient
computations within the cohomology ring of a flag variety, and gives
              the
reason why the structure constants for this ring has been wanted
              by
geometers and combinatorialists for decades.  The K-theory or
              Grothendieck
ring of a variety can be seen as a generalization of the
              cohomology ring.
A good understanding of K-theory will therefore give a more
              complete
picture of cohomology theory.  At the same time K-theory is important
              for
the study of vector bundles on a variety and for homological algebra. 
              This
makes it very natural to try to generalize the known results
              about
cohomology theory to K-theory.
