Title       : Representations of Infinite Dimensional Lie Algebras and the McKay
               Correspondence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2000       
File        : a0070422

Award Number: 0070422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79203              (Estimated)
Investigator: Weiqiang Wang wqwang@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator studies the connections among representation theory of infinite
              dimensional Lie algebras, finite groups and geometry.  Influenced by the works
              of Nakajima, Grojnowski, Segal and others, theinvestigator in his recent works
              established connections among Hilbert schemes of points on surfaces, wreath
              product (orbifolds) and vertex representations of Heisenberg and affine Lie
              algebras.  He proposes to investigate the deeper connections among these
              subjects.  A new approach to the McKay correspondence first observed by the
              investigator has been developed in his work with his collaborators.  Here
              vertex representations of (quantum) affine and toroidal Lie algebras of ADE
              type are constructed by using wreath products.  The investigator proposes to
              realize other (quantum) vertex representations studied algebraically in the
              literature by means of wreath products and their variations.  In another
              direction, he proposes to give a group theoretic interpretation of certain
              vertex algebras in the framework of wreath products.

The investigator
              studies symmetries.  There are different types of symmetries, discrete and
              continuous, finite and infinite.  They are of fundamental importance to
              understanding of the laws of physics and have practical applications such as to
              coding theory.  It turns out that if one puts certain classes of discrete and
              finite symmetry together in a clever way one observes continuous and infinite
              symmetry.  The investigator studies the interactions between these different
              types of symmetries which bring new insights of these subjects which can not be
              obtained by studying them separately.


