Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for High-throughput Genomics Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0070349

Award Number: 0070349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Galbraith galbraith@arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hans J. Bohnert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vicki L. Chandler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rene Feyereisen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Galbraith

	During the last few years, the analysis of entire genomes
              has been made possible by technological breakthroughs, such that gene isolation
              and characterization and functional analyses have become dramatically faster
              and more efficient than previously possible. "Genomics" is broadly defined as
              research toward understanding the structure of genomes, the genes present in
              these genomes and their expression, and the functions of the proteins encoded
              by these genes. Essential to genome-wide gene expression and function studies
              is the use of recently developed robotic methods for the high-throughput
              manipulation of genes and the analysis of sequences. Equipment for colony and
              plaque picking (a robotic workstation), for DNA sequence amplification (PCR
              instruments), for high-throughput DNA sequencing (a capillary DNA sequencer),
              and for analysis of DNA microarrays (a microarray scanner) will be used for
              high-throughput genomics analysis at the University of Arizona.
	The colony
              and plaque-picking robot will be used for the high-throughput isolation of
              individual colonies and plaques from cDNA, EST, and genomic libraries produced
              for different eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms and tissues.  cDNA/EST
              libraries will be produced under a variety of conditions designed to induce
              different expression patterns, thereby identifying new genes.  The PCR
              amplification instruments will be employed for the high-throughput production
              of amplified DNA molecules suitable for DNA sequencing and DNA microarraying. 
              The capillary sequencer will be employed for the sequencing of the DNA
              molecules that have been amplified from the various library inserts.  The array
              scanner will be employed for the analysis of microarrays following
              hybridization using fluorescent "target" molecules prepared from eukaryotic
              cells and tissues subjected to different environmental conditions. 
	The
              impact of the instrumentation on the field of research will be particularly
              profound in the area of the Plant Sciences.  Four major NSF-funded Plant
              Genomics grants provide research funding for the University of Arizona. Given
              the availability of high-throughput instrumentation provided by this funding, a
              considerable increase in the progress of these projects is anticipated. 
              Specifically, the instrumentation will permit the production and sequencing of
              many more cDNA and EST libraries than originally envisaged by these proposals.
              This should lead to greater numbers of discovered genes for different
              organisms, as well as a more profound understanding of how gene expression is
              regulated. The instrumentation will also alleviate bottlenecks in PCR-based
              microarray production and microarray analysis, and this in turn will accelerate
              understanding of the coordination of gene expression through functional
              genomics. 
	These research and training groups represent ones at the
              University of Arizona that are already involved in genomics analyses. Other
              U.A. groups are poised to start such work as a logical extension of their
              ongoing, federally funded activities. Availability of the proposed equipment
              will directly assist their programs, and also increase the numbers of faculty
              groups considering a high-throughput genomics approach to their specific
              research problems. In terms of education and outreach, the U.A. has a defined
              mission in educating the future work force of Arizona and the Nation. The
              availability of the proposed equipment will provide an invaluable teaching and
              training resource.


