Title       : The Classification of Finite Simple Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0070801

Award Number: 0070801
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Lyons lyons@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his colleague continue their project to write a complete,
              efficient and substantially self-contained proof of the classification of the
              finite simple groups.  Having completed four volumes of this project, they are
              preparing the next four volumes, constituting the heart of the proof, the
              generic case and the special odd case.  These cases cover the identification of
              the finite simple groups of odd type, a class including almost all of the
              alternating groups and the groups of Lie type defined over finite fields of odd
              order, as well as five of the twenty-six sporadic groups.

For the past two
              centuries the mathematical objects called ``groups'' have been among the most
              fundamental and most studied in the entire landscape of mathematics.  A group
              is an abstract mathematical object by which one may formulate and study
              symmetry, whether in chemical molecules, crystals, atoms, codes, networks, or
              abstract mathematical structures.  Each such object possesses a group called
              its ``symmetry group'' which captures the symmetry properties of the object and
              which makes possible certain kinds of useful calculations based on symmetry. 
              For example, the recognition and exploitation of symmetry groups is decisive in
              many complex counting schemes, in many algorithms for coding and decoding, in
              X-ray crystallography and in quantum physics.  The most fundamental groups are
              the so-called ``simple'' groups; for example, all the finite groups (those
              corresponding to objects possessing a finite number of symmetries) are built
              out of finite ``simple'' groups. Indeed many finite groups which arise in
              important applications are simple or nearly simple.  For these reasons, the
              problem of determining all the finite simple groups is of paramount importance
              from both the theoretical and applied perspectives.  The intensive
              investigation of this problem began in the early 1950's, and is nearing
              fruition through the work of the investigator and his colleague, as well as
              other researchers.


