Title       : Vertex Operator Algebras and Mathematical Conformal Field Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0070800

Award Number: 0070800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Lepowsky lepowsky@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yi-Zhi Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for 0070800 - Lepowsky / Huang

The investigators study a range of
              problems related to vertex operator algebra theory and conformal field theory,
              and their relations with and applications to a variety of areas of mathematics
              and physics.  Vertex operator algebra theory arose naturally in the
              representation theory of infinite-dimensional Lie algebras and in the
              construction of the infinite-dimensional "moonshine module" for the Monster
              finite simple group, and vertex operator algebras are basic ingredients in the
              mathematical construction of conformal field theories, which arose in both
              condensed matter physics and in string theory.  The investigators use
              algebraic, geometric and analytic methods and ideas.  Huang develops an
              analytic and geometric theory underlying conformal field theory and applies the
              results obtained to the study of geometry and topology.  Lepowsky continues his
              investigations into the relations between vertex operator algebra theory and
              number theory and other topics.  The investigators also study algebraic
              problems underlying geometric uniformization.  The various topics studied are
              in fact deeply connected with one another, and the solution of certain of these
              problems is expected to be useful in the analysis and solution of other
              problems.  The long-term goal of the investigators is to contribute to the
              deeper development of a mathematical theory that will enhance the conceptual
              understanding of many known and still-unknown connections among many branches
              of mathematics.

The theory of "vertex operator algebras" arose naturally in
              the study of both continuous symmetries and a very special large finite group
              of symmetries called the "Monster."  This theory is fundamental to a wide range
              of problems in many branches of mathematics and in theoretical physics.  Some
              years ago, it was very surprising to mathematicians that the Monster appeared
              to be deeply connected to number theory.  Equally remarkably, this purely
              mathematical connection, at first only speculative, was considerably clarified
              by the introduction of new mathematical ideas related to a completely different
              theory---a physical theory called "string theory," which aims at unifying all
              the fundamental forces in nature, including gravity, electricity and magnetism,
              and nuclear forces.  One result of this mathematical progress has been a richly
              developed theory of vertex operator algebras, a theory that continues to find
              new and surprising applications at a rapid rate.  A very important theme is
              that vertex operator algebras are basic ingredients of the mathematical
              construction of physical theories called "conformal quantum field theories,"
              which arose both in the study of the properties of solids and fluids and in
              string theory.  Conformal field theory is in the process of being rapidly
              developed into a rich and beautiful mathematical theory.  This development is
              expected to continue to yield solutions to many mathematical problems,
              involving symmetry, geometry, topology, algebra and number theory, and to yield
              further applications to the deeper understanding of nature and, it is hoped,
              the development of technology involving solids and fluids.  The proposed
              project uses a variety of mathematical ideas to deepen the understanding of
              vertex operator algebra theory and of conformal field theory, and to develop a
              range of new applications.


