Title       : Effects of Void Redistribution on Liquefaction Flow of Layered Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a0070111

Award Number: 0070111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce L. Kutter blkutter@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ross W. Boulanger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1576,5983,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0070111
Kutter, Bruce L.

The assessment the post-liquefaction shear
              resistance behavior of soil is widely recognized as a controlling factor in
              many large remediation projects throughout the country and world.  Decisions on
              whether to proceed with costly ground improvement projects to mitigate
              liquefaction hazards often hinge on highly uncertain estimations of
              post-liquefaction shear resistance of the soil.  The objective of these
              research projects is to better understand the sources of uncertainty.

One
              likely source of uncertainty is the lack of procedures to evaluate the effects
              of void redistribution on the post-liquefaction shear strength.  Void
              redistribution may be associated with accumulation of earthquake induced pore
              pressures near interfaces between permeable and impermeable soil and by
              particle intermixing.  A program of dynamic centrifuge modeling tests and
              laboratory triaxial tests are proposed, in collaboration with a proposed
              program of l-g shaking table tests conducted by Professor Kokusho at Chuo
              University, Japan, to study this problem.  The centrifuge tests, to be
              conducted on the 9 m centrifuge at UC Davis will include models with multiple
              layers of contracting permeability.

Professor Kokusho of Chuo University,
              Japan has observed flow failures and the formation of water interlayers beneath
              impermeable layers even in steeply sloping ground.  Water interlayers, an
              extreme form of void redistribution raise serious questions regarding validity
              of typical stability calculations.  Collaboration with Professor Kokusho will
              greatly enhance the benefits of this research by allowing comparisons between
              shaking table and centrifuge tests over a range of testing conditions.

The
              proposed work includes funding to support, train, and provide valuable
              experience to graduate and undergraduate students.  The MESA, MORE and WIE
              programs at UC Davis have agreed to help recruit a diverse pool of applicants
              for the undergraduate positions.  The opportunities for students to design,
              conduct and analyze the large-scale experiments and to meet renowned experts
              from the US and Japan will be an extremely valuable.

This project is
              supported under the 3rd-year competition under NSF 98-36. "US Japan Cooperative
              Research in Urban Earthquake Disaster Mitigation."
 

