Title       : NSF-CNPq Collaborative Research: Development and Understanding of Automated
               Capture Environments to Support Long-Term Use.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0070345

Award Number: 0070345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201670             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory D. Abowd abowd@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1069,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to extend knowledge about automated capture
              environments to better support long-term use. In earlier work, the goal was to
              make capture a ubiquitous service at any point in time and over a short period
              of time. However, as more live events are captured and views of the captured
              experiences are automatically prepared, having too much information available
              becomes a problem.  The objective of this project is to find information access
              solutions that scale over time, increasing the benefit of captured memories for
              the human as time passes and more information is captured, rather than
              increasing the burden of foraging through a morass of memories to find ones of
              importance.  Two approaches to this problem will be used. The first approach is
              to create an application-specific information model for a captured experience.
              This leads to captured experiences being contained in a searchable repository
              of experiences. The second approach is to view capture as only one part of the
              knowledge acquisition process in any given application.  Specifically, a
              general infrastructure for building capture and access applications, and
              storing, retrieving and visualizing large repositories of captured experiences
              that evolve over time will be built.  Capture and access in the educational
              domain as well as in distributed collaborative meetings will be explored.  The
              major contribution is general support for the construction of capture and
              access applications as well as deeper evaluation of long-term use of capture
              and access in educational and meeting environments.



