Title       : Infinite Dimensional Lie Algebras, Quantum Groups, and their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0070931

Award Number: 0070931
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicolai Reshetikhin reshetik@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Among the specific problems, which this proposal addresses, is the description
              of finite dimensional representations of quantized affine Lie algebras in terms
              of the geometry of the symplectic leaves of the corresponding Poisson Lie
              group.  When completed, this project should substantially clarify the structure
              of most known integrable systems. Another problem is the investigation of
              Weyl-type dualities for quantum affine algebras in the limit when the number of
              factors in the tensor product goes to infinity.  Reshetikhin wants to
              investigate new infinite dimensional algebras that will appear in this limit
              and how they are related to the thermodynamics of the corresponding integrable
              quantum field theory.  Some of the other problems he is planning to investigate
              are the asymptotic expansion of Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants for large
              levels, the deformation quantization of generic integrable systems (not
              necessarly regular, for which the Lagrangian fibration is a fiber bundle).  He
              also intends to investigate characteristic classical and quantum systems and
              classical and quantum integrable systems related to Kac-Moody Lie algebras and
              Lie groups.

Quantum groups appeared as an algebraic object (Hopf algebras)
              describing the symmetries of a wide class of quantum integrable systems.  In
              the last decade there has been a fascinating development in structural theory
              of quantum groups and their representation theory.  This development was
              stimulated by (and stimulated) various applications to integrable systems
              topology and geometry.  Their representation theory is far more sophisticated
              than the representation theory of Lie groups.  Quantum groups and their
              representation theory were instrumental in several path-breaking results: the
              invariants of links in 3 manifolds, integrable systems, crystal bases, and just
              recently, some of the ideas from the borderline between quantum groups and
              non-commutative geometry were used in string theory.  One may say that the
              conceptual goal of this direction is to understand most sophisticated
              symmetries which may appear (and some of them appear) as symmetries of
              interactions of elementary particles (or strings, if they are really there
              instead of particles).


