Title       : A Two Year College Cooperative Applied Research Initiative for Faculty and
               Students in the Engineering and Science Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0070910

Award Number: 0070910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299352             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald D. Fong fongjd@alfredtech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie F. Plumb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arnold M. Peskin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Tech Alfred
	      
	      Alfred, NY  148021196    607/871-6111

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary The goal of this project is to enrich a vital yet historically
              neglected  segment of the science and technology education community. Rooted in
              a collaborative effort among Alfred State College, Jamestown Community College,
              Corning Incorporated, and Brookhaven National Laboratory  (BNL), the intent is
              to create an accessible, self-perpetuating, 'real world' capstone experience
              for students in isolated, rural two-year colleges. The four institutions will
              partner to develop lead teams composed of student and faculty collaborators who
              will participate in two consecutive summer internships at  BNL. The various
              teams, drawn from the participating colleges, will work on problems selected by
              staff members at both Corning and BNL. Problems will span the gamut from
              computer science to biotechnology and will take advantage of capabilities
              unique to BNL or Corning: notably a scientific  visualization facility,
              advanced scientific instruments, and cutting edge material science. Following
              internship, the lead teams will transmit and transport these projects to their
              home campuses, and will involve other faculty and students. This project will
              represent a next step in distance education. It creates an extended learning
              community which emphasizes campus-based, real time interactions among
              participants at different sites. The early projects will involve construction
              of scientific visualization facilities at the two campuses and mastery of
              selected measurement techniques at BNL.  Later projects win focus on problems
              for which a combination of measurement capabilities and visualization
              technology are uniquely helpful. The project addresses the DUE themes of
              technical experiences for students and faculty in a real world setting, faculty
              development, and integration of technology in education. 
