Title       : Physics of Strongly Correlated Two Dimensional Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0070890

Award Number: 0070890
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Eisenstein jpe@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a condensed matter physics experimental project aimed at improving our
              understanding of the collective behavior of two-dimensional electron systems in
              advanced semiconductor heterostructures. Attention will be focused on
              electrical transport, quantum tunneling, and Coulomb drag measurements at high
              magnetic field and very low temperature. These probes will be applied to the
              newly discovered many-electron states in highly excited Landau levels and to
              the remarkable ferromagnetic configurations that two-dimensional electrons in
              double layer systems exhibit. The results of these experiments will help to
              elucidate the underlying structure (e.g. correlated liquid, charge density
              wave, etc.) of these unusual phases of matter. As the quantum many-body problem
              is at the heart of modern condensed matter physics, the planned research will
              have broad significance. A positive impact on the materials science of advanced
              crystal growth can also be expected since only the very purest semiconductor
              samples are suitable for this research. The research provides excellent
              educational opportunities for graduate students and post-doctoral associates
              who be trained for careers in academe, industry or government. Their work
              involves fundamental physics and exposure to cutting edge materials and
              instrumentation.
%%%
This experimental condensed matter physics project is
              aimed at improving the basic understanding of how large groups of electrons
              behave in technologically important semiconductor materials. The planned
              research will have several outcomes: First, the fundamental properties of the
              electron systems themselves will be elucidated. Attention will be focussed on
              those aspects that depend critically on the repulsive forces the electrons
              exert upon one another. This "many-body problem" is at the core of modern
              condensed matter science. Second, this research will advance the frontiers of
              materials science. The samples needed for this work require the most advanced
              methods of crystal growth for their fabrication and, in the end, must be of the
              very highest purity and complexity. These same growth methods are used to
              fabricate a wide variety of technologically important devices, ranging from
              fast transistors for cellular telephones to lasers for compact disk players.
              This research has a strong educational component and will contribute to the
              Nation's technological competitiveness. 

