Title       : Reverse Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a0070718

Award Number: 0070718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Simpson simpson@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator believes that mathematical logic needs to return to its roots
              in Foundations of Mathematics, in the great tradition of Frege, Russell,
              Hilbert, Turing, and G del.  A basic question in Foundations of Mathematics is:
              Which set-existence axioms are needed to prove specific theorems of core
              mathematics?  Here ``core mathematics'' comprises standard topics in analysis,
              algebra, topology/geometry, etc.  The investigator and his colleagues study
              this question in terms of Subsystems of Second Order Arithmetic, as exposited
              in the investigator's recently published research monograph of that title.  An
              extensive series of case studies reveals that (i) many core mathematical
              theorems are logically equivalent to the set-existence axioms needed to prove
              them, (ii) only a handful of set-existence axioms arise in this way, (iii) the
              corresponding subsystems are linearly ordered by logical implication.  This
              gives a far-reaching classification of hundreds of core mathematical theorems
              into a small number of classes, the classes being defined in terms of logical
              equivalence over a weak base system.  This ongoing classification project is
              known as Reverse Mathematics.  It has many implications for philosophically
              motivated foundational programs such as constructivism (Bishop), computable
              mathematics (Pour-El/Richards), finitistic reductionism (Hilbert),
              predicativism (Weyl/Feferman), and predicative reductionism.  The Reverse
              Mathematics classification project is also a rich source of challenging
              technical problems.  The investigator and his colleagues are pursuing several
              of these, with emphasis on analysis, geometry, and countable combinatorics.  A
              direction for the future is to weaken the base system, in order to greatly
              broaden the scope of the classification project, providing significant points
              of contact with other parts of mathematics such as number theory and
              computational complexity.

Foundations of Mathematics is the study of the
              most basic concepts and logical structure of mathematics, with an eye to the
              unity of human knowledge.  This line of research deals fruitfully with
              fundamental questions such as: What is the nature of mathematical proof?  What
              is the logical structure of mathematics?  What are the appropriate axioms for
              mathematics?  Foundations of Mathematics is a rich subject with a long history,
              going back to Aristotle and Euclid and continuing in the hands of outstanding
              modern figures such Frege, Russell, Hilbert, Turing, and G del.  The
              investigator and his colleagues continue in this foundational tradition by
              pursuing a far-reaching classification project known as Reverse Mathematics. 
              Specific mathematical theorems are classified according to the axioms needed to
              prove them.  This reveals a remarkably simple logical structure within
              mathematics.  The existence of such a structure has many profound implications.
               The ongoing research contributes to clarification of the role of the infinite
              in mathematics, the nature of mathematical constructions, the role of
              impredicative definitions in mathematics, and related issues. 

