Title       : RUI: Acquisition of a Capillary Electrophoresis System for DNA Analysis in
               Investigations of Adaptation, Speciation, Species Interactions and DNA Repair
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a0070310

Award Number: 0070310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 1,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47099              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn M. Jacobson jacobsok@grinnell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent M. Eckhart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie Gregg-Jolly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9141,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Jacobson
Automated capillary electrophoresis system for the analysis
              of DNA demands relatively little training to use and involves minimum risk of
              exposure to radioactive or toxic substances. The automated DNA sequencing and
              fragment sizing (for analysis of DNA polymorphisms) capabilities of the
              requested instrument will make investigations more efficient, less expensive
              and more effective learning tools for students. This is central to the
              institutional goal of integrating research and education of
              undergraduates

Four of the eight faculty in the Biology Department will use
              the instrument on a regular basis to explore research questions that span the
              breadth of the discipline. The immediate goals for instrument use are:
- to
              explore questions relating to the nature of speciation; specifically to develop
              mitochondrial DNA markers suitable for phylogeographic and population analyses
              of host races and subspecies of the goldenrod ball-gallmaker; and to generate a
              DNA sequence-based phylogeny of all extant taxa of Hawaiian tephritid flies.
-
              to examine the causes of correlated evolution in plant breeding systems, life
              history and morphology; specifically to use DNA polymorphisms to resolve
              relationships among populations of Clarkia xantiana, and search for markers
              that correlate with quantitative trait expression.
- to further elucidate the
              molecular basis of DNA repair in response to DNA damage in Acinetobacter;
              specifically to sequence critical genes involved in this process.
- to explore
              questions relating to community structure of subterranean fungi; specifically
              to use DNA polymorphisms to quantify genetic variation within and between
              global populations of desert macrofungi; to continue an ongoing study of the
              spatial and temporal distribution of variation amongst morel populations; and
              to explore the spatial distribution of ectomycorrhizal fungal communities
              associated with bur oak.

Genetic analyses will be used to answer questions
              that reflect the respective disciplines of the investigators, namely
              microbiology, organismal biology, ecology and evolution. An important goal of
              the anticipated research will be to provide students with authentic experiences
              that allow them to understand both principles and applications of DNA
              techniques. The automated sequencing and sizing capabilities of the requested
              instrument will also facilitate inclusion of exercises involving DNA sequencing
              and multilocus fingerprinting in upper-level courses currently being developed
              as part of a new NSF CCLI-funded biology curriculum at Grinnell College.  

