Title       : Limit Theorems in Probability Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0070382

Award Number: 0070382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Evarist Gine gine@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0070382
Gine
	Work is planned on several topics from asymptotic theory in
              Probability and Statistics.  A main thrust of the research aims at deepening
              our understanding of canonical $U$-statistics and $U$-processes by
              investigating exponential and moment inequalities (what are the true analogues
              for $U$-statistics of the Rosenthal-Pinelis and Bernstein's inequalities? is
              there a uniform Bernstein, or uniform Prohorov inequality such as the recent
              inequality of Talagrand for collections of sums of independent random
              variables?) and limit theorems, particularly the law of the iterated logarithm.
               These results may be obtained for generalized $U$-statistics, including
              multilinear forms in independent random variables.  Applications of these
              topics in Statistics, particularly censored data, will also be pursued.  A
              second object of study are selfnormalized sums of independent random variables,
              particularly in connection with the bootstrap and with the Student t-statistic.
               Finally, the P.I. is also interested in exploring the application of the
              modern theory of empirical processes and its techniques in different areas such
              as asymptotics of the fluctuations of the occupation measure process for
              multiple particle systems, and estimation and testing based on different
              functionals of the empirical process.
	The empirical measure is shorthand for
              the description of a series of data points.  Sums of independent random
              variables and empirical processes can be thought of as single integrals of
              functions of one variable with respect to this measure, and $U$-statistics and
              $U$-processes, as multiple integrals with respect to the empirical measure of
              functions of several variables.  First order asymptotic statistics is often
              based on limit theorems for sums of independent random variables and processes,
              but more refined second order properties require limit theory for
              $U$-statistics and processes (in a way, in analogy with the use of higher order
              derivatives versus only the first derivative when studying functions in
              Calculus).  Although $U$-statistics were introduced in the forties, their
              asymptotic theory has not been close to reaching its final form until recently,
              in part due to previous efforts by this P.I. and collaborators; the proposed
              research aims at completing this chapter of Classical Probability for
              $U$-statistics, and at advancing the theory of $U$-processes, by obtaining best
              possible distributional and moment inequalities and laws of the iterated
              logarithm.  This research will also include applications in survival analysis.
              In another direction, it is accepted wisdom that normalizing sums of
              independent random variables by certain quantities that depend on themselves
              rather than numerical constants improves the convergence properties (in
              particular, then, statistical procedures based on such selfnormalized
              quantities may have good properties, the leading and oldest example of this
              being the famous Student t-statistic and test).  But this must be shown at each
              instance.  The P.I. would like to study some questions related to
              selfnormalized sums, particularly in connection with the bootstrap.  Empirical
              process theory vigorously developed during the last two decades (with
              substantial contributions by this P.I.) and, since then, its impact on
              different fields of stochastics has not ceased to increase (in classical
              asymptotic statistics, information theory, neural networks, machine learning,
              model selection, statistical mechanics, etc.), and the P.I. would like to
              continue applying it to different statistics and probability problems of
              current interest.

