Title       : Detection of Gravitational Waves: Advanced Research and Development for LIGO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0070854

Award Number: 0070854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1335000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Guenakh Mitselmakher mitselmakher@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Tanner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Reitze  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard F. Whiting  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This group will conduct a multi-faceted program of advanced research and
              development for the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO).
               The program will concentrate on four main areas related to the development of
              improvements to the LIGO detection system and to the analysis of LIGO
              data.

First, the group will determine control strategies and assess problems
              associated with suspended interferometers for the next LIGO upgrade through the
              study of a suspended signal-recycled interferometer. Second, they will asses
              the effects of high laser power, in excess of 100 W, on critical optical
              components (such as  modulators, Faraday isolators, and other transmissive
              optics).  Strategies will be developed for minimizing exposure levels to
              optical elements that cannot tolerate high powers. Third, the group will
              develop data analysis methods based on wavelet transforms for transient signal
              detection, continue to develop components for the LIGO end-to-end model, and
              undertake a critical study of noise characterization. Fourth, they will explore
              white light cavities as a way of reaching broadband quantum limited sensitivity
              for future generations of gravitational wave detectors. In the course of this
              research, the University of Florida LIGO group will collaborate with the LIGO
              Laboratory, Glasgow University, Stanford University, and the Australian
              National University.

