Title       : Terahertz Electro-Optics in Semiconductor Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0070083

Award Number: 0070083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Sherwin Sherwin@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the fabrication and investigation of a novel class of
              semiconductor electro-optical devices. These devices will enable the study of
              quantum dynamics of many-body systems driven by strong periodic fields.  They
              also form a cornerstone of a novel approach to utilizing the full 400 Terabit/s
              communications bandwidth of optical fibers. The devices will use antennas to
              couple THz fields with frequency f(THz) into a small region containing
              semiconductor quantum wells or superlattices. Near-Infrared (NIR) radiation
              with frequency f(NIR), near the semiconductor band-gap, will probe the response
              of the active region. Absorption, and the emission of sidebands at frequencies
              f(sideband) = f(NIR) +/- nf(THz), where n=integer, will be monitored. One
              expects at high THz fields large shifts in interband absorption resonances, and
              sideband intensities, which oscillate with THz field strength. In doped quantum
              wells, efficient sideband emission is expected when THz radiation is resonant
              with the transition between the ground and first excited sub-bands.  At higher
              THz intensities, nonlinear phenomena like period-doubling bifurcations to chaos
              have been predicted.  This research offers graduate and undergraduate students
              broad training in semiconductor physics, device fabrication, and optics, which
              will prepare them for future careers in government, industry, or
              academe.
%%%
One of today's outstanding technological problems is the rapid
              communication of digital information. The threads of the Internet are optical
              fibers, each of which has the potential to carry information at the rate of 40
              trillion bits per second. Existing technology is capable of using only 1% of
              this bandwidth, by sending 10 gigabits per second on several dozen optical
              frequencies simultaneously. This research focuses on fabricating and testing a
              new class of nonlinear optical devices, which are capable of selectively
              shifting information carried on one optical frequency to another one several
              Terahertz away. The proposed devices are also expected to exhibit a variety of
              surprising phenomena, which test our understanding of quantum-mechanical
              systems driven very far from equilibrium. This research offers graduate and
              undergraduate students broad training in semiconductor physics, device
              fabrication, and optics, which will prepare them for future careers in
              government, industry, or academic science.
***  


