Title       : Development of Multi-User Facility for the Study of Complex Macromolecular
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a0070319

Award Number: 0070319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Imperiali imper@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel S. Kemp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joanne Stubbe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence J. Stern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Lippard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   A key aspect of biochemical research involves the definition of the
              interactions of complex biomolecules, such as proteins and nucleic acids, in
              solutions that represent their native environments in living cells.  To this
              end, this award will establish a multi-user facility with state-of-the-art
              instrumentation for the study of complex macromolecular biological systems. 
              Researchers who will use this facility are working at the interface between
              chemistry and biology at MIT.  The new instrumentation will afford powerful new
              capabilities to probe the structure, dynamics, and interactions of complex
              biomolecules and therefore to derive valuable information concerning complex
              biological systems.  This information will then form the foundation for working
              hypotheses for understanding the function of these systems at the molecular
              level.

     The specific instrumentation that will be purchased includes a
              Beckman Optima XL-I analytical ultracentrifuge and MicroCal Inc. VP isothermal
              and differential scanning calorimeters.   The analytical ultracentrifuge
              provides a powerful method for the rapid and accurate determination of
              association behavior of complex macromolecules and the determination of
              molecular weight and shape. The acquisition of an XL-I instrument with UV and
              RI detection capabilities allows the study of diverse macromolecules over a
              broad concentration range.  The calorimeters are exceptionally sensitive and
              powerful tools for studying the heat generated or absorbed in diverse
              biochemical processes.  Calorimetry is particularly valuable in the study of
              complex biomolecules because it permits the assessment of molecular
              interactions and conformational energetics using native materials.

     The
              new instrumentation will greatly advance the training and scientific
              development of the many researchers in the groups of five primary and nine
              secondary users.  These groups are involved in the training of approximately 90
              graduate students and 55 postdoctoral associates.   The researchers in these
              groups work in a variety of disciplines at the interface of chemistry and
              biology. Seven visiting scientists are associated with the groups of the users
              and there is excellent synergy amongst many of the groups.   The facility will
              be housed in newly renovated space on the MIT campus and will be strategically
              placed to best serve the groups with research interests at the
              chemistry/biology interface.  The facility is part of a major renovation
              project that will have a significant impact on interdisciplinary research at
              MIT.

