Title       : Acquisition of Molecular Imaging and Plate Reading Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a0070334

Award Number: 0070334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : May 1,  2001         (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84300              (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Bullerjahn bullerj@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Huber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. McKay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Geusz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Narasaiah Gavini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Bullerjahn

To enhance ongoing research activities in the departments
              of Biological Sciences and Chemistry at Bowling Green State University, a
              molecular imaging system, and a multifunction
plate reader will be placed in
              common lab facilities shared by the two departments. The laboratories of seven
              major users will use the instruments. Molecular imagers analyze radioactive,
              fluorescent and luminescent samples, yielding linear data over a wide dynamic
              range. The imager will be used to visualize and quantify electrophoretic
              mobility shift assays, western blots, RNase protection assays, northern blots,
              sequencing gels, and DNA footprints. A multifunction plate reader capable of
              photometric, fluorescence and luminescence modes with adequate software for
              data analysis and storage will be used on similar projects. 

The molecular
              imaging system will be used in several very diverse projects, such as
              quantitation of ferredoxin and flavodoxin levels in metal-limited phytoplankton
              by western blotting; functional analyses of Fur-type repressor-operator
              interactions; northern/western analyses of mRNA and protein levels in brain
              cells comprising the circadian pacemaker;
quantitiation of western blots of
              hybrid Nif proteins involved in nitrogenase expression and assembly; assessing
              protein phosphorylation of ErbB3 receptors in; characterizing transcription of
              genes involved in crayfish monoamine synthesis; and quantifying by gel
              electrophoresis RNA-RNA interactions in model systems optimized for determining
              binding constants.  The projects employing the plate reader are studies
              parallel to those employing the molecular imager, and such work includes
              screening cyanobacterial promoter fusions by luciferase-dependent luminescence;
              using such promoter fusions in a cyanobacterial-based metal biosensor assay;
              determining phosphate nutrient status in phytoplankton by assaying alkaline
              phosphatase activity; measuring interacting Nif proteins by a
              beta-galactosidase assay; and quantifying cAMP and cGMP levels following
              activation of oocytes bearing the AT2 receptor by angiotensin II.
      
              
Given the diversity of the research projects described above, the award will
              provide direct benefits to the widest possible spectrum of research projects at
              BGSU.  The instrumentation will provide analytical tools currently not
              available on campus, thus the immediate impact will be
Improved data
              acquisition for the PI, co-PIs and major users.  Such benefits will allow these
              faculty to make more rapid progress on their funded research projects.  The
              instrumentation will also be available to other scientists on campus, thus
              yielding an improved environment for
research and training of graduate and
              undergraduate students.


