Title       : Projects In Operator Algebra: Tensor Algebras, Coordinates, and Toeplitz
               Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0070405

Award Number: 0070405
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142332             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Muhly muhly@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
DMS-0070405

Muhly will study a variety of problems in operator
              algebra that may be
divided into three groups: General Operator Algebras,
              Groupoids, and
Toeplitz and Related Operators.  Under the first heading are
              found a number
of problems pertaining to the structure and representation
              theory of
non-self-adjoint operator algebras.  The theory of these algebras
              has been
reinvigorated in recent years through advances in what has come to be
              known
as quantized functional analysis, i.e., the theory of operator spaces. 
              This
subject coupled with the recent work of Muhly and Solel that identifies
              the
C*-envelopes of various very general operator algebras allows one to
              make
good progress on the program proposed more than thirty years ago by
              Wm.
Arveson as a generalization of the Sz.-Nagy - Foias model theory
              of
contraction operators on Hilbert space: study the representations of
              an
operator algebra in terms of the C*-representations of its C*-envelope.
              In
the area of groupoids, emphasis will be placed on the study of Fell
              bundles
over groupoids.  The impetus for this study comes from the
              representation
theory of groupoids and from efforts to understand co-actions
              of groupoids.
Further, these bundles (more accurately, generalizations of
              them) occur in
the theory of product systems and the structure of
              non-self-adjoint operator
algebras just mentioned.  Toeplitz operators have
              long been a subject of
intense interest in operator algebra/theory.  In recent
              years Muhly and Xia
have identified the automorphisms of the C*-algebra
              generated by all
Toeplitz operators.  The identification is described in terms
              of constructs
that have played important roles in function theory and harmonic
              analysis on
the disc.  A particular importance is played by commutator
              singular
integrals.   Muhly proposes to extend these results, to the extent
              possible,
to multivariable settings.  Again, commutator singular integrals
              should play
a decisive role, but the jump to dimensions greater than one
              presents
difficult challenges.

Muhly's work on non-self-adjoint operator
              algebras, while inspired primarily
by developments in pure mathematics, has
              connections with problems of an
applied nature, most particularly,
              mathematical systems theory - the theory
of so-called H-infinity control.
              This, basically, is a body of knowledge
dedicated to the problem of building
              machines, such as cars and airplanes,
so that they meet certain performance
              criteria.  Among these are such things
as the responsiveness of the steering
              wheel, in the case of cars, or the
rudder, in the case of airplanes.  In
              short, Muhly's work will contribute to
theoretical underpinnings of design
              problems ensuring the safety of all
sorts of conveyances.  Much of Muhly's
              work on tensor algebras over
C*-correspondences, which has been inspired by
              the operator theory that
underwrites this kind of control theory, seems to be
              usable in multivariable
control problems.  Indeed, quite serendipitously, it
              appears to be
ready-made for multivariable problems.  Muhly expects his
              research to
provide a theoretical underpinning of multivariable control
              problems that
here-to-fore have been handled by essentially ad hoc methods. 
              Muhly's work
in non-self-adjoint algebras and the theory of groupoids has made
              unexpected
connections with quantum Markov processes - the theory of so-called
              open
systems that arise in a variety of places such as the theory of lasers
              and
materials science devoted to super conductivity.  They also arise
              naturally
in quantum field theory through the constructs known as sectors.  It
              is
anticipated that Muhly's work will help to provide the
              mathematical
underpinnings of quantum field theory and advances in laser and
              materials
science.  Finally, Muhly's work on Toeplitz operators has made
              connections
with perturbation theories that arise in areas of relativistic
              quantum
theory and in quantum chemistry.  It is anticipated that his projects
              on
higher dimensional Toeplitz operators will have an increased impact in
              this
arena.

