Title       : Intersection Theory for Non Intersectional Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0070409

Award Number: 0070409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72652              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bin Wang wbinbin@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
In this project the investigator studies the intersection of two cycles whose
              dimensions do not add up to the dimension of the ambient space.  In previous
              studies of intersection theory this is the case that has been ignored, since in
              general these cycles do not meet (thus we call them non-intersectional cycles).
               The space of cycles is a big puzzle to us, and this non-intersectional case is
              a piece that is still missing from the puzzle.  So in order to have a complete
              picture of space of cycles, one should also include non-intersectional cycles. 
              The first case studied by the investigator was the linking case where the
              dimensions of cycles add up to the number that is one less than the dimension
              of the ambient space.  The fundamental approach is that such an intersection
              theory should not only include the cycles that meet, but also those that do not
              meet.  To accomplish this the investigator borrows a tool-Archimedean height
              pairing from Arakelov geometry (or to be precise, the Arithmetic intersection
              theory developed by Gillet and Soule), which is only defined for pairs of
              linking cycles that do not meet.  In this direction the investigator has made
              significant progress:  (1) He obtained formulas for the leading term of the
              asymptotics of Archimedean height pairing.  (2) Investigating Mazur's incidence
              structure, he constructed an incidence divisor on the Chow variety.  (3) Based
              on above two results, he gave a proof of Clemens' conjecture: generic quintic
              three folds admit only finitely many smooth rational curves of each degree. 
              The plan is to further the understanding of this intersection theory that
              includes general non-intersectional cycles.  The project is concentrated in (1)
              the study of incidence divisors, (2) the relation between the incidence
              equivalence and the Abel-Jacobi equivalence, (3) the application to a study of
              the relation between the Chow group and the Chow variety, (4) the application
              to a construction of Beilinson-Bloch filtration on the Chow group. 

One of
              the most fundamental problems in mathematics is the solving of algebraic
              equations.  Once people it was realized that one could not always explicitly
              write down the solutions of equations, the paradigm changed into the mode of
              examining different types of questions such as: does a solution exist, if so,
              how many solutions are there, do the solution sets have additional structure? 
              These are the fundamental questions in algebraic geometry.  In order to answer
              them, mathematicians have developed varied techniques, one of
              which-intersection theory--studies he intersection of solution sets of two or
              more systems of equations.  In this project, the investigator plans to develop
              a new method in intersection theory.  The significance of this project is to
              investigate material that is less studied or completely untouched by the
              current techniques of intersection theory.



