Title       : GOALI: Laser-Jet Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) Rapid Prototyping of Electronic
               Devices and Laminated Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0070429

Award Number: 0070429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374850             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Jack Lackey   (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Rosen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry L. Fehrenbacher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the research is to identify process-structure-property relationships
              and conduct process planning in order to permit efficient operation of the
              newly developed laser-jet chemical vapor deposition (LCVD) rapid prototyping
              (RP) system and demonstrate the usefulness of this system by fabricating
              advanced electronic devices and structural materials.  The LCVD-RP system,
              which began operation in August 1999, was specifically designed by this
              research team to permit rapid prototyping and manufacture of complex shaped,
              3-D, composite electronic/photonic devices and structural material components. 
              Visualize a laser and gas jet positioned above a substrate whose movement is
              computer-controlled.  At any instant, the laser heats a spot on the substrate,
              which is simultaneously flooded by a localized jet of CVD reagent gases.  Only
              the spot heated by the laser becomes coated as a result of the thermally
              activated CVD reaction.  The combination of laser CVD with gas jets offers
              significant advantages in terms of facilitating the deposition of multiple
              materials, maximizing deposition rate, and conserving reagent.  Prior research
              has focused on producing simple structures such as fiber arrays and solenoids
              because the process control utilized was not sophisticated.  The LCVD-RP system
              utilizes hardware, computer control, and on-line dimensional equipment that
              will permit growth of intricate, useful composite devices and components.  
              

The LCVD-RP system possesses the following novel features:  (1) three modes
              of operation, two of which utilize a high velocity gas jet that increases the
              deposition rate,  (2) a rotating/translating stage that facilitates rapid
              movement of the stage relative to the laser and/or gas-jet,  (3) an on-line
              dimensional control system, and  (4) on-line temperature monitoring and
              control.  The system enables fabrication of novel devices and material
              microstructures that are impossible to fabricate by conventional methods.  For
              example, the research will demonstrate the fabrication of an advanced electron
              beam source, and either a g-sensor or fiber-reinforced nanolaminate composite
              materials.

