Title       : D-modules on Noncommutative Spaces. Noncommutative Local Algebra and
               Representations. Noncommutative Smooth Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0070921

Award Number: 0070921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Rosenberg rosenber@math.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 The  project  is   devoted  to  the  following  topics  of
noncommutative 
              geometry:  a)  Theory  of D-modules  and  differential
operators  on
              noncommutative  locally affine  spaces and  schemes.  b)
Noncommutative  local
              algebra and  its applications  to representation
theory  of  quantum 
              enveloping   algebras  and  related  algebras  of
mathematical physics.  c) 
              Noncommutative smooth locally affine spaces
and  related  structures.   Main 
              purposes of  the  project:  Studying
D-modules  on noncommutative  spaces,  in
              particular  on quantum  flag
varieties and noncommutative smooth spaces. 
              Developing an analogue of
the  crystallin approach to  D-modules in  the case 
              of noncommutative
spaces  and  schemes.   Combining   methods  of  D-module 
              theory  and
noncommutative local  algebra, study the  spectrum and
              representations
of  quantum  enveloping  algebras  and  other  important 
              algebras  of
mathematical physics.   Studying properties and  important
              examples of
noncommutative smooth  spaces and their  applications.  Results
              should
have  impacts  on  noncommutative  geometry,  noncommutative 
              algebra,
representation  theory, deformation  theory and  some other  topics
              of
mathematical physics.

Noncommutative geometry is a relatively new field
              of mathematics which
is now becoming one of important tools, or ruther ways of
              thinking, in
many areas of  mathematics and theoretical physics. It  takes
              roots in
quantum mechanics and representation  theory. But the main
              motivations
come from recent amazing developments in mathematical physics
              (quantum
groups  and  related quantized  'spaces')  and  from  physics. In 
              the
recently proposed M-theory (which  is nowadays regarded as a
              candidate
for the  theory describing all  interactions existing in  the
              Nature),
the geometry of physical  space-time is noncommutative. A
              considerable
part  of the  project, the  one concerned  with  smooth
              noncommutative
spaces (which the investigator  studies together with M. 
              Kontsevich),
is naturally related to  M-theory on curved spaces.  The
              inverstigator
and  his collegues  expect  that  the language  and  new
              intuition  of
noncommutative spaces will be used not only in 'pure'
              mathematics, but
also in modern physical theories.
