Title       : Semigroup Algebra at Infinity and its Combinatorial Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0070593

Award Number: 0070593
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil Hindman nhindman@howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   A compact right topological semigroup is a set S which is a semigroup and a
              topological space and has the property that multiplication on the right by any
              fixed element of S is continuous.  Compact right topological semigroups are
              guaranteed to have some well known algebraic properties, principal among which
              is the existence of a smallest two sided ideal which is the union of (usually
              infinitely many) pairwise isomorphic groups. Given an infinite semigroup S,
              such as the set N of positive integers under addition, the largest possible
              compactification of S, its Stone-Cech compactification, has a natural semigroup
              operation extending that of S which makes it a compact right topological
              semigroup.  In most reasonable semigroups, including all of the (right or left)
              cancellative semigroups, the smallest ideal of the Stone-Cech compactification
              is contained in the Stone-Cech remainder.  Also, one usually finds most, or
              all, of the idempotents of the Stone-Cech compactification lying in this
              remainder.  The algebraic structure of the Stone-Cech remainder is the "algebra
              at infinity" of the title of this proposal. While much is known about the
              algebra at infinity of infinite semigroups, many fascinating and very natural
              questions remain open. Another reason for interest in the algebra at infinity
              of infinite semigroups is the significant consequences in Ramsey theory that
              are (usually quite easily) obtainable there.  Ramsey Theory is that part of
              combinatorics that deals with the question of what sort of homogeneous
              structures one can expect to find in some one cell of a finite partition of
              specified sets (or sometimes in any suitably "large" subset).

     Ramsey
              Theory may be thought of as a generalization of one of the simplest
              mathematical statements, the "pigeonhole principle".  This principle says that
              if letters are being distributed among pigeonholes and there are more letters
              than pigeonholes, then some pigeonhole will get more than one letter.  The
              simplest statement in Ramsey Theory says that, if six people are at a party,
              then either there will be some three, none of whom have met before, or there
              will be some three, each pair of which have met each other.  In spite of (or
              maybe because of) the simplicity of some of its basic statements, Ramsey Theory
              has had widespread applications throughout many areas of mathematics: number
              theory, logic, algebra, and Banach space theory to name a few.  The principal
              investigator and his students study ways to apply the "algebra at infinity" of
              semigroups to obtain new results in Ramsey Theory.  They investigate the
              algebraic structure of the Stone-Cech compactification of discrete semigroups,
              deriving new understandings of this structure itself, and obtaining new
              applications.

