Title       : Homology of Linear Groups with Applications to Algebraic K-theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0070119

Award Number: 0070119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin P. Knudson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      656 W. Kirby
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Knudson studies the homology of linear groups over various rings of interest in
              algebraic K-theory.  In this project he focuses attention on the
              low-dimensional homology groups of the general linear group over the coordinate
              ring of an elliptic curve over a number field with the goal of proving that the
              second K-group of such a curve has finite rank.  This extends Knudson's
              previous work on the homology of rank one groups over such rings.  In addition,
              a new homology theory based on algebraic cycles in the product of a scheme with
              the simplicial classifying scheme of an algebraic group is constructed and its
              properties investigated.  The hope is that this construction will lead to a
              proof of the Friedlander-Milnor conjecture concerning the homology of algebraic
              groups made discrete.  Also, the investigator's previous work on the structure
              of special linear groups over integral Laurent polynomial rings is used in the
              study of the Burau representation of the braid groups.  This representation is
              known to be faithful for three strings and unfaithful for five or more strings;
              the remaining case of four strings is singled out for study in this project. 
              Finally, Knudson studies the completion of a discrete group relative to a
              Zariski dense representation in a reductive group over a field of positive
              characteristic.  This generalizes the classical unipotent completion of a group
              and extends to positive characteristic R. Hain's work in characteristic
              zero.

A scheme is a geometric object constructed from solution sets of
              polynomial equations.  Algebraic K-theory associates to a scheme a sequence of
              groups which encode information about the scheme.  One aspect of this project
              is the study of the K-groups of an elliptic curve.  Such curves have remarkably
              rich structure and appear in various branches of mathematics such as algebraic
              geometry and coding theory.  A seemingly unrelated part of this project
              concerns the so-called Burau representation of the braid groups which is
              intimately connected with knot theory.  These diverse topics are unified by
              studying the structure of groups of matrices with entries in various rings (the
              coordinate ring of the elliptic curve in the first case and the ring of
              integral Laurent polynomials in the second). The hope is to solve several
              outstanding conjectures about these objects.


