Title       : Inverse Boundary Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a0070488

Award Number: 0070488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gunther Uhlmann gunther@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposer plans to continue his work on inverse boundary problems. For
the
              case of Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) he plans to consider the
problem
              in which one makes electrical measurements only on part of the
boundary. In
              EIT he also plans to consider the case of conductivities
having jump type
              singularities as well as the identifiability problem for
anisotropic
              conductors. Another inverse boundary problem that the proposer
plans to
              consider is whether the geodesic distance (travel times) between
points on the
              boundary of a domain or Riemannian manifold with boundary,
satisfying certain
              conditions, determines uniquely the metric in the
interior up to an isometry
              which is the identity on the boundary. The
third inverse problem is the
              problem of Reflection Seismology. In
particular the proposer plans to consider
              the problem of seismic migration
when caustics are present and the case in
              which the Earth is modeled as an
anisotropic elastic medium instead of an
              acoustic medium.



Inverse boundary problems are a class of problems in
              which one seeks to
determine the internal properties of a medium by performing
              measurements
along the boundary of the medium. These inverse problems arise in
              many
important physical situations, ranging from geophysics to medical
              imaging
to the non-destructive evaluation of materials. The proposer plans
              to
consider the case of Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT).
              The
measurements in this case are voltage and current measurements from
              which
one attempts to infer the internal conductivity of the medium. EIT
              has
been proposed as a diagnostic tool in medicine since organs and
              tissues
have quite different conductivities. Another important inverse
              boundary
value problem arising in geophysics that the proposer plans to
              consider is
Reflection Seismology. In this case one attempts to determine
              the
substructure of the Earth by measuring the response at the
              surface
produced by impulses located also on the surface. One of the
              main
applications of this inverse problem is in locating
              hydrocarbons.Other
potential applications are to improving ultrasound and
              sonar.


