Title       : Quadratic Forms on Schemes and Geometry of Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a0070728

Award Number: 0070728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109495             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Pardon wlp@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The (de Rham) cohomology, based on differential forms on a smooth
manifold,
              provides an analytic representation of singular cohomology. 
For natural
              spaces which are not smooth, like complex algebraic
varieties, singular
              cohomology is available, but some of its useful 
properties no longer hold and
              there is no good analytic representation. 
However, the de Rham cohomology of
              forms with moderate growth near the 
singular set provides a good alternative,
              because it satisfies duality 
and (Hodge) filtration properties like those in
              the smooth case. 
The investigator and his collaborators study this cohomology
              in two 
cases, where the variety has isolated, point singularities and where
              
it is the minimal compactification of a locally symmetric space. In 
the
              latter case certain natural functions are studied, with the goal 
of proving
              that they are modular forms. A second line of investigation 
concerns
              quadratic forms defined over the ring of regular functions 
on an algebraic
              variety. The investigator relates these quadratic 
forms to quadratic forms
              defined on the rational function fields 
of all subvarieties, in much the same
              way that holomorphic functions 
are related to meromorphic functions and their
              residues. The 
consequent connection to certain multiplicative structures on
              ideals 
in the ring of regular functions is explored.
   The first part of
              the project pursues a program to study 
wrinkles (singularities) in a space.
              If this space were a surface, 
wrinkles would typically occur near places
              where the degree of 
turning (called curvature) is very high. One part of the
              project 
is then to quantify this degree of turning, with the eventual goal
              
of understanding what sorts of wrinkles can occur singly or in groups. 
Some
              of the problems in this project come up in physics, especially 
string theory,
              to which the the investigator and his collaborators 
intend to apply the
              methods they develop. The second part of the 
project concerns questions about
              abstract number systems, in particular 
whether a given (abstract) number is a
              perfect square, or the sum of 
two or more perfect squares. Such questions
              have been studied for 
centuries in the mathematical subfield called number
              theory. More 
recently, the intractability of the problem of finding certain
              
perfect squares, even with a computer, has been shown by other
              
investigators to be the basis of certain protocols which guarantee 
the
              secure and fair electronic exchange of information.
