Title       : Algebra, Number Theory and Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2002     
File        : a0070674

Award Number: 0070674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $527000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benedict Gross gross@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric N. Sommers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Kazhdan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pavel I. Etingof  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator (Gross) and his colleagues (Kazhdan and Sommers) are
working
              on an assortment of problems in number theory, representation
theory, and
              algebraic geometry. Gross will study Fourier coefficients for
modular forms on
              quaternionic real groups (with N. Wallach), the
exceptional theta
              correspondences in the style of Siegel (with W.T. Gan),
and various theories
              of modular forms modulo a prime.  He will also
investigate subvarieties of
              Shimura varieties in the middle dimension and
motives with a fixed Galois
              group (with G. Savin).  Kazhdan will work on
Langlands' lifting and the theory
              of unipotent crystals, perverse sheaves
on loop spaces, and the theory of
              algebraic integration.  Sommers will
study representations arising from covers
              of nilpotent orbits and attempt
to resolve the normality question for the
              closure of nilpotent orbits in a
complex Lie algebra. He will also study
              connections with unitary
representations of complex Lie groups. 

The
              proposal deals with several questions in the subfields of
mathematics known as
              number theory, representation theory, and algebraic
geometry.  Many of these
              questions are motivated by the philosophy that
algebraic information can be
              obtained by geometric methods.  At the center
of the work is the use of a
              symmetry group, or algebraic group, which is
an object that is both algebraic
              and geometric in nature.  These symmetry
groups arise naturally in physics and
              chemistry. It is not too ambitious
to say that the solution to the problems in
              this proposal will one day
affect research in cryptography, theoretical
              physics, and quantum
computing. 
