Title       : Analysis, Geometry, and Spectral Theory On or Off Fractals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0070497

Award Number: 0070497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michel L. Lapidus lapidus@math.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The PI intends to pursue and amplify his investigations of
              the
relationships between spectral and fractal geometry.  We plan to study
              the
vibrations of "fractal drums", both "drums with fractal
              boundary"
(Laplacians on open sets with very irregular boundary) and "drums
              with
fractal membrane" (Laplacians on fractals themselves).  The
              proposed
problems are closely connected to Kac's question "Can one hear the
              shape of
a drum?" and to its beautiful extensions from the "smooth" to the
              "fractal"
domain by the physicist Michael Berry.  Although the proposed theory
              is
mathematically rigorous, it is also naturally physically motivated
              (with,
for example, applications to the scattering of waves by fractal
              surfaces
and the study of porous media), and has recently drawn some of its
              impetus
from the use of computer graphics.  Moreover, we propose to use and
              extend
the theory of "complex dimensions" of "fractal strings"
              (one-dimensional
drums with fractal boundary)-recently developed extensively
              by the PI and
Machiel van Frankenhuysen in the research monograph [La-vF2] on
              "Fractal
Geometry and Number Theory" and motivated in part by the PI's earlier
              joint 
work with Carl Pomerance [LaPo] and Helmut Maier [LaMa] on (direct
              and)
inverse spectral problems for fractal strings and the Riemann
              hypothesis-in
order to study the fascinating oscillatory phenomena occurring
              in the
geometry and in the spectrum of "drums with fractal boundary" and of
              "drums
with fractal membrane".  ("Complex dimensions" are defined as the poles
              of
a suitable geometric zeta function.  Further, in [La-vF], a detailed
              study
of their structure is given, for example, in the case of self-similar
              fractal strings.)

We plan to further develop analysis and spectral theory on
              fractals and on
regions with fractal boundary, as well as to investigate
              problems of a
'dynamical nature', of physical significance in condensed matter
              and solid
state physics; for example, in the study of mechanical or
              electrical
transport in porous or in random media, as well as of heat
              diffusions on
fractals and in disordered systems.  We also intend to pursue
              our
mathematical and computer graphics-aided study ([LaPa], [LaNRG]) of
              partial
differential equations (PDEs)-such as the Laplace, heat and (linear
              or
nonlinear) wave equations-on regions with fractal boundary or on
              fractals
themselves.  According to appealing experiments and interpretations
              by the
physicist Bernard Sapoval, this work may help understand the formation
              of
fractal structures (for example, coastlines, trees and blood vessels)
              in
nature.  In the long term, it is hoped that the tools and results
              developed
in this project (and in the PI's earlier investigations) will help
              us to
probe more deeply than has been so far possible the fine
              geometric
structure of fractals and of related 'objects' occurring in
              mathematics
and in physics.


