Title       : Wavelets and Basis Set Optimization for Molecular and Other Few-Body Quantum
               Calculations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0070879

Award Number: 0070879
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Littlejohn robert@wigner.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0070879
Littlejohn
	Quantum mechanics is the fundamental theory which
              describes the behavior of atoms, molecules and nuclei.  This work concerns
              relatively simple, or ``few-body,'' systems. In some cases it is possible to
              use quantum theory and computer calculations to predict the outcome of
              molecular reactions (one example of an application) which are difficult or
              impossible to test in the laboratory, with ultimately an important impact on
              biology, medicine and environmental sciences, among other fields.  The
              application of quantum theory involves finding certain wave functions, which in
              practice are expressed in terms of more elementary waves (the basis wave
              functions).  The problem of finding an optimal basis is an old one in quantum
              theory, but in recent years there has arisen a host of new ideas relevant to
              this question from a variety of fields, including pure and applied mathematics,
              physics, chemistry and engineering.  The object of this work is to integrate
              these new developments, to search for and exploit fundamental, unifying
              principles, and to apply them to basis set selection in few-body quantum
              physics.
	The new ideas include the following.  The first is wavelets,
              a
relatively recent development in applied mathematics, which has already had
              an important impact on the processing, transmission and storage of signals and
              data.  A second concerns phase space or semiclassical methods, which are called
              ``microlocal analysis'' in the mathematics literature.  These methods are
              characterized by a consideration of position and momentum together, an unusual
              and relatively unfamiliar point of view in quantum mechanics where the
              Heisenberg uncertainly principle limits the simultaneous knowledge of these
              quantities.  A third concerns the mathematics of abstract, higher dimensional
              spaces in few-body quantum problems, the so-called ``geometrical'' methods. 
              Such methods have been a very active area of mathematics in recent years and
              are well known in certain areas of physics.  They have not, however, been
              exploited much in few-body quantum mechanics, although they are vital for
              understanding the nature of the ``internal'' spaces of few-body problems. 
              Finally, this work will take the corpus of methods which are in current use in
              atomic, molecular and nuclear physics for basis set selection, compare them,
              integrate them, search for generalizations and improvements, and apply them.

