Title       : RUI: Advanced Microscopy and Manipulation Cluster for Biological and Biophysical
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a0070361

Award Number: 0070361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169271             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter F. Smith wsmith@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl A. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer A. Punt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Fairman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne M. Amador Kane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9141,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The atomic force microscope (AFM) can image samples with a resolution of 2
              nanometers laterally and 0.2 nanometers vertically, and can also measure
              extremely small forces (from 100 piconewtons up to 1 micronewton).  Laser
              tweezers extend this force range below 1 piconewton and also allow manipulation
              of objects on length scales of 50 nanometers.  A fluorescence microscope
              permits imaging of fluorescent tagging molecules, which, in addition to their
              typical applications, will be used to insure that the objects being studied
              with AFM and laser tweezers are indeed those of interest, rather than artifacts
              or contamination.  This instrument cluster will be used for a variety of
              experiments including:

1) the study of novel self-assembling biomaterials
              based on the coiled-coil protein folding motif 
2) the response of both mature
              and immature T lymphocyte cells to infected cells
3) the effect of
              naturally-occurring modifications of the microtubule surface on motor protein
              traction
4) basic experiments to characterize electron transfer in DNA.


 
                 With support from the National Science Foundation, an atomic force
              microscope, a fluorescence optical microscope, and a laser tweezers workstation
              will be purchased and combined into a single instrument with powerful imaging,
              manipulation, and force measurement capabilities.  The instrument will be the
              first to integrate these three technologies using commercial components, and
              should pave the way for other researchers.  Auxiliary equipment for vibration
              isolation, temperature regulation, and the formation of micropipettes, all of
              which are required for optimal performance and for the force measurements, will
              also be purchased.

     Haverford College has a strong commitment to
              excellence in the education of undergraduates.  At least four graduating
              students per year will use this instrument cluster for a senior research
              project.  The interdisciplinary nature of the work will spark exciting
              interactions between the students and also between their mentors.

