Title       : Intersection Multiplicities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0070709

Award Number: 0070709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78399              (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia M. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal concerns questions related to intersection multiplicities and the
              study of divisor class groups.  The intersection multiplicities studied by the
              investigator include Serre's multiplicity, Dutta's limit multiplicity and the
              Hilbert-Kunz multiplicity, all intimately related, most notably via the theory
              of localized Chern characters of Baum, Fulton, and MacPherson.  Of particular
              interest are the following: the connection between characteristic p and
              characteristic zero situations, the possible misbehavior of Serre's
              multiplicity when both modules have finite projective dimension, and the
              question of the rigidity of Tor.  Some of these projects will be joint work
              with Anurag Singh.  The second project involves the study of how the divisor
              class group changes between a variety and a hypersurface inside that variety. 
              The third project involves determining the divisor class groups of symmetric
              mixed ladder determinantal varieties.

Commutative algebra is a crucial tool
              in developing the foundations of algebraic geometry.  Together with number
              theory, these fields were in the center of the revolutionary new approaches and
              ways of thinking about classical problems which were eventually responsible for
              the modernization of much of mathematics in the middle of this last century. 
              Noether, Krull, Weil, Grothendieck, Serre and Zariski were among those who
              brought about this revolution.  Especially central was the modern development
              of intersection theory and it continues to be an especially exciting and
              important area of research.  In the same time period, the importance of divisor
              class groups was realized and the connection between those of a variety and a
              hypersurface in the variety has been a question of interest since then. 
              Eventually these studies lead to applications, such as the recent example of
              algebro-geometric codes in coding theory.

