Title       : Mixed-Integer Programming for Capacitated Logistics Network Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0070127

Award Number: 0070127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334641             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alper Atamturk atamturk@ieor.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of effective and efficient
              methodologies for solving 
large-scale capacitated logistics network design
              and routing problems.  A major obstacle in solving network design and routing
              problems is that the bounds from the linear relaxations of their mixed-integer
              programming models are quite weak.  In order to strengthen these bounds, strong
              cutting planes will be developed through rigorous analysis of generic network
              design polyhedra.  The approach taken will be
to exploit common substructures
              that exist in large classes of logistics network design and routing problems
              without making any assumptions on the topology of the network and the specific
              characteristics of the
capacities.  Generic primal heuristics that make use of
              these network substructures will be developed. Extensive computational
              experiments will be performed on a large class of logistics problems to test
              the viability of the approach.

One of the most important outcomes of the
              project will be the development of an intelligent 
next-generation
              mixed-integer solver that will automatically identify the network design and
              routing substructures of mixed-integer programming problems and employ the
              methods developed in this project to exploit these substructures.  If
              successful, this research project will significantly advance our capabilities
              in solving large classes of mixed-integer programming problems that have
              capacitated network design problem as a substructure.  Since many
              telecommunication and transportation network planning, vehicle/crew routing and
              scheduling, production and distribution, facility location and capacity
              allocation problems are variations of capacitated network design and routing
              problems, the results of the project are expected to have a  significant impact
              on many industries.

