Title       : Harmonic Analysis and Linear Elliptic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0070437

Award Number: 0070437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82062              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill C. Pipher jpipher@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
This proposal is concerned with research on singular integrals, the
              theory of
weights, with applications to linear elliptic partial differential
              
equations of second and of higher order. There are three main areas
              of
current focus. First, we study the elliptic measure associated to
a second
              order elliptic operator - both divergence and nondivergence 
form. Second, we
              are studying the boundary values of solutions to
certain higher order elliptic
              operators in non-smooth domains. The third
part of this proposal concerns the
              maximal functions and singular
integrals associated to certain product domains
              - such operators involve
nonisotropic dilations and results require a study of
              the geometry of
families of rectangles arising from this dilation
              structure.

In the middle of this century, revolutionary ideas in analysis
              were
being forged on two fronts: the theory of singular integrals in
              
harmonic analysis (the Calderon-Zygmund school of analysis) and the
theory
              of elliptic equations (Di Giorgi, J. Nash). Each of these
subjects has
              provided fascinating applications - the first in such
areas as applied
              harmonic analysis/wavelets/Fourier analysis, and the
second in the theory of
              nonlinear partial differential equations, of
tremendous value in applications.
              But at the beginning of these studies, and
for a period of twenty or so years,
              the development of each of these
subjects proceeded independently, and with
              little interaction. However,
since the early 1980's, the connections between
              these areas have
been increasingly exploited and understood, to the great
              benefit of
the fields of harmonic analysis and partial differential
              equations.
This proposer's research is in this field of harmonic analysis,
              with
an emphasis on its connection to and inspiration from partial
              
differential equations.


