Title       : Non-linear equations in analysis and geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0070492

Award Number: 0070492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicola Garofalo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is concerned with two main projects. The former focuses
              on
various questions in sub-Riemannian geometry and in the closely
              connected
analysis of sub-elliptic pde's and systems. The PI proposes to
              investigate
the classification of non-negative entire solutions to
              non-linear
equations in groups of Heisenberg type, and compute the best
              constants in
the Folland-Stein Sobolev embedding. This program is instrumental
              to a
possible attack of the compact CR Yamabe problem in the open case of
              CR
manifolds of co-dimension higher than one. The geometric case of
              such
embedding will also be investigated along with the relative
              isoperimetric
inequalities. The PI also proposes to study the regularity of
              minimal
surfaces, the question of traces on lower dimensinal sub-manifolds
              of
functions having integrable horizontal derivatives. The basic
              boundary
value problems, such as the Dirichlet and the Neumann problem will
              also be
investigated, and a theory of variational inequalities and regularity
              of
"free boundaries" will be developed. The second project is concerned
              with
various problems in which symmetry plays an important role. One of them
              is
concerned with the determination of the extremal functions in
              the
Tomas-Stein restriction theorem for the Fourier transform. Other
              problems
are connected with symmetry in the exterior obstacle problem, a
              conjecture
of De Giorgi connected to minimal surfaces, and symmetry in the
              evolution
of surfaces driven by mean curvature.


Partial differential
              equations and systems formed by the latter are the
basic laws which describe
              most natural phenomena. An understanding of the
physical world also requires
              grasping the underlying geometric structure
of the latter in its various
              forms. The present proposal belongs to that
mainstream of research which sits
              at the confluence of the theory of
partial differential equations and systems,
              both linear and non-linear,
and their connections with an emerging type of
              geometry, called
sub-Riemannian geometry. Both theories have witnessed an
              explosion of
interest in the last decade and they continue to attract the
              interest of
various schools of mathematicians both nationwide and abroad.
              Another main
part of this proposal is devoted to the study of physical and
              mathematical
problems in which symmetry plays an important role. Symmetry is
              present
everywhere in nature, a remarkable instance being the fundamental
              laws
of gravitation and electrostatic attraction. The study of conditions
              under
which a given natural phenomenon develops symmetries is both important
              for
its practical consequences (the presence of symmetries
drastically
              reduces the human effort) and for its implications
in the furthering of our
              knowledge.


