Title       : High Temperature Electronic Devices Based on Polycrystalline Diamond and Cubic
               Boron Nitride Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0070004

Award Number: 0070004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raj N. Singh Raj.Singh@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. Kosel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Raj Singh
ECS-0070004


The primary objectives of this proposal are to
              synthesize and characterize thin films of high resistivity (undoped), and p-
              and n -doped polycrystalline diamond (PCD) and cubic-boron nitride (c-BN)
              suitable for the fabrication of high temperature electronic devices, and
              application/demonstration of these films for the fabrication of high
              temperature microelectronic devices.

The thin film processing activities is
              expected to develop a fundamental understanding for synthesizing and in situ
              doping of diamond and cubic-boron nitride (c-BN) films predictably and
              reproducibly by ECR (Electron Cyclotron Resonance) plasma enhanced chemical
              vapor deposition (ECR-PECVD) on semiconducting substrates. This way of
              processing creates non-equilibrium (activated) conditions in which novel
              metastable materials like diamond and c-BN can be synthesized at relatively low
              temperatures and pressures. The influence of different process parameters (e.g.
              substrate bias, plasma gas composition, substrate temperature, pressure, and
              plasma density) on the composition, crystal quality, and properties of the PCD
              and c-BN films will be studied. Special attention will be given to substrate
              strategy, precursor selection, catalytic activation, and in situ doping, in
              order to obtain high quality films suitable for device fabrication. The films
              will be characterized by IR and Raman Spectroscopy, XRD, SEM, TEM, AFM,
              AES/XPS, SIMS and Electron Diffraction techniques. In addition, electrical
              properties of the films will be determined by resistivity, carrier
              concentration, and dielectric measurements. 

Both electrical and optical
              devices based on the PCD , and  to the limited extent using  c-BN, will be
              investigated and fabrication techniques will be developed for the production of
              high-temperature electronic components. In particular, the following two basic
              circuits are proposed for investigation: (1) a voltage multiplier stack (VMS)
              which requires the integration of MSM Schottky diodes with MSM interdigitated
              capacitors, and (2) an optical bridge of four MSM detectors for DC-to-AC
              conversion and for driving the voltage multiplier stacks.  Most of the devices
              will be fabricated using PCD with a limited scope for fabricating c-BN based
              devices in the revised program.

