Title       : Integrated AFM-optical Microscope (Bioscope) for Molecular and Cell Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2000      
File        : a0070356

Award Number: 0070356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuri L. Lyubchenko yuri.lyubchenko@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Roberson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas E. Chandler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Blankenship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract # 0070356 Integrated AFM-optical microscope (BioScope) for molecular
              and cell biology
PI: Y. L. Lyubchenko, Arizona State University. 

AFM is a
              novel technique that offers unique advantages with the potential for very high
              resolution imaging of macromolecules, their complexes and cells in the absence
              of stains, shadows, and labels.  AFM can be performed in air at ambient
              conditions or in aqueous solutions the latter being particularly important for
              resolving fully hydrated structures.  Recently, instruments which integrate AFM
              technology with an optical light microscope has permitted cells, microorganisms
              macromolecular complexes to be imaged with a resolution much greater than the
              ~200 nm resolution of the best optical microscopes. 
A BioScope AFM, an
              integrated Atomic Force Microscope/Optical Microscope will be used to study the
              structure of living cells and macromolecular assemblies and to follow
              biochemical processes in living as well as fixed cells, tissues, and developing
              organisms. This is one of the most powerful instruments used in cellular and
              structural biology and material science today.  Specifically, this integrated
              optical/AFM microscope will be able 
to locate with the optical microscope the
              area of interest; 
to obtain high resolution topographic images of cells,
              their components and macromolecular complexes; 
to combine optical and
              topographic characteristics of the samples;
to follow the dynamics of living
              cells and their components.
These new capabilities will allow more detailed
              structural and functional studies of a wide range of biological systems
              including a) the molecular structure of DNA during recombination, b) the
              structure and spectral properties of photosynthetic complexes in bacteria, c)
              surface reorganization of sperm just before fertilization of amphibian and
              mammalian eggs, d) the surface structure of pathogenic fungi, e) the mechanisms
              of viral interactions with cell surfaces, and f) surface characterization of
              biomimetic materials used in artificial organs and tissues.  In each case, this
              new imaging technique is expected to provide new insights into how cells
              interact with both biological and nonbiological surfaces.  The BioScope will be
              housed in the W. M. Keck Bioimaging Laboratory at Arizona State University and
              will be accessible to any interested party at the University, including
              faculty, postdoctoral researchers as well as graduate and undergraduate
              students.


