Title       : Investigation of Design for Manufacturing (DfM) Metrics and Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0070128

Award Number: 0070128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $578128             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jami J. Shah jami.shah@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul K. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In this joint project between Arizona State University and University of
              California at Berkeley,  a set of metrics and methods will be developed to
              evaluate and optimize design for manufacturing through all phases of product
              development.  The first phase of the project will involve investigation of
              Design-for-Manufacturing (DfM) metrics and methods using several criteria, such
              as theoretical soundness and computational complexity.  A novel DfM approach
              based on Benefit/Cost analysis will be developed to consider trade-offs between
              the quality of a design and its manufacturing cost, while taking into account
              market factors and a Company's strategic goals.  Key performance or utility
              factors of each design alternative or competing product will be used for
              computing a Design Benefit Rating, and similarly relevant manufacturing factors
              will be used for computing a Manufacturability Rating.  Then techniques of
              value engineering will be used to explore design changes to improve the overall
              value of the design and/or to choose between alternatives. In the final year of
              the project, a DfM Shell will be implemented to serve as a domain independent
              testbed to verify, refine, and compare DN methodologies.  Domain-specific
              design and manufacturing agents will be linked to the testbed.  The particular
              focus will be on three processes:  CNC machining, injection molding, and fuse
              deposition.  Six industrial partners will provide the part designs and process
              knowledge for several manufacturability case studies.

The primary benefits
              from the project are:  (1) tools for manufacturing companies to improve rapidly
              the quality of their products to meet changing market conditions; (2) sound
              theoretical foundations for manufacturability analysis; and (3) a framework to
              evaluate the reliability of current and future commercial software for DfM.

