Title       : A Confocal Microscope for Developmental and Cell Biological Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a0070353

Award Number: 0070353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Irvine irvine@waksman.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim S. McKim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A confocal microscope system will be housed in the Waksman Institute at Rutgers
              University as a shared resource for ten different laboratories. A confocal
              microscope is needed in many studies to optically section through thick
              specimens with high resolution and sensitivity, and to simultaneously detect
              the signals from multiple targets, each labeled with a different fluorescent
              dye.  The entire system includes a compound microscope equipped for
              fluorescence and DIC optics, a laser scanning and confocal detection system, a
              computer and software to operate the instrument and analyze the data collected,
              and a vibration-free table and workbench for the instrument. This system will
              replace an older confocal microscope, which has become obsolete and is no
              longer supported by its original manufacturer. The technological improvements
              of the new confocal microscope system are numerous and will allow many kinds of
              experiments that could not be performed previously to be done.

This
              instrument will be used for fluorescence microscopy of animal (Drosophila, C.
              elegans), fungal (S. cerevisiae) and plant (Arabidopsis, Tobacco) tissues. 
              These studies address a wide range of scientific questions in developmental and
              cell biology.  These include investigations of signal transduction pathways,
              regulation of tissue growth, regulation of gene expression, meiotic
              recombination, mechanisms that regulate the subcellular localization of
              different proteins, and synapse formation. These studies primarily involve the
              localization of proteins using fluorescently-tagged antibodies or other dyes. 
              In addition, intrinsically fluorescent proteins, such as the Green Fluorescent
              Protein, are also employed. A confocal microscope that can optically capture
              sections through thick sections is absolutely essential for these experiments. 
              In addition, numerous experiments will specifically take advantage of the many
              advanced capabilities of the new confocal microscopes, especially the higher
              resolution and sensitivity that will allow smaller and fainter signals to be
              observed.  Other important improvements multiple lasers and detectors that
              provide the possibility to simultaneously observe multiple signals.

The
              users are addressing a range of scientific questions of critical importance in
              cell and developmental biology, and this instrument will enable them to make
              major contributions to their respective fields.  These studies will provide
              many new insights into basic cellular processes that occur in plants and
              animals.  In addition, the instrument will be made available to qualified users
              from outside of the Institute, and will play an important role in keeping
              Rutgers at the leading edge of studies in cell and developmental
              biology.




