Title       : Adaptive Stochastic Resonance and Noise Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a0070284

Award Number: 0070284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bart Kosko Kosko@sipi.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0070284
Kosko

This project will explore how noise can improve signal
              processing and computation both in theory and in select information and
              physical systems.  The launching point for this project is the principal
              investigator's recent publication that shows that many nonlinear dynamical
              systems can adoptively achieve a noise-based "stochastic resonance" where
              external noise improves the system's signal-to-noise ratio or other performance
              measure (such as measures of cross-correlation, mutual information, or
              probability of detection).  The project will more generally explore "noise
              processing" and how it affects many feedback and some feedforward
              systems.

The central focus will be the study of adaptive stochastic
              resonance (ASR).  ASR uses sample data and as few statistical assumptions as
              possible to find the optimal type or amount of noise to add to a nonlinear
              system to improve some system performance measure such as the system's spectral
              signal-to-noise ratio.  One may view noise simply as an unwanted signal.  But
              noise itself is a free and local source of energy.  So noise can sometimes help
              computation as well as interfere with it. A key part of the initial effort will
              focus on how to achieve ASR in feedback systems that try to detect broadband
              forcing signals.  This problem has so far defied solution.  The Project
              Description lists five core problems with subproblems that this research effort
              will try to solve.  The work plan presents the PI's current best estimates of
              how to tackle these problems.  The effort will involve a constant search for
              real-world applications of this emerging field of adaptive noise
              processing.


