Title       : Operator Algebras and Noncommutative Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0070763

Award Number: 0070763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Blackadar bruceb@math.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Valentin Deaconu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Kumjian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Blackadar


Blackadar will study a range of questions concerning
              the structure of various
classes of operator algebras and their relation to
              noncommutative topology.
Topics will include generalized inductive limits of
              finite-dimensional
C*-algebras and the structure of nuclear C*-algebras,
              semiprojectivity,
nonstable K-theory and the Universal Coefficient Theorem,
              and bivariant
cohomology theories on C*-algebras and their dense
              subalgebras.

An idea which has revolutionized the study of operator algebras
              in recent
years, and which has led to some spectacular applications
              throughout
mathematics and mathematical physics, is to view operator algebras
              as
generalizations of topological spaces, or more precisely the set
              of
continuous functions on a topological space; the principal new feature
is
              that the multiplication of "functions" is no longer assumed to be
commutative.
               It has long been recognized that operator algebras provide the "right"
              framework for the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics, and it has
              been increasingly recognized
recently that noncommutative "function spaces"
              (operator algebras)
arise naturally in problems in subjects as diverse as knot
              theory
(with applications to the structure of DNA and other molecules, as
              well
as mathematical physics), dynamical systems, and even mathematical
              logic.
It has become apparent that it will be possible to give an
              explicit
description of all operator algebras in large classes, including
              most
algebras arising in applications, far beyond what was thought
              possible
only a few years ago.  This project concerns some of the
              central
remaining problems in the classification of one particularly
              important
class, the nuclear C*-algebras.  Understanding the mathematical
              structures
that can occur will give great insight into the nature and behavior
              of
the associated applied problems.


