Title       : An Automated DNA Sequencer for Microsatellite Genotyping of Social Insects and
               Sequencing in Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a0070330

Award Number: 0070330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : May 1,  2001         (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan E. Strassmann strassm@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Parry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Queller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Gomer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George N. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

0070330
Joan E. Strassmann
Rice University
An Automated DNA
              Sequencer for Microsatellite Genotyping of Social Insects and Sequencing in
              Molecular Biology


	Social insects like the bee or the ant provide one of
              the chief model systems for studying the evolution of cooperation and conflict.
               Understanding the evolution of such traits requires estimates of relatedness
              between individuals and estimates of who reproduces how much.  The ideal tool
              for making these estimates is an automated DNA sequencer.  An automated
              sequencer makes it possible to study new mutations in genes and to characterize
              those genes.  In addition, genotyping individuals in the society makes it
              possible to understand the dynamics of genes in families and in populations.  
              Automated approaches to sequencing and genotyping are much faster and more
              accurate than the manual methods they replace.

	With support from the
              National Science Foundation, an ABI 377 automated DNA sequencer with upgrades
              and software will be purchased.  Peripheral equipment essential to the
              efficient operation of the sequencer including a spectrophotometer, a
              centrifuge, and a gel loader will also be purchased.

	The acquisition of an
              automated sequencer will be beneficial at a number of levels.  It will give
              students at Rice hands-on training on an important piece of equipment for
              understanding genetics and its applications.  Students will more easily enter
              advanced programs and positions in genetics from biotechnology companies to
              basic research institutions.  In addition, the sequencer will be used to
              understanding what makes a better artificial hemoglobin, the key component in
              artificial blood.  Finally, the sequencer will be used to understanding the
              dynamics of DNA microsatellites that are implicated in an important class of
              neurological diseases.  


