Title       : High-Speed Droplet-Based Manufacturing of High-Precision Structural Components
               and Photonic BandGap Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0070053

Award Number: 0070053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa E. Orme melissao@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant funds research seeking to further the development of a high-speed
              droplet-based net-form manufacturing technology for the fabrication of
              high-precision three-dimensional aluminum and aluminum alloy components. 
              Successful development relies the knowledge base acquired from previous NSF and
              industry supported work.  In the NSFsupported work, highly uniform molten
              aluminum alloy droplet streams were reliably generated from capillary stream
              break-up in a custom fabricated state-of-the-art droplet generator and
              deposition facility, and preliminary three-dimensional componets were
              fabricated. In the industry supported work, molten solder droplets were charged
              and deflected in a manner similar to ink-jet printing and targeted onto a
              circuit board with an accuracy of 12.5 micrometer.  Hence, the union of these
              efforts forms the knowledge base for the proposed net-form manufacturing
              technology.  The crux of the this research  is the determination of the
              inter-relationships between processing parameters, structure and properties. To
              this end, a research plan that consists of experimentation coupled with
              numerical modeling and materials characterization is proposed, with information
              gained from the experimental and characterization studies serving as feedback
              into the modeling effort.

A novel extension will be explored in
              droplet-based manufacturing and to  investigate the fabrication of photonic
              bandgap (PBG) materials.  The extent to which the processing parameters for PGB
              materials fabrication can be extrapolated from the relationships governing
              aluminum alloy structural component fabrication will be ascertained as a first
              step towards the fabrication of PBG and other multimaterial components.

  
