Title       : Cohomology of Exponential Sums
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0070510

Award Number: 0070510
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Adolphson adolphs@math.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Exponential uses have many uses in mathematics.  Historically, they
arose in
              problems in number theory.  More recently, they have found
applications in
              cryptology and coding theory.  The main question that
arises is to find sharp
              upper bounds for the absolute value of an
exponential sum.  The standard
              approach, based on P. Deligne's
fundamental work on the Weil conjectures, is
              to compute the l-adic
cohomology groups associated to the exponential sum. 
              Recently, the
investigator and his collaborator computed the p-adic cohomology
              of
some new classes of exponential sums.  The calculations indicate
              that
these classes of exponential sums should have "good" upper bounds.
The
              investigator plans to search for more such classes of exponential
sums and try
              to compute their l-adic cohomology, thus obtaining the
desired upper
              bounds.

Exponential sums originally arose in basic problems in number
              theory,
such as trying to find the number of integer solutions to a
              given
equation.  Usually it is very difficult to find the exact number
              of
such solutions, so the next best thing is to approximate that number.
It
              was discovered that this question could often be reduced to the
problem of
              estimating the size of certain sums of complex numbers,
called "exponential
              sums."  A substantial theory has developed over
the years to deal with this
              subject, and it has found modern
applications in the fields of cryptology and
              coding theory.  The
investigator has discovered new classes of exponential
              sums which he
believes it should be possible to estimate.  He will try to
              extend the
existing theory to cover these new classes.

