Title       : Novel Method for Measuring Permeability of Concrete
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0070092

Award Number: 0070092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225049             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Scherer scherer@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0070092
The goal of this work is to develop a novel technique for measuring low
              liquid permeabilities in heterogeneous materials, particularly including
              high-performance concrete. In contrast to conventional methods, the new method
              does not require high pressure apparatus and it yields results in a few hours,
              rather than days or weeks moreover, it is easiest to perform on samples of low
              permeability, which are the most difficult to measure by other methods. The
              principle of the new method is that the thermal expansion kinetics of a
              saturated porous body involves flow of the pore liquid, so the permeability can
              be determined by measuring the dilatation during a thermal cycle. When a
              saturated porous material is heated, the pore liquid expands much more that the
              solid phase, so the liquid tends to flow out of the pores. Our objective is to
              design and build a dilatometer to perform the measurement on cylinders of the
              kind typically used for strength measurements. The resulting permeability
              values will be compared to those obtained by conventional methods. Test will be
              performed on cement, mortar, and concrete to explore the range of measurable
              permeabilities. A numerical analysis of the experiment will be performed to
              explore the limits of the analytical calculation, which involves some
              simplifying assumptions However, the low permeability of the body prevents the
              liquid from escaping as fast as it expands, so is forced to expand within the
              pores, stretching the porous body like a spring. If the body is heated and then
              held at a constant  temperature, the initial expansion is caused in part by the
              liquid; during the isothermal hold, the liquid drains from the pores and the
              body contracts to the dimension determined by the thermal expansion coefficient
              of the solid. The magnitude of the dilatation contributed by the liquid can be
              calculated, so fitting the measured expansion to the theory provides the
              permeability as a parameter.  

