Title       : Nonlinear Equations and Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2000      
File        : a0070641

Award Number: 0070641
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl T. Kelley tim_kelley@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 0070641
ABSTRACT.

The principal investigator will continue his research
              program in the numerical
solution of large systems of nonlinear equations and
              noisy optimization 
problems. In the area of nonlinear equations the PI will
              continue his 
research program on pseudo-transient continuation methods for
              nonlinear 
equations to the partial differential algebraic equation (PDAE)
              setting
and design and analyze multilevel methods for fully iterative
              algorithms 
for parameter-dependent families of compact fixed point
              problems.
In the area of optimization, the principal investigator will
              
extend his work on sampling methods to problems with ``hidden constraints'',
              
i.e. constraints whose violation can only be detected by failure of the
              
objective function to return a value, continue his development of the
              implicit
filtering with the design of a Levenberg-Marquardt form of the
              algorithm, 
and investigate the performance of the DIRECT method both from the
              
theoretical viewpoint and as a way to identify hidden constraints. 
This
              aspect of the PI's research involves undergraduates in a significant
              way.

Many processes and models in engineering and science are expressed as
              nonlinear
equations. Numerical simulation of these processes requires the
              rapid and 
accurate solution of these equations and a clear understanding of
              the methods
and their limitations. With a high-quality simulator in hand,
              optimization
can be used in design.  The optimization problems that arise in
              
industrial design are often noisy because of measurement or simulation error.
              
The principal investigator will continue his work on the computational
              
solution of nonlinear equations and optimization problems. The work 
will
              consist of study of algorithms, needed to ensure robustness and 
reliability
              of simulations, implementation on distributed memory computers,
which is
              important for for rapid turnaround, and applying the methods
in collaborations
              with scientists and engineers in industry, national 
laboratories, and
              academia. The work will be used in (a) environmental 
modeling, measurement,
              and remediation, (b) simulation, optimal design, 
and control in the aerospace
              industry, and in (c) optimization of 
gas pipeline networks.


