Title       : Studies in Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0070714

Award Number: 0070714
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600265             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilfried Schmid schmid@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:
DMS-0070714

In earlier work, I observed that the functional
              equation for L-functions
attached to Maass modular forms can be derived by
              taking the Mellin 
transform of their (distribution) boundary values along the
              real axis, 
rather than the traditional way of integrating the modular forms
              along
the imaginary axis. My method appears likely to apply also to
              higher
rank groups which, until now, have resisted the usual arguments. I
              intend
to extend the idea to higher rank cases. This involves a number of
              
representation theoretic sub-problems, several of which are interesting
in
              their own right. I also plan to continue my joint work with Vilonen,
on
              characteristic cycles of representations of real reductive groups. 
Such
              representations are attached to constructible sheaves on the flag 
variety,
              via the Beilinson-Bernstein construction and the Riemann-Hilbert
              
correspondence. These sheaves, in turn, have characteristic cycles
which
              encode deep information about the representations. By studying
              the
characteristic cycles, we intend to obtain geometric invariants of
              
representations which clarify the meaning of unipotence, and possibly
point
              to ways of constructing unipotent representations geometrically.

The overall
              theme of the proposal is representation theory. Felix Klein,
late in the
              eighteenth century, enunciated the principle that the notions
of a group and
              group action formalize the idea of symmetry. The laws of
classical mechanics,
              for example, are invariant under rotations and 
translations, which together
              form the symmetry group of Newtonian
mechanics. Special relativity --
              discovered after Klein -- has a different 
symmetry group, and this difference
              explains the fundamentally different 
behavior relativistic mechanics; indeed,
              the difference in symmetry groups
was well understood even in the infancy of
              the theory of relativity. The 
symmetries of mechanics lie very much on the
              surface. Less obvious -- 
sometimes deeply hidden -- symmetries arise in many
              contexts, not only 
physics, but also geometry, number theory, and
              differential equations. 
Representations are the "atoms", i.e., the most basic
              ingredients, of group
actions. Representation theory studies both the
              representations themselves, 
and applications of the idea of symmetry where
              the less obvious properties
of certain representations lead to new insights.
              The second part of my
proposal is of the former type, and the first part, of
              the latter. 


