Title       : Potential Theory of Symmetric Stable Processes, p-Laplacian on Trees and
               Quasiregular Maps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0070312

Award Number: 0070312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108849             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jang-Mei G. Wu wu@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The goal of the research is to study potential theoretic
              problems
arising in the following areas. (1) Symmetric stable processes
              are
discontinuous and nonlocal versions of Brownian motions.  The jumps
              of
the processes impose many technical complications, at the same time
making
              the roughness of the boundary invisible; consequently they
produce many
              unexpected properties and interesting questions.
Harmonic measures, Martin
              boundaries and a certain version of boundary
Harnack principle will be
              investigated.  (2) On trees of nonregular
branching, or on a random
              Galton-Watson tree, problems on sizes of
Fatou sets of bounded p-harmonic
              functions will be studied. These
are discrete analoge of the usual p-harmonic
              functions. (3) For
a quasiregular mapping on the unit ball, the relation
              between the
volume growth of the mapping and size of the set on the unit
              sphere
where the function has asymptotic values will be analyzed. 
              This
constitutes a first step towards a very difficult problem of Fatou
sets
              for bounded quasiregular mappings.
Brownian motion has been studied at least
              since Norbert Wiener and has
played a central role in probability and
              potential theory, which in
turn are very important in the study of
              differential equations, heat
conductivity, electrostatic potential and fluid
              dynamics.  Recently,
there are many problems in physics and mathematical
              finance and risk
estimation which have been modelled and studied successfully
              with the
use of symmetric stable processes -- discontinuous counterpart of
              the
Brownian motions.  A symmetric stable process has discontinuous
sample
              paths and heavy tails, while Brownian motion has continuous
sample paths and
              exponentially decaying tails.  Therefore many
techniques from Brownian motions
              can not be routinely adapted to these
processes.  Wide range applications and
              challenging behaviors of the
processes are the motivation behind the proposed
              research.  Wu hopes
that knowledge derived from a theoretical study of these
              processes
from an analytical point of view, will give new tools for
              applications
in physics and finance.


