Title       : Reasoning and Plannning with Sensing Actions and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0070463

Award Number: 0070463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chitta R. Baral chitta@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Sensing actions, which when executed change the state of an agent's knowledge
              without changing the world. are necessary when planning in the presence of
              incomplete knowledge about the world. The initial aim of this research is to
              develop a formal characterization of reasoning and planning with sensing
              actions.   Questions to be addressed include:  What kind of plans are necessary
              when planning with incomplete information?   When is such a plan correct?  
              What is the state-space in this case?   How do we compactly represent states?  
               How do we characterize noise in sensing? How do we specify goals?    What is
              the complexity of planning with sensing?   The answers to these questions will
              be used to develop planning algorithms and planners that are more tractable,
              and which use a sound (but not necessarily complete) reasoning about sensing
              actions.

Another thrust of this research is to use sensing actions for
              diagnostic problem solving in dynamic domains.   The PI will formulate the
              notion of a diagnosis, given a set of observations about different time points.
                Since a particular set of observations may lead to multiple diagnoses, the PI
              will develop the notion of a diagnostic plan which when executed will lead the
              reasoner to a unique (or a smaller set of) diagnoses.  He will then study the
              complexity of finding a diagnosis and constructing diagnostic plans, and
              develop and implement corresponding algorithms for tractable
              subclasses.

This project will lead to a theory of actions that allows
              sensing actions, which will allow us to: develop sound and complete planners as
              well as sound, but incomplete, but more tractable planners.   It will extend
              applications such as agent control and diagnosis to the incomplete world,
              impacting diverse areas of computer science including the high-level control
              aspects of mobile robots, active databases, and program verification.


