Title       : Inorganic Fullerene Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0070291

Award Number: 0070291
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Balch albalch@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research on inorganic fullerene chemistry by Professor Alan Balch of
              the Department of Chemistry at the University of California-Davis. A number of
              fullerene derivatives, both endohedral and dimeric, will be synthesized. The
              x-ray structures of fullerenes which are co-crystallized with transition metal
              complexes will be determined. These new supramolecular compounds will also be
              examined for interesting physical properties, particularly magnetism and redox
              activity. New, redox active films which consist of fullerenes covalently bonded
              to transition metal centers, metal-ligand complexes or metal clusters will be
              prepared by means of an electrochemical reduction process. The films will
              subsequently be investigated by a variety of physical measurements to determine
              their charge transport and storage characteristics and nanostructural
              features.

The goal of this research is to explore the inorganic chemistry of
              fullerenes, a new form of carbon discovered a little over a decade ago. The
              combination of fullerenes with metal ions and complexes will lead to new
              crystalline compounds and films with potentially important applications. These
              materials may find use as battery and microelectronic components, chemical
              sensors, and catalysts. Students at all levels, undergraduate, graduate and
              postdoctoral, will be provided with both broad scientific training and good
              communication skills through their involvement with this project. 

