Title       : Complex Manifold Theory and Kaehler Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0070518

Award Number: 0070518
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $537964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yum-Tong Siu siu@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The project is to investigate the following problems in complex
              manifold 
theory.
(1) Invariance of plurigenera for manifolds not of general
              type.
(2) Fujita conjecture type problems and the sharpening of known
              bounds.
(3) Finite generation of canonical rings for manifolds of general
              type.
(4) Global regularity of the complex Neumann problem and nonexistence
 
                problem for Levi-flat sets with small singularities.
(5) Hyperbolicity of
              generic high-degree hypersurfaces in the complex 
    projective space and
              their complements.
The investigation will use and further develop the method
              of multiplier 
ideal sheaf which has already produced very good
              results.

Many problems in geometry and related fields, such as mathematical
              physics,
are reduced to questions about the existence and the properties, such
              as 
regularity, of global solutions of partial differential equations.  A
              priori 
estimates have for a long time been the dominant tool for globally
              solving 
partial differential equations.  Such a priori estimates are usually
              derived 
from pointwise properties of the partial differential equations.  In
              many 
important global geometric problems, some of which are listed above,
              
pointwise arguments are insufficient.  To solve such problems, this project
              
uses and further develops the method of "mulitplier ideal sheaf".  What is
              
to be estimated is multiplied by a "multiplier" before estimation so that
              
the a priori estimates hold.  The set of all such multipliers forms the
              
"multiplier ideal sheaf".  Global properties of the "multiplier ideal sheaf",
              
such as closedness under certain kinds of differentiation, for certain
              
problems force to be a multiplier the function which is identically 1, thus
              
giving the desired global solutions of the partial differential equations. 
              
Some long outstanding problems in algebraic geometry have already been
              
solved by this method.  With further development this new method of
              using
the multiplier ideal sheaf to solve global partial differential
              equations
should be a very powerful tool with broad applications and deep
              impact.



