Title       : Instrumentation for Plant Cell and Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2000      
File        : a0070387

Award Number: 0070387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin W. Fawley marvin.fawley@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan R. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc D. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Fawley

	Modern instrumentation in support of research in plant
              cellular and molecular biology will be housed in the Department of
              Botany/Biology, North Dakota State University, Fargo. Specifically, a research
              microscope, a high-speed centrifuge, an ultracentrifuge, rotors, a
              scintillation counter, and culture equipment will be used in a variety of
              botanical studies.
	Four researchers will be the primary users of this
              equipment. Dr. Marvin Fawley is investigating the phylogeny of green algae and
              the molecular diversity of coccoid green algae.  The equipment will support
              efforts to describe new species of coccoid green algae, and continuing
              investigations of coccoid green algal diversity.  Dr. Karen Phillips is
              studying phytoplankton communities and population dynamics using molecular
              techniques and light microscopy.  For this project, her work will focus
              primarily on winter phytoplankton communities
and population dynamics of
              freshwater coccoid green algae.  Dr. Marc Anderson is studying the influence of
              environmental stress on metabolic processes in plants.  Dr. Anderson will
              investigate the response of maize seedlings to chilling-induced oxidative
              stress, specifically focusing on processes in the mitochondria.  Dr. Alan White
              is investigating the biosynthesis of cell wall polysaccharides in plant Golgi
              membranes.  This equipment will support his efforts to purify enzymes involved
              in the synthesis of xylogulcans in the Golgi, specifically xyloglucan
              glucosyltransferase and xyloglucan xylosyltransferase.
	The results of this
              work will have significant impact on several areas of plant biology.  Work on
              coccoid algae and phytoplankton population dynamics will help revise old dogmas
              on the diversity of coccoid algae and the dynamics of phytoplankton under the
              ice in winter.  Research will also lead to an understanding of the mechanism(s)
              (e.g. induced transcription, protein modification, etc.)  by which enzyme
              activities are enhanced during chilling stress.  Finally, an increased
              understanding of xyloglucan biosynthesis will add significantly to our
              understanding of cell wall polysaccharides, the process of cell wall synthesis,
              and the structure and functional organization of the plant Golgi apparatus.
              Biology students and other investigators will have full access to this
              equipment for their research and training


