Title       : Granular Shear Instabilities: Oscillations, Waves and Rolls?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a0070591

Award Number: 0070591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Troy Shinbrot shinbrot@sol.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin J. Glasser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0070591
T. Shinbrot and B.J. Glasser, Rutgers University - New
              Brunswick

It is proposed to investigate the flow microstructure and
              instabilities in rapid flow of two particle streams past a splitter plate. 
              This is a simple flow geometry where fundamental aspects can be studied, such
              as the type of instability, typical velocity and vorticity flow structures, the
              shape of the interface among streams, dimensionless numbers governing the
              transition, and the role of interparticle stick-slip phenomenon on
              instabilities.  The research was triggered by observations made on a
              small-scale experiment where unexpected indications of Kelvin-Helmholtz type
              instabilities have been noticed.  The main experiment is based on flow
              visualization of a quasi-two-dimensional flow using colored and tracer
              particles at the confluence of two particulate streams.  The effect of particle
              size on various shear flow patterns, including collective behavior of particle
              motion in large vortices and rollers, will be experimentally determined.  This
              exploratory research aims to establish the flow pattern in a relatively simple
              shear flow and to derive conclusions for the basic flow mechanisms in particle
              systems of various particle sizes from micron to nanosize.
If successful, this
              proof of concept projects may have applications in mixing, in chemical and
              pharmaceutical processing industry, in polymer and ceramics processing.

