Title       : Topics in Model Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0070179

Award Number: 0070179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anand Pillay pillay@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Pillay plans to carry out research on stable and simple theories, especially the
              structure of supersimple fields, on differential fields and their Galois
              groups, and on groups over o- minimal structures.

Simple theories are a
              class of first order theories, including both stable theories and typically the
              theories of ifgeneric structuresll. Their models support a notion of
              ioindependencel. which specialises to ioalgebraic freenessli in the case of
              algebraically closed fields. The study of simple theories has thrown up some
              new ideas in model theory involving generalized notions of definability and
              Galois theory. Pillay plans to investigate several open questions in both the
              general theory and fine structure theory. Pseudo algebraically closed fields
              with small Galois group are examples of supersimple fields. Pillay will
              investigate the reverse problem: is a supersimple field pseudoalgebraically
              closed, namely does every irreducible variety over F have an F- rational
              point.

Differential rings and fields are objects developed as part of the
              algebraic study of differential equations. The model theoretic study of such
              rings and fields, using tools of stability theory, has had an impact in
              differential algebraic geometry as well as diophantine geometry. Pillay will
              investigate inverse problems with respect to differential Galois theory, as
              well as the fine structure of solutions of certain algebraic differential
              equations (those of Painleve).

The category of groups definable in an
              o-minimal structure resembles the category of real Lie groups. The relationship
              is very tight in the case of ifsemisimplel. groups. Pillay will try to extend
              this to wider classes of groups (abelian, definably compact, definable
              subgroups of algebraic groups).
     

