Title       : Collaborative Research: Synthesis and Investigation of Gallium Nitride Based
               Quantum Dots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a0070620

Award Number: 0070620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hadis Morkoc hmorkoc@vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marshall I. Nathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The principal investigators propose to study quantum dots (QDs) in the group
              III-nitride
materials system. The objectives are three-fold: 1) to improve the
              quality of the material
by using the dot layers to decouple the active layers
              of structure from the substrate; 2) to
produce a QD laser that has a lower
              threshold and is more efficient than present nitride
lasers; and 3) to produce
              efficient nitride light emitting diodes (LEDs) that span the
electromagnetic
              spectrum from the blue to the red and that can be made to emit white
light.
              Both of the PIs are carrying out extensive research in the nitrides, and this
              project
will be integral part of their programs. The activity will be largely
              crystal growth in
nature, but work on structure and device processing and
              materials characterization will
also be carried out. Both molecular beam
              epitaxy (MBE) and metal organic chemical
vapor deposition (MOCVD) will be
              used. This is one of the few projects in the world
where both techniques are
              employed by one research group for the nitrides and will give
the researchers
              the flexibility to choose to best method for each part of the growth
process.
              The PIs propose to produce the dots by two novel techniques which they
              expect
will produce more uniform dots. The first is a crystal growth technique
              whereby the dot
layer is grown pseudomorphically on a nitride layer of smaller
              lattice constant at low
enough temperature so that two dimensional growth
              occurs. The layer is then annealed to
form a layer of self-assembled dots. In
              the second technique, the growth is stopped just
below the dot-forming layer.
              The sample is then removed from the growth apparatus. It
is patterned on a
              nanoscale with a uniformly spaced array of dimples or hillocks. The
sample is
              then returned to the growth apparatus, and the growth is continued. The
              pattern
serves as a template to form the dots and helps make them more
              uniform. Partial laser
structures will be fabricated from samples made by both
              methods that will permit the
determination of whether the dot size is uniform
              enough to produce a narrower
spontaneous linewidth and, hence, a lower
              threshold, improved laser. Other
characterization measurements, including
              photoluminescence, cathodoluminescence,
atomic force microscopy (AFM), and
              transmission electron microscopy (TEM) will be
carried out. Single color LEDs
              from blue to red and white LEDs will fabricated and
characterized.

