Title       : Exploration of Ultrafast Carrier Dynamics In Polymer Semiconductors Using
               Terahertz Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2000     
File        : a0070285

Award Number: 0070285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65939              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Moses moses@ipos.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0070285
Moses
The carrier dynamics in conjugated polymers in the
              sub-picosecond time scale are generally unknown.  Recent developments in
              terahertz (THz) spectroscopy have opened a new window to the carrier transport
              in this time regime.  This technique has so far been applied mostly to
              "conventional" semiconductors.  In this project advantage will be taken of this
              powerful experimental probe in using it to study the carrier dynamics in
              various conjugated polymers.  The goals of this exploratory research are
              focused on a selected few currently open questions.  Three studies will be
              undertaken. Firstly, the charge transport promptly following photoexcitations
              will be studied while the carriers occupy extended states, and before
              significant carrier trapping and recombination can occur.  Secondly, a study
              will be performed on how the strength of the inter-chain coupling modifies the
              carrier transport by exploring the transport in PPV and its various
              derivatives, and thirdly, the soliton dynamics in polyacetylene at high bias
              fields will be studied. In this case the soliton velocity is predicted
              theoretically to reach a plateau, a prediction that has yet not been verified. 
              The transport measurement is based on the fundamental process of
              electromagnetic radiation, typically in the THz range, emitted by the induced
              transient photocurrent.  Monitoring the time-evolution of the THz signal
              provides information regarding the transient photoconductivity in the 0.1 to 10
              ps time scale. This research employs state-of-the-art experimental techniques. 
              Graduate students and post doctoral research associates will participate in
              this research and thereby acquire up-to-date- knowledge and skills in a
              forefront area of contemporary condensed matter physics and materials
              science.

%%% 

Following the discovery of semiconductor polymers as
              promising materials for light emitting diodes (LEDs) and lasers, an active
              research effort has emerged worldwide in pursuit of the goal of realizing
              "plastic" lasers, LEDs, and fast photo-detector devices based on conjugated
              polymers.  This project is concerned with the investigation of several unsolved
              questions concerning the nature of the light emission process in quasi-one
              dimensional polymer semiconductors promptly following photoexcitation.  These
              processes occur at ultrafast time scales and their studies are now made
              possible by new developments in experimental ultrafast spectroscopy.  This
              project is concerned with using these new techniques in the quantitative study
              of the nature of the processes that underlie the ultrafast emission of light
              following photoexcitation of various polymer materials.  This research will be
              conducted with the assistance of students and post doctoral research associates
              who will thereby acquire skills and knowledge in a contemporary forefront area
              of condensed matter physics and materials science. 

***



