Title       : The Model Theory of Valued Fields with Analytic Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0070724

Award Number: 0070724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard M. Lipshitz lipshitz@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zachary Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lipshitz and Robinson propose to continue their collaborative
              investigation
into the model theory of valued fields with analytic structure. 
              Classical 
rigid analytic geometry is based on rings of strictly convergent
              power series,
i.e., power series convergent on products of "closed" discs. The
              proposers have 
introduced new rings of power series convergent on products of
              "closed" and 
"open" discs.  These rings of separated power series share many
              of the 
desirable algebraic properties of the smaller rings of strictly
              convergent 
power series.  In addition they are particularly well suited for
              model 
theoretic applications. Lipshitz and Robinson propose to continue to
              develop 
the commutative algebra of rings of separated power series and the
              corresponding 
rigid geometry in analogy to the classical case.  On the model
              theory side they 
propose to broaden their investigation to consider the model
              theory of 
non-algebraically-closed valued fields with analytic structure and
              also to 
consider questions of uniformity over different fields in the theory
              of rigid 
subanalytic sets.  The methods to be employed come from model
              theory, 
commutative algebra and algebraic geometry.

The sets of points in
              Euclidean space over the field of real numbers defined
by systems of equations
              and inequalities among analytic functions are called
semi-analytic sets. This
              class of sets is basic to analytic geometry. The
projection (i.e. the shadow)
              of a semi-analytic set on a lower dimensional
subspace is called subanalytic.
              There are more subanalytic sets than 
semi-analytic sets, and their behavior
              is more complicated. There is a 
natural interest in subanalytic sets. These
              are exactly the sets that can be
mathematically defined from the semi-analytic
              sets, in the sense of formal
logic. Furthermore, real subanalytic sets arise
              in several branches of
mathematics such as differential equations and
              geometry. Similar classes of 
sets arise naturally, for example in number
              theory, over fields different from 
the real numbers, where the notion of
              distance has rather different properties. 
Such fields are called
              non-Archimedean. The corresponding subanalytic sets, 
however, share many of
              the nice properties of their real cousins. Lipshitz and 
Robinson will
              continue their investigation of the properties of these non-Archimedean
              
subanalytic sets, using methods from mathematical logic, commutative algebra
              and
algebraic geometry. Having developed key elements of theory in the
              Non-Archimedean 
case, they propose to apply their ideas to extend the classes
              of fields to which
these results apply.  In particular, they plan to apply
              ideas developed in
the non-Archimedean setting to the real case, thereby
              enlarging the class of
real sets whose nice geometric properties can be
              established by these means.
Since many of the procedures used to extract
              geometric information about
these sets do not vary from field to field, the
              also plan a careful study of the
nature of this uniformity.

