Title       : Nonstandard Analysis in Additive Number Theory - An Unconventional Approach to
               Upper Density or Upper Banach Density Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a0070407

Award Number: 0070407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73157              (Estimated)
Investigator: Renling Jin jinr@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator: Renling Jin

Abstract

This research project is
              about applications of nonstandard analysis to additive number theory,
              especially to upper density or upper Banach density problems. There are many
              interesting theorems about Shnirel'man density or lower density in additive
              number theory and a few interesting theorems about upper density or upper
              Banach density in combinatorial number theory. However, dealing with upper
              density or upper Banach density in additive number theory is still an uncharted
              area. One of the major untouched problems in this area is finding the growth
              and structure of sums of sets of positive upper density or positive upper
              Banach density. The principal investigator has been investigating the problem
              using nonstandard analysis and has obtained many interesting new results. The
              first part of the proposal describes a topological approach to the problem.
              Using U-topologies on a hyperfinite Loeb space, the principal investigator
              proves a powerful theorem in nonstandard analysis, which implies several new
              theorems in some standard mathematical fields including additive number theory.
              These theorems reveal a general phenomenon, which says that if two sets A and B
              are large in terms of ``measure'', then A plus B is not small in terms of
              ``order-topology''. The second part of the proposal describes a
              measure-theoretical approach. This approach allows one to derive a parallel
              theorem about upper Banach density to an existing theorem about Shnirel'man
              density or lower density in a very efficient way.

Additive number theory is
              classical and studies the properties of addition of natural numbers like
              1,2,3,4... which people use every day. Nonstandard analysis is relatively new
              and more abstract. It adds infinitely large numbers into our number system. A
              non-expert may be surprised that the study of the elusive infinitely large
              numbers has an interesting impact on the study of ordinary numbers. The
              principal investigator has already achieved some success in this direction. By
              furthering his efforts, the principal investigator will contribute more
              innovative ideas and results to additive number theory.

