Title       : Operator Algebras, Operator Spaces, Frames and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0070376

Award Number: 0070376
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vern I. Paulsen vern@math.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Blecher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Emmanouil I. Papadakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Paulsen/Blecher/Papadakis

The Principal Investigators propose
              several main lines of research on
topics related to the theory and
              applications of operator algebras,
operator spaces, and frames. Blecher will
              be studying the general
theory of operator algebras and modules over operator
              algebras,
Hilbert C*-modules, and questions relating to noncommutative
              Choquet
theory. Paulsen will continue to study injective operator spaces
              and
modules, the weak expectation property, function theoretic
              operator
theory, interpolation theory from an operator algebra point of
              view.
With Papadakis he will also be studying and frames and
              reconstructions
with a view to applying reproducing kernel Hilbert space
              methods and
symmetric orthogonalization results.

The study of operator
              algebras originally grew out of quantum mechanics.
It is often important to
              see how formulas involving numerical variables
behave when these variables are
              allowed to be operator variables. It is
out of such a process that the theory
              of operator spaces and completely
bounded maps emerged. Blecher and Paulsen's
              research focuses mainly on
questions of how various theories behave under this
              `quantization'.
On the other hand, interpolation theory started as a purely
              mathematical
exercise, and only in the past 20 years has it been found to
              have
important applications in engineering. For example, in electrical
              circuit
design, one starts with a desired frequency response, for a few
              given
frequencies, and wishes to design the simplest circuit with that
              given
response. Mathematically, this problem becomes one of finding
              the
simplest function of a given type that achieves certain given values
              at
given points. This last problem is what we call an interpolation
              problem.
Already the demands of electrical engineering take us beyond the
              known
interpolation theories. Surprisingly, interpolation theory and the
              study
of operator algebras is interwoven, and this interplay has lead to
              some
new interpolation results. We have found that a better understanding
              of
the "quantized", i.e., matrix-valued, interpolation is what is needed
to
              answer many ordinary interpolation questions.
Frame theory can be applied to
              the study of how we extract information
out of streams of data, and how we
              reconstruct the original data from
the derived information. A typical example
              of a situation where this
arises is the CAT scan, where from a large quantity
              of data, one is
trying to reconstruct a picture of the inside of a body. Our
              work is
not focused on particular examples, but on how one analyzes how
              "good"
is a particular frame.

