Title       : Complexity of operations with Pfaffian and Noetherian functions and effective
               o-minimality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0070666

Award Number: 0070666
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Gabrielov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A. Gabrielov proposes to continue research on the theory of Pfaffian and
              Noetherian functions (analytic functions satisfying systems of partial
              differential equations with polynomial coefficients), with applications to
              quantifier elimination, o-minimality, and computational complexity. The goal of
              this research is to establish effective upper bounds for the complexity of
              algebro-geometric operations  on Pfaffian functions and the sets defined by
              expressions with  such functions in the real domain. This can be considered as
              a quantitative, effective version of the o-minimal theory of Pfaffian
              functions. For Noetherian functions, where global o-minimality fails, the goal
              is to develop local real and complex analogs of this theory.

Modern computer
              algebra systems allow one to perform on a computer many operations with
              algebraic equations and inequalities previously considered the domain of
              abstract algebraic geometry. One of the latests achievements is an algorithm
              for the resolution of singularities of systems of algebraic equations. The
              results can be applied to such practical problems as visualisation, robotics,
              and the coding theory. The complexity of computer codes performing these
              operations becomes a practically important problem. This complexity usually
              grows fast with the degree of polynomials. The Pfaffian theory allows one to
              significantly reduce the computational  complexity of operations on
              "fewnomials" - polynomials of high degree  with few non-zero terms. The goal of
              the proposed research is to combine the Pfaffian theory with the algorithmic
              resolution of singularities, in order to develop efficient computational
              procedures for fewnomial systems.  

