Title       : Operator Algebras and Wavelet Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0070796

Award Number: 0070796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141096             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Larson larson@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:

The plan of this proposal is to utilize operator-algebraic methods
              to  solve several problems in the mathematical theory of wavelets, and in the 
              related area of frame theory, including Weyl-Heisenberg and Gabor theory. We
              have a new lead on the well-known wavelet connectivity problem, which we
              perceive to be a basic issue in the subject.  Another wavelet problem of a
              basic issue nature concerns the question of when a Riesz wavelet which is known
              to be a linear combination of MRA wavelets is itself an MRA wavelet.  Others
              problems we propose to work on concern norm-density of the wavelet frames,
              operator-theoretic interpolation of wavelets,  superframes and superwavelets,
              and Weyl-Heisenberg frames.  We will also work on two projects in a different
              direction concerning operator spaces, reflexivity and optimization.  The first
              concerns an axiomatic description of a ranking-function for an abstract
              operator space.  There is a natural definition of a concrete ranking-function
              for a concretely given operator space, but an abstract description of this is
              elusive and seems to be a basic issue.  The second concerns the question of
              which matrix completion problems are well-posed in the sense of optimization
              theory.  

This proposal represents work of an interdisciplinary nature on
              the mathematics of wavelet and frame theory. Work in this  direction that was
              previously supported by NSF has settled some open questions and has impacted
              the work of others in harmonic analysis and applications-oriented wavelet
              theory. Continuing in this direction is the main thrust of the present
              proposal.  Numerous papers  have been written in the past dozen years dealing
              with applications of wavelets to signal and image processing. So far,  most of
              the published work has dealt directly with applications, and relatively little
              has been accomplished concerning the basic mathematical underpinnings of the
              subject.  This proposal is  concerned with  this mathematics.  There have been
              some surprises that have come up in our work in the past two years, and these
              discoveries have led to some potential areas of applications of a previously
              unsuspected nature.  There are several outstanding  problems we emphasize in
              this proposal and plan to work on.  Under prior NSF support we also
              accomplished research with several co-authors on some basic problems in
              operator theory, operator spaces, operator algebras and matrix optimization,
              and this leads to some further open problems and directions we plan to pursue. 
               Several graduate and undergraduate students arinvolved in this project. This
              grant also contains the NSF partial support of the annual Great Plains Operator
              Theory Symposium, a major mathematics research conference which rotates among a
              number of universities in the USA.
 


