Title       : RUI: Distribution of Primes and a Higher Correlation Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0070777

Award Number: 0070777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Goldston goldston@math.sjsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Many questions on primes can be addressed by the use of short divisor sum
              approximations. These sums arise in the circle method, but they can be used
              independently of the circle method. They may also be viewed as truncations of
              Ramanujan expansions. The main terms in many asymptotic formulas for primes
              result from summing these short divisor sums into a singular series. These
              singular series therefore also reflect the properties of primes, and it is
              often an interesting and non-trivial problem to evaluate  formulas involving
              singular series.   Starting in 1990, the principal investigator has been
              working on obtaining lower bounds for problems involving primes. Up to now all
              this work has been on the binary correlation of short divisor sum
              approximations for primes. The investigator and C. Yildirim intend to extend
              this earlier work to higher correlations, and apply the results to obtain
              unconditional lower bounds for higher moments of primes in short intervals. The
              method also has application to other problems in analytic number theory. In
              addition, some questions on power sums and other problems will be examined in
              collaboration with undergraduate and graduate students at San Jose State
              University.

The distribution of prime numbers was first studied by the
              Greeks over two thousand years ago. Many significant results have been proved,
              but many difficult problems remain to be solved. With computers one can verify
              many conjectures about the distribution of primes with startling precision, and
              yet proofs of these conjectures are beyond our current state of knowledge. The
              principal investigator has focused his research on the problem of proving that
              the gap between consecutive primes will frequently be much smaller than the
              average gap size, and will infinitely often be smaller than any fraction of
              this average gap size. The techniques used to study this problem come from many
              areas of mathematics, statistics, and physics. Because of the fundamental role
              primes play in mathematics, it is to be expected that progress in this area
              will have applications in other areas.
