Title       : Studies in Commutative Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a0070268

Award Number: 0070268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Helen G. Grundman                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anurag K. Singh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will work on some questions in the theory of commutative rings
              that arise from tight closure theory, the theory of intersection
              multiplicities, a study of local cohomology modules, and from the homological
              conjectures for local rings. In tight closure theory, there is a substantial
              focus on understanding the class of F-regular rings and on developing theorems
              for this class of rings.  The study of local cohomology modules addresses
              finiteness issues of these modules over regular rings of mixed characteristic,
              and another question that is related to the theory of solid closure.  Research
              on Hilbert-Kunz multiplicities and on the rigidity of the Tor functor will be
              carried out in continued collaboration with Claudia Miller. 

Commutative
              algebra is a field closely related to algebraic geometry:  while algebraic
              geometry focuses on the geometry of solutions sets of polynomial equations, in
              commutative algebra the main objects of study are certain functions on these
              solution sets.  The connections between algebra and geometry are largely due to
              the revolutionary work of Grothendieck, Serre and Zariski.  An active area of
              research in commutative algebra today is the theory of tight closure developed
              by Hochster and Huneke.  This theory provides stronger formulations of existing
              theorems, and brings together many seemingly unrelated problems. It also has
              strong connections with the study of singularities of geometric objects.  The
              theory of local cohomology was developed by Grothendieck who used it to obtain
              several striking results.  Local cohomology has applications to basic, and yet
              deep, questions such as determining the minimal number of polynomial equations
              needed to define an algebraic set.  It continues to develop a fascinating
              interaction with several other branches of mathematics. 

