Title       : Topics in Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0070523

Award Number: 0070523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $489420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Granville andrew@math.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for Granville's proposal.


This award will support the research of
              the investigator and several
graduate students on various topics in number
              theory.  In the last few years 
the investigator, in collaboration with
              Soundararajan, has been revisiting 
the central topic of mean values of
              multiplicative functions, and strengthening known results as well as adding
              several new perspectives. In particular they 
have shown that such questions
              are in some sense equivalent to problems about 
integral delay equations.
              Granville proposes continuing this work, particularly looking at the range of
              values taken and to solve some thorny optimization 
problems.  This, in turn,
              should give new results on known problems about 
values of (Dirichlet and
              Hasse-Weil) L-functions at 1, bounds on least
mth power residues, and perhaps
              even distribution of zeros of L-functions.
The investigator also proposes
              continuing his work, with Stark, on the 
connection between the abc-conjecture
              and Siegel zeros: On the one hand, 
looking further at Diophantine equations
              satisfied by modular functions;
on the other hand, with Tucker, looking at
              whether the unproved abc-conjecture 
can be replaced by a weaker but feasibly
              provable hypothesis.


The investigator, with collaborators, is looking at
              the finer aspects of the
distribution of multiplicative functions. The
              functions turn up in many 
different areas in mathematics, physics and
              cryptography.
The investigator recently showed how an understanding of such
              questions
is closely related to the seemingly unrelated area of `integral
              delay 
equations'' which are analyzed extensively in understanding
              how
various biological mechanisms work. Thus results and conjectures 
about
              mean values of multiplicative functions can be ``translated'' into
results and
              conjectures about integral delay equations, so that the 
perspectives of one
              field can be brought to bear on the other, and vice-versa.
This has already
              led to some new results and fresh questions in integral-delay
equations, and
              the investigator has been asked to present his ideas in a 
series of lectures
              at a major conference in that area, to stimulate further
interaction. In
              addition the investigator has been working with students, 
particularly from
              the Deep South, to get their PhDs, and obtain good positions 
in research,
              education, industry and government, with a training that will help 
them bring
              a fresh perspective to their future professions. This group was
recently
              ranked tenth in the US.


