Title       : Spectral and Transport Theory of Schrodinger Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0070755

Award Number: 0070755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Svetlana Jitomirskaya szhitomi@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research involves localization type effects for ergodic
              Schrodinger
operators, the general study of spectra and wave functions
              of
multidimensional Schrodinger operators, and also of the
              transport
phenomena of quasiperiodic operators and two-dimensional
              magnetic
operators in the integer quantum Hall regime. An important objective
              is to
develop nonperturbative methods of proving localization type effects
              for
Schrodinger operators with deterministic potentials. The other goal is
              to
study the relation between spectral and quantum-dynamical properties
              and
behavior of the generalized eigenfunctions, particularly outside
              the
localization range and in the multidimensional case. Another goal of
              the
proposed research is to study singular continuous spectrum that
              exhibits
critical behavior and/or anomalous transport, particularly for models
              where
it appears for critical values (or intervals) of the parameters.

 The
              proposed research is centered around the fundamental properties
of disordered
              systems that serve as models of systems with impurities.
Deterministic,
              particularly quasiperiodic, potentials are most often used
to model
              quasicrystals.  In order to be able to understand much of the
experimental
              data on quasicrystals, it is particularly important to
investigate the
              transport coefficients like the electrical and heat
conductivities of the
              microscopic models. Such an understanding is most
helpful for finding new
              materials with desired physical properties. This
may lead to various
              industrial applications (the first one nowadays being
the covering of pans
              replacing the conventional Tefal film).  Disordered
systems are also used in
              modeling many other micro and macro effects: from
quantum localization to
              earthquakes. Our research concerns the anomalous
spectral and diffusive
              properties of quasiperiodic and other deterministic
structures. The quantum
              Hall effect is since 1985 used by the National
Bureau of Standards to define
              the Fine Structure Constant (and hence the
electrical charge of an electron).
              It is still not well understood why the
experiment can be reproduced with a
              relative error of only $10^{-8}$. Our
research is concerned with a microscopic
              theory of the quantum Hall effect
that is aimed at getting deeper insights of
              this phenomena.

