Title       : Representations of Finite Groups and Integral Lattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a0070647

Award Number: 0070647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pham Huu Tiep tiep@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal ties together several areas of mathematics: finite groups of Lie
              
type, integral lattices and linear codes, and finite permutation groups. The
              
main unifying ingredient is the representation theory. The PI continues
              his
investigation on some problems on representation theory of finite groups
              of Lie 
type; progress on these problem will lead to important applications in
              the 
integral lattice theory and in the theory of finite primitive
              permutation
groups. The PI proposes to determine the complex representations
              of a finite
group of Lie type, which are irreducible modulo the defining
              characteristic.
He also intends to classify cross-characteristic
              representations of finite
groups of Lie type of low dimension. The PI then
              applies the results on these
two projects to achieve significant progress on a
              number of applications: the
Thompson-Gross problem on classifying globally
              irreducible lattices, the problem
of finding the minimum of Euclidean integral
              lattices, the ``lifting'' problem,
and the problem on maximality of certain
              quasi-simple subgroups of finite
classical groups.

The main area of
              research in this proposal is group theory and the
representation theory of
              groups of Lie type. Groups in mathematics grew out of
the notion of symmetry.
              The symmetries of an object in physics, chemistry, or
mathematics, are encoded
              by a group, and this group carries a lot of
important information about the
              structure of the object itself. The
representation theory allows one to study
              groups via their action on vector
spaces. It has fascinated mathematicians for
              a century and had
many important applications in physics and chemistry. Thus,
              the representation
theory of Lie groups played a vital role in quantum
              mechanics and in the theory 
of elementary particles. The finite analogs of
              Lie groups - finite groups of Lie
type - and their representations have
              already proved valuable in coding theory
and cryptography, and are expected to
              play an important role in the new era of
computers and communications. The
              PI's research is and will be mostly focused 
on the representation theory of
              this important class of groups and its 
applications. 
