Title       : RUI: Research in O-minimality and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0070743

Award Number: 0070743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles I. Steinhorn steinhorn@vassar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project deals with questions concerning o-minimality, extensions
              of
o-minimality, and classes of finite structures. Some of the problems having
              to do with o-minimality relate to expansions of archetypal o-minimal structures
              and structures whose domain has as its order type that of the real numbers.
              Other have as their focus abelian groups definable in o-minimal structures or
              the development of o-minimal analogues of differential and algebraic
              topological methods and tools. Problems concerning extensions of o-minimality
              have to do in particular with weak o-minimality, local o-minimality, and, in
              analogy with Morley rank, the development of a model theory for ordered
              structures of finite rank. The third main topic of the project involves classes
              of finite structures with dimension and measure. This work has as its aim the
              development of a model theory for classes of finite structures that is in
              analogy with mainstream model theory for infinite structures. The results
              obtained to date and the examples that have been found suggest that there is
              much to be done.

The research outlined above concerns model theory, one of
              the principal subfields of mathematical logic. Model theorists study properties
              of familiar mathematical structures that can be expressed in a formal
              mathematical language such as predicate logic. This distinctive point of view
              can provide insights and understanding into such structures that otherwise
              might prove elusive. One aspect of this project focuses on structures that
              include and behave in important ways like the ordered field of real numbers,
              that is, the real numbers together with the polynomial and algebraic functions
              that are studied in first-year calculus and describe many phenomena. Model
              theory has played a key role in many of the significant advances that have been
              made in the last ten years. These have deepened our understanding of familiar
              mathematical systems in such diverse areas of the mathematical sciences as the
              analysis and geometry of real functions, neural nets, and relational database
              theory. Applications also have been made in economics. A second principal
              aspect of the project deals with classes of finite structures. Finite
              structures in general are central to computer science: any database can be
              construed as a finite structure in the sense in which they are studied in here,
              and a particular class of finite structures called finite fields are especially
              important in cryptology.

