Title       : Nonlinear Equations, Weighted Norm Inequalities, and Best Constants in Harmonic
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0070623

Award Number: 0070623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89913              (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor Verbitsky igor@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:


The proposed research is concerned with the investigation of
              certain classes 
of nonlinear partial differential and integral equations,
              and
related weighted norm inequalities. A systematic use will be made of
              
function spaces intrinsically connected with the problems involved, dyadic
              
linear and nonlinear models, nonlinear potential theory, quasimetrics on
              
spaces of homogeneous and nonhomogeneous type (without the doubling
              
property), and other means of modern analysis. The main goal is to
              
characterize completely the solvability problem (i.e., find necessary and
              
matching sufficient conditions), and obtain sharp estimates for solutions of
              
nonlinear elliptic and parabolic
PDEs with very general coefficients at the
              lower order terms and data, as 
well as for nonlinear integral operators with
              general kernels.
Linear problems for operators of Schrodinger type with
              general potentials 
(possibly complex valued distributions) will be considered
              as well. A good 
control of the constants involved is an essential part of
              this study. In 
particular, a special attention will be paid to best constant
              inequalities 
which appear in related problems of harmonic analysis and
              operator theory.

Many questions considered in the proposed research are
              motivated by
studies in mathematical physics, control theory, and stochastic
              processes. 
As a result, sharp inequalities and criteria of solvability will
              be found 
for equations and operators which describe important phenomena with
              linear 
and nonlinear sources appearing in quantum physics, fluid flow, heat
              
transfer, and electromagnetism problems.



