Title       : U. S. - France (INRIA) Cooperative Research Improving the Efficiency of
               Manufacturing Systems by Integrating Production Control into Maintenance
               Policies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2000       
File        : a0070866

Award Number: 0070866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19932              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Fu mfu@isr.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 5918,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              00070866
Fu

This three-year award for U.S.-France collaboration in
              operations research involves Michael Fu of the University of Maryland, Xiaolan
              Xie and Nidhal Rezg of the French National Institute for Research in Computer
              Science and Engineering (INRIA) in Metz (Lorraine Province).  The research
              collaboration is aimed at the development of analytical and simulation-based
              models that address the reliability and operational performance of certain
              types of manufacturing systems, in particular, semiconductor fabrication
              facilities.  Unlike other types of manufacturing systems, the main sources of
              operational uncertainty in semiconductor facilities are the downtimes of
              machines.  Thus, preventive maintenance is crucial for efficient operations.  
              The investigators will develop theoretical models that take into account
              information from the state of the system in terms of production planning data
              or process control data.  The goal is to improve operational performance and
              find good maintenance policy by integrating these data. 

This award
              represents the U.S. side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National
              Institute for Research in Computer Science and Engineering (INRIA).  NSF will
              cover travel funds and living expenses of the U.S. investigator and graduate
              student.  INRIA will support the French researchers' visits to the United
              States.  The collaboration is interdisciplinary. U.S. and French teams
              represent expertise in manufacturing facility design, production planning,
              operations and systems research, and in both analytical and simulation-based
              models.  The U.S. investigator has expertise in stochastic optimization.  This
              is complemented by French expertise in modeling and analysis of manufacturing
              systems.   The project could provide new models for improving profitability and
              reliability of semiconductor fabrication facilities.

