Title       : CONFERENCE: 2000 FASEB Summer Conference on 'Protein Phosphatases' to be held
               July 23-28, 2000 in Copper Mountain, CO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0070731

Award Number: 0070731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna A. DePaoli-Roach   (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Neel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides partial support for a FASEB Summer Conference on Protein
              Phosphatases to be held from July 23 to July 28, 2000 at Copper Mountain,
              Colorado. This will mark the tenth anniversary of this meeting. At the dawn of
              a new millennium, the success of the previous conferences and the widely
              recognized role of these enzymes in regulation of many cellular functions amply
              justify the existence of such a conference.
Research on protein phosphatases
              is at an exciting and rapidly moving stage, revealing the fundamental
              importance of these enzymes in pathways that govern most aspects of cell life
              and death. It is now clear that phosphatases are equal partners with protein
              kinases and research on protein phosphatases is essential for our understanding
              of the control of cellular functions. Within the past few years, a large number
              of phosphatases and phosphatase regulatory/targeting subunits have been
              identified. A major focus of current research is to understand their
              structure-function relationships and the multiplicity of ways they are involved
              in signaling.
The purpose of this conference is to bring together
              investigators studying various aspects of protein phosphatases and to
              disseminate the most recent information in the field. There is a constant
              infusion of new researchers from various disciplines into this area and the
              2000 conference will be important for a focused presentation and discussion of
              the most recent advances in the genetics, biochemistry and function of protein
              phosphatases. The Conference will consist of eight sessions, each with at least
              six speakers, selected from investigators who have made important recent
              contributions and from submitted abstracts. This will help to ensure inclusion
              of young investigators, women and minorities as primary participants. In
              addition, two poster sessions will be organized.


