Title       : Free Probability and Problems in Operator Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0070558

Award Number: 0070558
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87171              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Dykema ken.dykema@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Title:  Free probability theory and problems in operator algebras

Technical
              description: The project involves study certain von Neumann algebras
              and
C*-algebras using the techniques of free probability theory.  Some of
              the
problems on von Neumann algebras to be considered are the isomorphism
              problem
for free group factors, as well as related classification problems
              for
amalgamated free products of von Neumannn algebras and for type III von
              Neumann
algebras arising as free products with respect to non-tracial
              states.
Regarding C*-algebras related to free products, the project is to
              study
properties like simplicity, stable rank and pure infiniteness, and to
              attempt
to find Voiculescu's topological entropy of certain automorphisms of
              them.  In
a different direction, the project involves the study of commutators
              of
elements from ideals of infinite type II von Neumann algebra factors;
              in
particular, to characterize which elements are commutators in terms of,
              for
instance, generalized singular numbers.

Non-technical description: In
              the mid 1980's, Voiculescu discovered (or
created, depending on your
              perspective), a new sort of probbility theory
which is quite analogous to
              usual probability theory, except that the
usual notion of independence is
              replaced by freeness, which is exhibited
by certain noncommuting random
              variables.  In fact, freeness is related
to and inspired by the combinatorics
              of free groups, which are groups
with "maximal noncommutativity."  In the last
              decade and a half, free
probability has been shown to be a fundamental new
              theory, which touches
on diverse areas of mathematics and physics, including
              random matrices,
combinatorics and operator theory.  For example, freeness
              provides a
deep and satisfying explanation of the appearance of Wigner's
              semicircle
law in random matrices, and has proven very useful for the further
              study
of random matrices.  The natural context for free probability theory
              is
noncommutative von Neumann algebras and C*-algebras, because the
              full
power of spectral analysis can be brought to bear.  The project is
              to
elucidate the structure of C*-algebras and von Neumann algebras related
to
              free probability theory.  Successful completion of this research will
be both
              and application and an elucidation of free probability theory
and will deepen
              our understanding of C*-algebras and von Neumann
algebras.  Von Neumann
              algebras and C*-algebras were first considered by
von Neumann and,
              respectively, Gel'fand and Naimark, in the 1930s and
1940s. They are natural
              contexts for noncommutative analogues of
classical analysis, and they thus
              arise naturally in the mathematical
theory of quantum mechanics.  Moreover,
              noncommutative methods are
increasingly being used to study classically
              commutative problems in
mathematics --- witness the Jones polynomial used to
              distinguish knots,
and Connes' noncommutative geometric methods used to study
              fractals.


