Title       : The Structure of Crossed Product C*-algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0070776

Award Number: 0070776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98943              (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Christopher Phillips ncp@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Phillips

The Principal Investigator has recently proved that
              crossed products of compact manifolds by minimal diffeomorphisms can be
              represented as direct limits of systems of recursive subhomogeneous C*-algebras
              with no dimension growth. He proposes to attempt to generalize this result, by
              relaxing the differentiability assumptions (many interesting minimal
              homeomorphisms are not smooth, or not even on manifolds), and by considering
              more general groups (such as the real numbers or the direct sum of several
              copies of the integers). He also proposes to apply the direct limit
              decomposition, by attempting to prove a classification theorem for such direct
              limits, and by using the results it implies about K-theory to investigate the
              connections between dynamics and C*-algebras for interesting minimal
              homeomorphisms. The Principal Investigator further proposes to use methods of
              free probability to study isomorphism questions for C*-algebras related to the
              reduced C*-algebras of free groups.

This project concerns the classification
              of simple C*-algebras.  C*-algebras are a fascinating and beautiful part of
              mathematics in their own right, and moreover they have surprising applications
              to
other parts of mathematics (such as geometry and topology) and even to
              parts of physics (such as quantum mechanics and statistical mechanics).  For
              these reasons, and others, one wants to identify and describe all C*-algebras.
              Without some limitations, this task is presently hopeless, and my project
              focuses on C*-algebras which are "simple" (that is, the usual way of taking
              them apart into smaller pieces doesn't work), and also "not too large" in
              several other technical senses. Under these limitations, some classification
              theorems have been proved. That is, one can identify, label, and describe the
              objects in certain classes of C*-algebras, sort of like the periodic table of
              the elements or like the naming of the species of living things. In one
              particular case of
interest (the "stably finite" case), the classification
              results have been proved for simple C*-algebras arising from one particular
              construction ("direct limits"), but the most interesting source of examples is
              a different construction ("crossed products"). In a sense, the wrong algebras
              have been classified. The aim of this project is to show that some algebras of
              the more interesting kind are actually the same as some of the ones already
              classified, or are at least close enough that the old classification methods
              from direct limits might still be applied; and to extend those methods far
              enough to actually classify the algebras of the more interesting type.


