Title       : Resonant Ultrasound Spectroscopy of Solids: Hydrogen-Metal and Other Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2000  
File        : a0070808

Award Number: 0070808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Leisure leisure@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
0070808
Leisure

In this project Resonant Ultrasonic Spectroscopy (RUS)
              will be used to study the properties of materials usually shaped into spheres,
              cylinders or parallelopipeds. RUS is based on the measurement of the
              vibrational eigenmodes of such samples.  The RUS spectrum yields the full set
              of elastic constants  as well as the ultrasonic attenuation of the material
              composing the sample.  Very small size samples can be studied with this
              tecnique.  A major thrust of this work will be the study of hydrogen-metal
              systems including quasicrystalline, Laves-phase and rare-earth materials. 
              Experiments on the quasicrystalline systems Ti-Zr-Ni, Al-Pd-Mn and Zn-Hg-Ho
              will attempt to obtain information about H diffusion  in a non-periodic
              potential and use hydrogen as a probe of the local symmetry.  RUS will be
              expected to contribute to the clarification of the hydrogen hopping phenomenon
              by providing data complementary  to those obtained by conventional NMR and
              neutron scattering experiments.  Experiments in the millikelvin range on the
              hcp rare-earth type metals and Laves-phase materials will search for the
              resonant and relaxation effects of hydrogen transitions on the low-temperature
              acoustic properties.  The results will be correlated with modern theories of
              dissipative tunneling in a double-well potential.  RUS will also be applied to
              the study of phase transitions.  Elastic constant data for Ce-based magnetic
              compounds near their magnetic transition temperatures (2-30K) should provide
              valuable thermodynamic information related to the volume dependence of the
              competing Kondo and RKKY interactions.  The moduli of Mg2NiH4 will be studied
              to gain insight into the nature of the change to an apparent conducting state.
              This research is facilitated by the involvement of graduate and undergraduate
              students. Their training in a contemporary area of condensed matter physics and
              materials science will prepare them to enter the workforce during the next few
              decades of this Century. 
%%%
A technique called Resonant Ultrasound
              Spectroscopy (RUS) will be employed to study the elastic vibrations of solids. 
              These measurements provide data about the rigidity/stiffness of the material. 
              Only small samples are required, their small size implying that the vibrational
              frequencies are in the ultrasound, i.e., inaudible range of frequencies. The
              method will be applied to the study of hydrogen in metals.  Hydrogen in metals
              is of both fundamental and practical interest.   Practical uses of
              hydrogen-in-metal systems include their employment in batteries and their use
              for hydrogen storage.  High mobility of the hydrogen within the metal is
              usually required for successful applications.  The addition of hydrogen to
              metals affects the elasticity of these materials.  These changes in the elastic
              properties of the hydrogen containing metals are studied by the RUS technique. 
              Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this research.  They
              will thereby acquire knowledge and skills in experimental and theoretical
              condensed matter physics and materials science that will prepare them to be
              productive members of the workforce during the next few decades of this
              Century. 
***


