Title       : Collaborative Research: Graphs on Surfaces and Related Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a0070430

Award Number: 0070430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin Thaler                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaoya Zha xzha@mtsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middle Tennessee St Univ
	      1500 Greenland Drive
	      Murfreesboro, TN  37132    615/898-5005

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative Research: Graphs on Surfaces and Related Problems	       Mark N.
              Ellingham and Xiaoya Zha    The investigators study properties of graphs
              embedded on surfaces, together with some closely related problems.  The
              proposed research addresses five types of problems.  First, traversability
              problems for graphs embedded on surfaces, or with related conditions, are
              studied.  In particular, the existence of k-walks and k-trails, ways to
              traverse a graph visiting each vertex at least once and at most k times, are
              investigated. Second, the investigators study the spectral radius (largest
              eigenvalue of the adjacency matrix) of graphs embedded on surfaces,
              particularly the plane; this is an important parameter with connections to the
              number of walks in the graph.  Third, the investigators examine the
              relationship between a surface and the connectivity of graphs that embed on
              that surface in particularly natural ways, as genus embeddings.  Fourth, the
              existence of graph embeddings with nice properties, such as every closed face
              being homeomorphic to a closed disk, and the relationship of such embeddings to
              decomposition problems such as the Cycle Double Cover Conjecture, are studied. 
              Fifth, the investigators are concerned with the problem of cutting a surface
              with an embedded graph into smaller nontrivial pieces along a noncontractible
              cycle in the graph, as results in this area would give a very promising tool
              for studying many problems in the area of graph embeddings.    Graphs are
              abstract mathematical models of networks.   In the modern world, the study of
              communication and transportation networks is becoming ever more important.  In
              particular, many real-world networks are planar, meaning that they can be drawn
              on a piece of paper without any links crossing.  How close a network is to
              being planar is related to many of its useful properties, and mathematicians
              study this by looking at so called embeddings of graphs on surfaces.  The
              useful properties examined by this research include traversability (how can we
              travel around a network, visiting each node, in a more or less efficient way -
              this is the motivation for such problems as the Traveling Salesman Problem),
              how well a network works as a traffic network (this involves a number known as
              the spectral radius, which has been of interest to geographers), and
              connectivity (resistance to disruption by attack).  Besides studying the useful
              properties of networks, this research also develops new tools for studying such
              properties.  Networks drawn on a surface are easier to work with if none of the
              regions into which the drawing divides the surface touch themselves, and the
              investigators are interested in the question of whether networks can always be
              drawn in this nice way.  The investigators are also interested in the question
              of whether networks drawn on a surface can be cut apart in a natural way to
              give networks drawn on less complicated surfaces.  Both of these questions
              should lead to better understanding of networks drawn on surfaces, and hence to
              ways to examine useful properties of such networks.
