Title       : Metaplectic Forms and Cryptography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0070628

Award Number: 0070628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84084              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Banks bbanks@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              			William D. Banks

	This research will focus on two somewhat distinct areas
              of number theory.  First, the investigator will continue to study the
              Whittaker-Fourier coefficients of metaplectic forms, with a view to seeking new
              arithmetical and analytical applications in number theory, such as improved
              average value results for L-series attached to n-th order Hecke characters, and
              generalizations of the Bump-Hoffstein conjectures for L-functions on GL(n). 
              Second, the investigator and his colleagues will continue their joint research
              in number of areas of cryptography, including the development of efficient
              identification schemes, new techniques of encryption, and further results in
              the theory of pseudorandom functions.

	Automorphic forms (such as those
              associated to elliptic curves) play an important and central role in modern
              number theory, allowing the powerful tools of complex analysis to come to bear
              on arithmetical questions.  Metaplectic forms are a natural (though more
              mysterious) generalization of automorphic forms whose construction intimately
              depends on very deep results of class field theory (in particular, the higher
              order reciprocity laws).  While the study of metaplectic forms in still in its
              infancy, the results of this proposed research will prove to be very exciting. 
              The second part of this proposal focuses on cryptography, the rapidly
              developing field of mathematics/computer science that deals primarily with
              information security.  The investigator and his colleagues plan to continue
              their work on identification schemes for use with credit/smart cards,
              encryption algorithms, and questions related to the theory of pseudorandom
              functions.


