Title       : Infrared Hall Effect in High Temperature Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0070959

Award Number: 0070959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Dennis Drew hdrew@physics.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              

This project from an established professor at the University of Maryland
              consists of infrared (IR) and microwave magneto-optical studies of strongly
              correlated transition metal oxide metals, concentrating on the cuprate high
              temperature superconductors. Systematic investigations of the infrared Hall
              effect in thin film samples will be made using recently developed highly
              sensitive polarization modulation techniques to detect the small
              magneto-optical signals. The complex frequency-dependent magnetoconductivity
              tensor will be determined. In the studies in the normal state of high
              temperature superconductors the objectives are to expand on preliminary IR Hall
              data and past magneto-transport work that shows that the zero field response
              and the Hall response of these materials are governed by different relaxation
              processes. In the superconducting state the main goal is to provide the
              phenomenology that will allow an understanding of vortex dynamics in high Tc
              superconductors. The proposed studies break new ground in superconductivity
              research and they hold the promise of opening new paths for the science and
              technology of superconductors. They represent studies of the carrier dynamics
              in these materials which show anomalous non-Fermi liquid behavior. They cover
              the frequency range that corresponds to the important interaction energies in
              these materials. The results may provide important new insights into the
              mechanisms of high temperature superconductivity. The program involves the
              training of undergraduates, graduate students and post-docs in IR materials
              physics. 
%%%
This project from an established professor at the University of
              Maryland consists of magneto-optical studies of materials with strongly
              interacting electrons, concentrating on the cuprate high temperature
              superconductors. The measurements will be made at high magnetic fields and
              cryogenic temperatures. The infrared (IR) Hall effect will be measured in thin
              film samples using recently developed highly sensitive infrared polarization
              modulation techniques. The studies probe the electrical properties of these
              materials that appear highly anomalous in comparison with traditional metals
              and superconductors. They break new ground in high temperature
              superconductivity research and they hold the promise of opening new paths for
              the science and technology of these materials. They cover the frequency range
              corresponding to the important interaction energies of the electrons in these
              materials. The results may provide important new insights into the mechanisms
              of high temperature superconductivity and in the understanding of materials
              with strongly interacting electrons in general. The program involves the
              training of undergraduates, graduate students and post-docs in IR materials
              physics. 
***
 

