Title       : Micro-Fluidic Control Based on Acoustic Streaming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0070108

Award Number: 0070108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209369             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Frampton ken.frampton@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy S. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
PI: Professor Kenneth D Frampton, Vanderbilt University 
Proposal Number: 
              0070108 
Proposal Title:  Micro-Fluidic Control based on Acoustic Streaming
              Project Abstract:
This research program is focused on the development of a
              micro-fluidic control device, based on the phenomenon of acoustic streaming. 
              Acoustic streaming is a steady fluid motion created when high amplitude
              acoustic waves propagate through a dissipative fluid. The dissipation of energy
              through viscous effects, combined with nonlinear hydrodynamic coupling, results
              in a steady momentum being imparted to the fluid.  The primary function of this
              device (and the primary focus of the research) is pumping, although the device
              will be capable of performing a variety of other tasks critical to
              micro-fluidic control including metering, valving, mixing, fluid property
              monitoring and suspended particle manipulation.  The research program consists
              of simultaneous computational and experimental investigations.   The
              computational investigation is focused on the development of nonlinear fluid
              dynamic models used to reveal effects of fundamental system parameters on
              acoustic streaming.  The experimental investigation is focused on prototype
              development and experimental verification of the computational results.  This
              work promises to have a significant technological impact at many levels. 
              First, the understanding of the fundamental physics  surrounding acoustic
              streaming will be enhanced.  Secondly, this approach to micro-fluidic control
              has many advantages over anything yet postulated.  These advantages include the
              development of a solid state micro-fluidic pump possessing superior
              manufacturability and reliability as well as a micro-fluidic control device
              capable of performing multiple fluid handling functions.  Finally, the creation
              of an effective, reliable micro-fluidic control device promises to open many
              other possible applications for MEMS technology such as microprocessor design,
              pharmaceutical products and security/defense capabilities.



