Title       : Distributions and Representations: The Kirillov Conjecture, Special Values Of
               L-functions and Fourier-Jacobi Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0070762

Award Number: 0070762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74799              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ehud M. Baruch baruch@math.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his collaborators study several problems in
              the
representation theory of reductive groups and its applications to
              number
theory. The first problem is to prove the Kirillov conjecture which
              states
that every irreducible unitary representation of Gl(n,R) or
              GL(n,C)
remains irreducible when restricted to a certain subgroup. The
              second
problem is to find a formula relating fourier coefficients of
              half
integral weight modular forms with special values of L-functions
              of
integral weight modular forms. This formula generalizes a
              classical
formula of Kohnen and Zagier and is different from a formula
              given
by Waldspurger. Other problems which are considered are the study
              of
Bessel distributions and Bessel functions for quasi-split groups and
              the
study of Fourier Jacobi models for representations of symplectic
              and
unitary groups. The line of attack on these problems is to study
              certain
invariant distributions and the spherical functions associated to them
              via
regularity theorems. 

Unitary representations of semisimple Lie groups
              were studied by the famous 
physicists Wigner and Dirac among others in an
              attempt to understand and
develop the theory of quantum mechanics. Later,
              mathematicians such as Gelfand
and Harish Chandra developed and rigorized this
              beautiful theory. Many
applications were found to physics, geometry, number
              theory and other
fields. The purpose of the current proposal is to advance the
              understanding 
of representation theory and to continue to explore the
              connections
between representation theory and number theory. 
