Title       : Harmonic analysis and global invariants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0070742

Award Number: 0070742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Stanton stanton@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:
One of the themes visible in recent developments in mathematics is
              the cross-fertilization of ideas across different mathematical disciplines. As
              an example I mention interplay between topology and analysis in the computation
              of  topological properties of a manifold. Another example involving number
              theory and topology and analysis can be found in the explanation of the leading
              analytic behavior of L-functions from number theory in terms of topological
              information from periods of topological cycles computed using harmonic
              analysis.
Similar interdisciplinary research has been the main focus of recent
              research of the PI. Several projects have been concerned with the evaluation or
              determination of topological/geometrical properties of locally symmetric
              manifolds either with harmonic analysis techniques or through leading behaviour
              of geometric zeta functions. This theme continues in the present proposal.
              Joint projects have been begun to extend from Hermitian locally symmetric
              spaces to their "real forms" the construction of geometric zeta functions, and
              the identification of their leading behaviour in geometric terms. Part of this
              work involves developing refined information concerning various
              compatifications of symmetric spaces and then encapsulating it in a generating
              function of geometric origins. It is expected that torsion-like invariants will
              appear in this investigation but it is hoped that a better understanding of
              subtle characteristic classes like the R-class may result.   
A new direction
              taken by the PI is toward nilpotent orbits in semisimple Lie algebras. An
              approach to an algebraic proof of the existence of hyperKahler metrics on these
              orbits is underway. Also a realization of the quantization of the minimal orbit
              by means of Dirac operators has been started. The use of techniques from
              twistor theory play an important role in these investigations. 


