Title       : Polynomials and Exponential Sums: Extremal Problems, Density, Inequalities, and
               Zeros
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0070826

Award Number: 0070826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74539              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamas Erdelyi terdelyi@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract
                           


   Polynomials pervade mathematics.
              Virtually every branch of mathematics,
from algebraic number theory and
              algebraic geometry to applied analysis,
Fourier analysis, and computer
              science, has its corpus of theory arising 
from the study of polynomials. This
              project intends to study polynomial  
inequalities and their applications in
              classical analysis, approximation 
theory, orthogonal polynomials, and number
              theory. The proposed research 
is about polynomials in a general sense, so it
              includes Chebyshev spaces, 
Markov spaces, Descartes systems, Muntz
              polynomials, rational function 
spaces, as well as polynomials with various
              constraints such as restricted 
zeros, integer coefficients, and nonnegative
              coefficients in various bases.  
The project continues several years of
              successful work on a variety of 
topics and describes various new directions. 
                    

   The polynomial is one of the most basic concepts of mathematics.
              Throughout
history people have found problems concerning polynomials
              especially fascinating.  
Each of the ``three famous problems'' in the
              ``Heroic Age'' dealt with zeros of 
polynomials: squaring the circle,
              duplicating the cube, and trisecting an  
angle. Historically, questions
              relating to polynomials, for example, the solution
of polynomial equations,
              gave rise to some of the most important problems of
the day. Besides the
              natural intellectual interest in them, polynomials, and in
particular extremal
              problems involving polynomials, arise not only in
almost every field of
              mathematics, but also in other sciences, especially 
in engineering. However,
              it is often the case that polynomials related to a practical 
problem belong
              to a restricted class. Depending on the nature of the 
problem, some
              additional pieces of information on the polynomial may be known. 
For filter
              design, polynomials with coefficients from {-1,0,1} are very useful, 
because,
              if they are used, then the filter can be implemented without  
the use of
              multiplications; their implementation requires only additions 
and
              subtractions. This reduces the cost of implementation. The problem is 
to find
              such polynomials which have a ``lowpass'' behavior on the unit 
circle of the
              complex plane. Roughly, that is, they approximate 1 in a 
neighborhood of 1
              and approximate 0 in a neighborhood of -1. The project plans  
to study
              extremal properties of polynomials with coefficients from {-1,0,1}
{0,1}, and
              {-1,1}. Unimodular polynomials (when the coefficients are complex numbers 
of
              modulus 1) are also important in engineering. In some other problems related
              
to physics, in particular electrostatics, information about the distribution
              of  
the zeros of the polynomial is known. ``Gaped'' polynomials
              (polynomials
with a large number of zero coefficients) are used to analyze,
              for example,
the time-optimal boundary controls for the one-dimensional heat
              equation. 
The proposal intends to explore further applications of polynomial
              inequalities
as well as to offer a systematic study of naturally arising
              questions regarding 
polynomials subject to various constraints.  


