Title       : Cardinal Characteristics and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0070723

Award Number: 0070723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102869             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas R. Blass ablass@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Recent work in the theory of cardinal characteristics of the
              continuum has indicated that one can get more detailed information by working,
              not with the cardinal characteristics themselves, but with certain relations
              associated with them.  This applies especially in cases where these relations
              are Borel sets. Part of the planned research concerns the question "Which
              cardinal characteristics are associated with Borel relations?"  For many
              characteristics the answer is known to be positive; for others it appears to be
              negative, but it isn't yet known to be negative for any particular
              characteristic.  The investigator hopes to close this gap by proving that
              certain specific characteristics are not associated with Borel relations.  A
              second aspect of the planned research concerns the sequential composition of
              relations, which occurs in many theorems and proofs about cardinal
              characteristics.  A priori, sequential compositions cannot be Borel relations,
              but the investigator intends to extend the theory of Borel relations, using
              tools from topos theory, so as to cover sequential composition.  The research
              also includes questions relating computability theory to cardinal
              characteristics.  Finally, the investigator also plans to study the use of the
              groupwise density number (a characteristic introduced some years ago by
              Laflamme and the investigator) in partition theorems.

Cardinal
              characteristics of the continuum constitute a significant area of contemporary
              research in set theory. Not only are they of interest for their own sake, but
              for the last two decades they have played a role in applications of
              set-theoretic methods to general topology.  More recently, there have been
              applications (including some due to the investigator) to other parts of
              mathematics, particularly algebra.  The investigator and graduate students will
              extend this theory in several directions.  One direction concerns connections
              with classical descriptive set theory, dealing with relatively easily definable
              relations involving real numbers.  A second direction connects this theory with
              recursion theory, the study of what is (and what is not) computable in
              principle.  A third direction establishes connections with combinatorial
              information about infinite sets and structures.

