Title       : Rigidity of Quotient Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a0070798

Award Number: 0070798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23933              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilijas Farah   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project to be undertaken is a research of quotients of structures based on
              the set of real numbers. Certain categories of such quotients exhibit a strong
              permanence property: a structure reducible to another  one is either very
              simple, or it inherits characteristic properties of the more complex structure.
              Via a theory of liftings previously developed by the investigator, this
              phenomenon is now well understood for some  classes of groups and Boolean
              algebras, in the contexts of both decriptive and combinatorial set theory. (The
              former corresponding to the situation in which we study only the simply
              definable sets of real numbers and the latter corresponding to the situation in
              which we accept the Axiom of Choice and study arbitrary sets of reals in an
              appropriate ambient theory.) The investigator plans to further this research
              into the realm of Borel equivalence relations induced by Polish group actions. 
              An example of an important problem that may yield to such a technique is an
              isolation of a simple basis for turbulent orbit equivalence relations.
              

Quotient of a mathematical structure is formed by identifying its elements
              that differ "in an inessential way."  Different applications require different
              understanding of what is "inessential," and therefore single structure gives
              rise to a multitude of quotients with rather  diverse properties. Some of them
              are reducible to the original structure, but the resulting quotient is
              frequently, yet somewhat paradoxically, much more complex than the underlying
              space.   One of the goals of this project is in finding a simple basis for a 
              class of quotients corresponding to the new notion of  "magnitude" introduced
              in order to study difficulties of classification problems in mathematics and
              extensively studied during the last decade.  Basis is a set, typically small,
              of objects from a given class that  are "critical" in the sense that every
              object reduces one from the basis. Canonical objects consisting the basis are
              easier to understand than the arbitrary "generic" objects, yet the intrinsic
              properties of the latter are reflected in the former. Therefore the basic
              objects provide a paradigm for studying the whole class.   

