Title       : Interacting Particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0070465

Award Number: 0070465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Liggett tml@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This research addresses several problems in the area known as interacting
              particle systems, and deals primarily with the exclusion process and spin
              systems. The first problem involves relationships between symmetric exclusion
              processes and negative correlation inequalities. This would be analogous to the
              important known connections between positive correlations and spin systems. The
              second attempts to understand the way in which local changes in the dynamics of
              the asymmetric exclusion process can have global effects. The third problem is
              to determine whether (and when) adding a large amount of a symmetric exclusion
              interaction to an ergodic one dimensional spin system can render the combined
              process nonergodic. The final one is to study reversible stochastic infection
              models on random or inhomogeneous trees.
	Interacting particle systems is a
              branch of probability theory that studies random models for situations in which
              there is a large number of individuals (or particles, cars, molecules, cells,
              bacteria, messages in a computer network,...) that interact in various ways.
              Models of this type arise in many different areas of science, as indicated in
              the parenthetical list above. The exclusion process has been used to model
              particle motion, computer networks, traffic flow, and issues related to
              DNA-RNA. Spin systems have been used to model magnetism, spread of infection,
              and economic systems among others. The main issue in this area of research is
              to understand how the local evolution rules affect the long time global
              behavior of the system. This project will contribute to this understanding in a
              number of ways.
