Title       : An Automated DNA Sequencer and Related Equipment for Multidisciplinary
               Biological Studies at Florida State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a0070316

Award Number: 0070316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don R. Levitan levitan@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Piotr G. Fajer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura R. Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Ross Ellington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Levitan

New equipment and software will enhance the productivity and
              extend the capabilities of the Florida State University Sequencing Facility, a
              core facility that services the research needs of 33-plus users from diverse
              disciplines in the biological sciences. An Applied Biosystems (ABI) PRISM  377
              Automated DNA Sequencer will supplement the current instrument, a ten-year old
              ABI Model 373A. The new sequencer will not only permit a larger number of
              samples to be sequenced and processed in less time and with greater accuracy,
              but it will also permit DNA fragment (e.g., RAPD, AFLP, and microsatellite)
              analysis, an operation that is presently unavailable with the configuration of
              our current machine. Additional sequencing-related instrumentation and software
              is as follows: (1) upgrades in the form of equipment and software that will
              extend the capabilities of both old and new ABI DNA sequencers; (2) a
              Mastercycler gradient thermal cycler that will permit simultaneous
              cycle-sequencing of DNA templates requiring different primer annealing
              temperatures; (3) a Macintosh G4 PowerPC server to store DNA sequence and
              fragment output, and software that will permit remote access to data and
              sequence-analysis programs by multiple users; (4) Macintosh- and PC-format
              licenses for simultaneous access to the Sequencher Sequence Analysis Program by
              up to 12 users; (5) color printers and CD read/write ROMs to support computers
              in the FSU Sequencing Facility and the Macintosh G4 server; (6) a digital
              gel-imaging and documentation system that is more sensitive and versatile than
              our current system and one that will facilitate the detection of low-yield DNA
              samples for subsequent analysis on the ABI 377 Sequencer.

This equipment
              will positively impact a remarkably diverse body of research conducted by seven
              major users, 26 additional faculty users, and their graduate students by more
              than doubling the present sequencing capacity of the core facility and for the
              first time permitting automated DNA fragment analysis. Current sequencing
              projects address questions in evolutionary biology and systematics, structural
              biology, cellular biology, microbial ecology, muscle physiology, neurobiology
              and genetics.

The major benefits to be gained from this instrumentation are:
              (1) an increase in the timely acquisition of data at lower cost (e.g., more DNA
              samples per gel, more nucleotides read per sample, more accurate gel-tracking,
              more sensitive sample detection, and shorter electrophoresis times); (2) a
              faster and more efficient means of data handling, storage and retrieval; (3) a
              more flexible, efficient and user-friendly sequence-analysis platform; (4) the
              capability to perform new research methodologies (e.g., automated DNA fragment
              analysis) on-site; and (5) better quantification and quality-assessment of
              PCR-amplification products and sequencing templates. 

FSU is committed to
              upscale its research mission and a substantial number of new biology faculty
              will be hired in the near future. The instrumentation upgrade is necessary to
              attract high-quality faculty applicants, to provide graduate students the
              experience of working with state-of-the-art technology, and to accommodate the
              present demand and anticipated increase in automated DNA sequencing-related
              research.




