Title       : Operators on Hilbert Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0070675

Award Number: 0070675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl M. Pearcy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract :
   
 In broad terms, the purpose of this project is to increase our
              knowledge about
linear operators acting on a complex, separable, infinite
              dimensional Hilbert space.
The proposer plans to continue work that was done
              under prior NSF grants, using
results and techniques that were obtained in the
              recent past by the proposer, his
coauthors, and his students, to accomplish
              this. In particular, the proposer will
work on  the invariant subspace problem
              for various classes of operators such
as the Lomonosov-amenable operators, the
              sub-n-normal operators, the contractions
with spectral radius one, and the
              power bounded operators. These classes are more
general than some others in
              which the proposer has been instrumental in the solution
of the invariant
              subspace problem.
    Operators on Hilbert space may be thought of as the
              natural generalization of
finite complex matrices, and such matrices play an
              important role presently in
the solution of many problems in the real world
              such as signal processing, populationstudies, various types of optimization
              procedures, etc. But the natural mathematical
setting in which to cast certain
              problems in computing, quantum physics, nuclear
fuel processing, etc. is in
              the more general setting of operators on Hilbert space.
And there is ample
              evidence to show that knowledge about such operators, obtained
from a purely
              mathematical investigation, very frequently is useful in resolving
real-world
              problems of the sort mentioned above. This project aims to increase
such basic
              knowledge about operators.


