Title       : Banach Spaces: Theory and Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a0070456

Award Number: 0070456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Schlumprecht   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

This proposal contains several open problems in Geometrical
              Functional Analysis. 
Furthermore it is intended to applyconcepts of
              Functional Analysis to solve
questions in Financial Mathematics, in
              particularin the theory of option  
pricing. A long standing open question in
              Operator Theory asks whether or
not there exist Banach spaces on which every
              operator has an invariant subspace.   
In order to solve this problem the
              author intends to use and to extend methods 
which led to the construction of
              spaces on which every operator is a singular 
perturbation of a multiple of
              the identity.  In recent years the notion of 
asymptotic properties of Banach
              spaces  and their connection to isomorphic 
properties gained increasing
              attention.  Such properties are  for example the 
recently introduced notion
              of uniform asymptotic convexity and 
uniform asymptotic smoothness. The author
              of this proposal intends
to find sufficient and necessary isomorphic
              properties admitting
uniform asymptotic convex and smooth renormings. In a
              joint work with R. Gardner 
and  A. Koldobsky the author applied concepts of
              Harmonic Analysis to find 
connections between certain extremal properties of
              convex bodies and higher 
derivatives of their section functions.  The author
              intends to explore this path 
further to get more inside on other extremal
              problems.  A central question in 
Finance is to find fair prices of options
              contingent to an underlying security. 
Many results in this area  rely on
              tools developed in Stochastic Calculus as 
well as Functional Analysis. The
              author intends to investigate the problem of 
robustness of option pricing,
              i.e. the continuous dependence of the option
price on the underlying stock
              model.


Banach spaces and their geometry are studied since they provide the
              natural 
framework for studying dynamical systems, differential equations,
              and,
as discovered recently,  the pricing of financial assets. The proposed
              projects  
deal with problems on the geometry of Banach spaces, operators
              between them, and 
applications to the mathematical understanding of
              finance.


