Title       : Representations of Finite Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a0070630

Award Number: 0070630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60948              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Boltje boltje@math.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for R. Boltje's NSF Proposal 0070630

1. The principal investigator
              is doing research in the field of representation theory of finite groups.  More
              precisely, he works on questions related to the conjectures of Alperin, Dade,
              and Broue.  These conjectures state that certain invariants of a finite group
              and a fixed prime number can be determined by the same invariants of subgroups
              which are again related to that prime.  The first conjectures are concerned
              with invariants that are integers, whereas the third conjecture predicts
              equivalences of categories.  The first two conjectures and consequences of the
              third have been verified for a convincing number of examples.  It is likely
              that these three conjectures are consequences of a single feature which is
              still hidden behind the scene.  Probably more important than solving these
              particular conjectures would be the discovery of this feature.  The principal
              investigator works on general ideas of how to approach these conjectures,
              partially in collaboration with B. K"ulshammer.  A graduate student is involved
              in this effort by writing computer programs which will either discard or give
              more evidence to the applicability of one of the suggested approaches.

2.
              The principal investigator studies mysterious coincidences in the
              representation theory of groups which have been discovered about fifteen years
              ago but could not be explained so far.  This research is not aimed at immediate
              applications outside mathematics.  However, in the history of the interplay
              between mathematics and other sciences, in particular physics, it is a repeated
              pattern that theories and results which were considered as important within the
              edifice of mathematics became precisely what was needed in the other sciences
              in order to describe our real world.  For example, group representations which
              have been studied a century ago became the right tool to describe particles in
              nuclear physics.


