Title       : Quantum Statistical Mechanics of Lattice Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0070774

Award Number: 0070774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruno L. Nachtergaele bxn@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Nachtergaele will work on a variety of problems in quantum
              statistical 
mechanics. In a first group of problems he will study quantum
              spin systems
as models for magnetic materials. The main focus here is on
              equilibrium
and non-equilibrium properties of domain walls and other
              structures
such as droplets. With Messager, he proposes a new quantum
              solid-on-solid 
model for the 111 interface in the Heisenberg XXZ ferromagnet.
              For this 
model the stability of the interface at strictly positive
              temperatures will 
be studied. The universality of fluctuations of interfaces
              will be investigated 
in a class of one-dimensional models. Another goal is to
              prove the existence 
of droplets in quantum spin models at zero temperature
              and to make first steps 
towards the study of their dynamics. In continuum
              quantum statistical mechanics
Nachtergaele will work on the derivation of the
              Euler equations from the
Schroedinger dynamics of interacting fermions, and on
              a characterization of 
the various types of Bose condensation.  The latter is
              a project in
collaboration with Zagrebnov and Bru. The first is work already
              begun with 
HT Yau.
 
Quantum statistical mechanics is an area of growing
              interest because many of 
the phenomena that are being discovered and studied
              today in condensed matter
physics and material science are intrinsically
              quantum mechanical: Bose
condensation, superfluidity, superconductivity,
              quantum optics, quantum
computation, and many of the most interesting aspects
              of magnetism at the
microscopic scale. In addition to the implications in
              material science, this
work will provide new insights in fundamental problems
              of quantum statistical
mechanics and lead to analytical methods for their
              solution. The mathematical
models of quantum statistical mechanics, though
              related to problems in partial
differential equations, representation theory,
              spectral theory of operators, 
and probability theory, pose new mathematical
              challenges of their own.  
Many fascinating questions have so far resisted
              existing analytical and 
numerical methods. The results of this project will
              contribute to our
understanding of the fundamental mathematical structures of
              quantum mechanical
models and, in the long run, may lead to innovations in
              numerical work
on quantum mechanical models, which is increasingly needed in
              pure and 
applied science.

