Title       : Plurisubharmonic Functions on Algebraic Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0070725

Award Number: 0070725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97878              (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Alan Taylor taylor@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:
    The classical Phragmen-Lindelof theorem extends the maximum
              principle
to unbounded analytic functions by showing that an analytic function
              that
satisfies an asymptotic exponential bound in the upper half plane and
              a
uniform bound on the real axis in fact satisfies a uniform
              exponential
bound in the upper half plane. Research of the past three decades
              has
shown that the validity of estimates of a similar character for
              analytic
functions on algebraic varieties in n-dimensional complex Euclidean
              space
are in fact equivalent to certain properties of linear
              constant
coefficient partial differential operators.  Some such properties of
              the
operators are surjectivity on the space of real analytic functions
              or
Gevrey classes, the existence of lacuna in fundamental solutions,
              the
existence of linear solution operators, and continuation properties
              of
solutions of the homogeneous equation(s).  While there are different
              sets
of these estimates associated to the different properties of the
              operator,
they all are similar in spirit.  The aim of this work is to
              develop
methods that give a geometric characterization of the algebraic
              varieties
for which a given Phragmen-Lindelof condition is satisfied. 
              If
successful, the work should also give insight into questions about
              the
partial differential equations such as the existence of
              fundamental
solutions with cone-shaped lacuna. 

This work is focused on
              developing tools in complex analysis that
can be used to answer basic
              questions about linear partial differential
equations.  In the 1950's, Laurent
              Schwartz formulated such fundamental
problems for general linear partial
              differential equations.  Are they
always solvable?  If so, can the solution be
              chosen as smooth as the data
in the problem?  Do fundamental solutions exist? 
              Can the equations be
solved with a "formula", so that the answer depends
              linearly on the data
of the problem?  Most of these questions were answered in
              the 1950's by
Ehrenpreis and Malgrange.  However, the question of whether the
              solution
could be chosen to be real analytic when the data is real analytic
              was
open until the late 1960's when the first counter examples were given. 
              In
1973, Hormander gave a characterization of the equations with
              this
property in terms of the validity of certain inequalities for
              analytic
functions on the zero set of the polynomial giving the
              differential
equation.  In 1990, Taylor, Meise, and Vogt answered the question
              about
the existence of "formulas" for the solution and showed they were
              also
characterized in terms of some similar inequalities.  The aim of
              this
project is to develop tools that allow one to decide whether or not
              the
required estimates are valid for a given partial differential equation.
              We
believe that it is possible to develop an algorithm that will make
              the
verification, and further, will explain the geometry of the zero set
              of
the associated polynomial that is necessary for the inequalities to
              be
satisfied. 


