Title       : The Mixed Ligand Approach to the Preparation of Low-Dimensional Cluster
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a0070915

Award Number: 0070915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343252             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abdessadek Lachgar Lachgar@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      1834 Wake Forest Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27106    336/758-5000

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project aims at the preparation and characterization of
              low-dimensional materials containing octahedral metal clusters.  A systematic
              study of niobium oxochlorides containing octahedral Nb6L18 (L  =  C1,  O) 
              clusters will be performed to advance fundamental understanding for the
              correlation between cluster configuration and framework dimensionality.  The
              long-term goal is to identify and understand the structure determining factors,
              and ultimately make these types of materials by design.

The proposal
              describes in detail a creative and original approach to prepare cluster-based,
              low-dimensional materials.  The methodology to be explored is the modification
              of octahedral metal clusters to form building blocks with well-defined
              anisotropic bonding preferences.  To achieve this goal a combination of oxide
              and chloride ligands is used to create anisotropic charge distribution around
              the octahedral (Nb6) cluster core.  A combination of counterions with large
              difference in their charge-to-radius ratios and, thus, different coordination
              preferences is used to enhance anisotropic ligand distribution.

The proposed
              work will teach art in its field, and support the education of young scientists
              who participate in this exciting area of the preparation and characterization
              of materials.  Results and knowledge will be disseminated broadly through the
              literature and in presentations at regional, national, and international
              conferences.  The work addresses strongly the broad scientific and educational
              mission of the National Science Foundation.

