Title       : GEOMETRY OF FLAG VARIETIES AND REPRESENTATION THEORY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0070679

Award Number: 0070679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shrawan Kumar kumar@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT OF THE NSF PROJECT OF SHRAWAN KUMAR


Shrawan Kumar intends to
              continue work in the general area of 'Lie Theory and Geometry'.  He has
              proposed to work on five projects requiring diverse and extensive mathematical
              tools from Algebraic Geometry, Classical and Quantum Representation Theory, and
              Topology. Briefly described, these projects are as follows: In an attempt to
              understand the Kostka-Macdonald coefficients, Garsia and Haiman proposed a
              remarkable conjecture, known as the n! conjecture. This asserts that the
              dimension of a certain space of polynomials in 2n variables is exactly n!. The
              validity of the conjecture will imply that the coefficients of the
              Kostka-Macdonald polynomials are non-negative integers which remains an open
              challenging problem. The first project aims at proving this conjecture (jointly
              with Prof. J. Thomsen from Aarhus) by using the geometry of Hilbert schemes. 
              The second project involves proving the non-existence of non-constant
              holomorphic maps between certain homogeneous compact complex manifolds.  Kumar
              already has a precise conjecture in this direction.  Lusztig has defined a
              certain Frobenius morphism for quantized enveloping algebras at roots of unity
              and also a certain 'splitting' of this morphism defined on the positive parts
              of the algebras involved. On the other hand, any algebraic variety defined over
              a field of positive characteristic admits a Frobenius morphism. 
              Mehta-Ramanathan introduced the concept of Frobenius splitting of such a
              variety and showed that the flag varieties associated to any semisimple
              algebraic group do admit Frobenius splitting.  This leads to some important
              results on the geometry of flag varieties. Now Kumar-Littelmann have obtained a
              very precise connection between these two (quantum and geometric) notions of
              Frobenius morphisms and Frobenius splittings and the third project involves
              completing this ongoing work.  The fourth project involves proving a conjecture
              given by Kumar himself on the cohomology of 'thick' flag varieties associated
              to affine Kac-Moody groups with coefficients in homogeneous vector bundles. A
              'direct' proof of this conjecture will lead to uniform proofs of several
              important results related to the Moduli of Vector Bundles and Verlinde Formula.
              The fifth is a long continuing project which is due for completion by the end
              of this summer. It involves writing the book "Kac-Moody Groups, their Flag
              Varieties and Representation Theory," to be submitted to the Graduate Texts in
              Mathematics series of Springer-Verlag.
To explain these to a general
              scientific community, the main underlying theme behind Kumar's projects is to
              exploit 'symmetry' or in more technical terms 'invariance' in problems arising
              in mathematics and mathematical physics. Several natural phenomena exhibit
              symmetry, from crystals to the surface of the earth we live on (where the
              latter of course is invariant under any rotation). Now consider a mathematical
              or a physical problem, say studying the geometric properties of an object (from
              a cell to the universe), or solving some complex equations arising in diverse
              situations in mathematics and other sciences. An effective method has been to
              study the collection of all the symmetries of the problem under consideration
              (called a Group) and use the properties of the Group to shed light on the
              original problem. This method has been very successfully employed in a wide
              variety of problems leading to some pioneering works since the nineteenth
              century.


