Title       : Hydrodynamic Stability in viscous, compressible flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0070765

Award Number: 0070765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Zumbrun kzumbrun@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The principal investigator proposes several projects concerning
              
multi-dimensional stability of flows in compressible, viscous, 
and reacting
              media.  These include both shear flows of classical 
hydrodynamic stability
              and compressive flows of shock wave and 
combustion theory,  the former
              exhibiting local symmetry parallel 
to and the latter normal to the flow.  The
              unifying mathematical 
theme in these problems is the appearance of multiple
              length scales 
corresponding to small-scale transport and large-scale
              convective 
effects,  with associated ``stiffness'' in the linearized
              perturbation 
problem.  This leads to interesting, nonstandard issues in
              spectral 
and semigroup theory.  At the same time, the inclusion of
              small-scale 
transport effects is highly desirable from the point of view of
              physical 
applications, which often occur at scales where these effects might
              be 
expected to be significant.

The stability of regular flow patterns is
              an old and central topic in fluid, 
gas, and plasma dynamics, deciding which
              (stable) patterns will typically
be observed, and which (unstable) are only
              mathematical and not physically
observable solutions.  The transition from
              stability to instability
is of particular importance, since it usually signals
              the arisal of
alternative, more complicated flow patterns close to the
              original
(now unstable) one- this is a way to understand complicated flows
by
              the study of simpler and better-understood ones.  Despite a large
and
              well-known body of theory on this subject, dating back to the late 
1800's,
              there are still many aspects that are poorly understood, particularly
for
              compressive, viscous, or reacting flows.  Here, we propose to study
several of
              these issues arising in compressible gas and plasma dynamics,
and in
              combustion, applications in which such usually-neglected effects
are of
              considerable practical importance.  Our goal is, by including
these
              mathematically problematic terms, to move existing theory from
the qualitative
              to the quantitative regime, obtaining new information
of use to practitioners
              at the same time that we advance the mathematical
theory.

