Title       : Methods of Hamiltonian Mechanics for Nonlinear Wave Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a0070218

Award Number: 0070218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Craig craigw@gauss.math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research described in this proposal is on a class of linear and nonlinear
              
partial differential equations (PDE)which share the property that they can be
              
written in the form of a Hamiltonian system with infinitely many degrees of
              
freedom. Principal examples include nonlinear wave equations, nonlinear
              
Schroedinger equations and Euler's equations for water waves.  The analogy
              
with dynamical systems motivates a number of basic questions. (1) The
              
existence of invariant tori for the nonlinear partial differential equations
              
involves extensions of KAM theory to infinite dimensional settings.
              
Implications of these results include the existence of solutions of nonlinear
              
evolution equations which exist for all time and are recurrent. Techniques
              
that have been developed for PDE also have bearing on several open problems
              in 
classical dynamical systems concerning the persistence of resonant tori.
              
(2) A normal forms transformation of a Hamiltonian PDE gives details of its
              
essential nonlinearities, and it has applications to Nekhoroshev stability
              
results and to a proof of the Arnold condition of genuine nonlinearity. 
(3)
              Starting from a normal forms transformation, long time existence results 
for
              nonlinear PDE are important in a mathematically rigorous analysis of the
              
classical asymptotic regimes of mathematical physics. In addition the
              proposer 
will address a number of related questions in the theory of PDE. (4)
              Estimates 
of dispersive smoothing for linear and nonlinear Schroeinger
              equations depend 
upon the scattering properties of bicharacteristics, and
              estimates of this 
form play a role in the study of the initial value problem
              for data of low 
smoothness. (5) The classical problems of standing waves in
              two dimensional 
water waves and traveling waves in three dimensional water
              waves are instances 
of problems in PDE which exhibit small divisors, and
              analytic results involve 
delicate questions of convergence. 

    
              Celestial mechanics, the problem of describing the motion of planetary
              
bodies, has always intrigued mathematicians and motivated their discoveries.
              
At the beginning of this century, the French mathematician H. Poincar' and
              his 
American contemporaries G.D. Birkhoff and G.W. Hill, essentially
              revolutionized
the subject with their work, bringing it conceptual clarity and
              introducing 
powerful new analytic techniques. This work gave rise to a new
              paradigm in its 
field, and contributed to the birth of many modern branches
              of mathematics. An 
important question was and remains the n-body problem; the
              problem of stability
of the motion of n planets in their mutual gravitational
              attraction. Indeed in 
the 1960's, 50 years after the death of Poincar'e, the
              development of a theory 
by three mathematicians, A.N. Kolmogorov, V.I. Arnold
              and J. Moser (it is now 
called KAM theory) made a significant contribution to
              the field. At the time of
its development there were physical applications to
              the stability of high 
energy particles in a cyclotron, as well as to the
              classical questions of the 
stability of our solar system or to other
              important systems in mechanics. The 
equations which describe the motion of n
              bodies are examples of ordinary 
differential equations. It was a question at
              the time of the development of 
KAM theory whether such stability results
              could be extended to partial 
differential equations. These describe the
              evolution in time of a continuous 
medium such as a fluid, a gas, and
              electromagnetic field or an elastic solid. 
The analogy between mechanics and
              the motion of a continuum is mathematically 
quite elegant. However the n-body
              problem is a finite dimensional one, while 
problems of partial differential
              equations viewed with this analogy in mind 
are inherently infinite
              dimensional, and this summarizes the essential 
mathematical difficulty of
              extending the methods. The principal content of 
this research program is the
              extension of some aspects of the analytic 
techniques of Hamiltonian mechanics
              to physically important partial 
differential equations. These results will
              have some significant consequences 
in a variety of diverse physical
              applications, including the study of ocean 
waves, the propagation of signal
              pulses in optical fibers, and in the 

