Title       : Vertical Cavity Blue and Ultraviolet Light Emitters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0070887

Award Number: 0070887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arto V. Nurmikko arto_nurmikko@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0070887
Nurmikko

In this project, Nurmikko, his graduate students, and
              collaborators aim to study, design, and develop optoelectronic device and
              optical physics concepts that will lead to the realization of blue and
              ultraviolet vertical cavity light emitters, based on wide band gap nitride
              semiconductor heterostructures.  In particular, the specific goals of the three
              year program are the demonstration and fabrication of (a) a resonant cavity
              light emitting diode (RCLED), and (b) a vertical cavity surface emitting laser
              (VCSEL).  Although closely interconnected, the technical challenges facing the
              development of these new, compact short wavelength devices can be logistically
              grouped into into two broad areas: (i) the approach and implementation of the
              optical microresonator structure and (ii) the design and realization of a
              pn-junction based injector structure.  To achieve high Q-factor vertical
              cavities for InGaN and AlGaN heterostructures, Nurmikko and co-workers aim is
              to create processing techniques that will create optical structures reaching
              Q-factors in the 1000-2000 range for reducing the laser threshold requirements.
               The approach is based on monolithic integration of two dielectric DBRs and
              also focus on "hybrid" structures with one dielectric and one as-grown DBR. 
              Study of the optical gain spectra of the VCSEL structures forms another key
              project area, to detail the gain spectra of the InGaN and AlGaN active media
              for optimizing these for low threshold VCSELS.  Nurmikko and co-workers will
              study fundamental microcavity physics to enhance light emission from InGaN and
              AlGaN VCSELs and RCLEDS.  Excitonic enhancement to oscillator strength can
              concentrate optical gain so as to significantly reduce a nitride VCSEL
              threshold.  Similarly, spontaneous emission properties for an RCLED are
              expected to be dramatically enhanced.

For achieving a diode vertical cavity
              emitter, Nurmikko and co-workers will study lateral p-injection in two types of
              experiments: (i) the use of near field imaging techniques to study lateral
              diffusion, and (ii) the design of LED microstructures where current spreading
              can be obtained from electroluminescence spatial imaging.  For the blue and NUV
              VCSEL work they will also concentrate on the incorporation of p-GaN/AlGaN
              modulation doped heterostructures for enhancing the p-side conductivity.  One
              of the specific features that they will address concerns the tailoring of the
              electronic structure so that interface scattering can be reduced (hence the
              hole mobility enhanced).  They propose to use the very large built-in
              piezoelectric and spontaneous dielectric polarization effects to
              electrostatically design the heterojunction confinement profile.  They will
              also study the use of epitaxial lateral overgrowth (ELOG) to facilitate both
              the incorporation of "buried" DBR mirrors as well as to define current
              apertures for channeling hole transport to the active device region (as defined
              by the vertical resonator).

A specific characteristic of the ongoing
              research is a close collaboration with Hewlett-Packard (both HP Labs and the
              Optoelectronic Division, now renamed Agilent Technologies), as well as Sandia
              National Laboratories.  This industry/government laboratory connection will be
              an integral part of the project work.
***



