Title       : Assessing the Role of Technology in the Work of Modern Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0070468

Award Number: 0070468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane E. Bailey diane.bailey@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Wooley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond E. Levitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Barley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Researchers know very little about the tasks engineers perform, the ways in
              which they employ technology, how their knowledge and tasks are embodied in
              technology, and what skills are likely to be required in the years ahead.  In
              this project, the role of technology in the work of modern engineers will be
              assessed.  Using ethnographic techniques of observation and interviewing, two
              types of engineers will be studied: structural engineers who design buildings
              and electrical engineers who design computer chips. In the course of this
              research, what engineers do, what technologies they employ, the extent to
              which, and the manner in which, these technologies embody, augment, and alter
              engineering knowledge and tasks will be investigated. This study augments
              current knowledge about engineering work and will have significant implications
              for organizations as they consider how to manage and support their engineering
              workforce.  In addition, the answers to these research questions will inform
              the education and training of engineers, as well as their broader study in the
              social sciences.  Our results will lend insight into the design of engineering
              workspaces, tools, and supporting technologies. More generally, they will
              further add to our understanding of how technologies are employed in the
              workplace. 
