Title       : A Multi-User Server for Bioinformatics Data Storage, Distribution and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0070396

Award Number: 0070396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83948              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russel H. Meints meintsr@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Phelps  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0070396
Russel Meints
A Multi-User Server for Bioinformatics Data Storage,
              Distribution and Analysis

With this award, Oregon State University (OSU)
              will obtain a multi-user computer server to support bioinformatics data
              storage, distribution, and analysis for the Biological Computing Consortium
              (BCC) network. This Consortium is comprised of seven research units: The Center
              for Gene Research & Biotechnology (CGRB), and the Departments of Botany and
              Plant Pathology, Entomology, Food Science and Technology, Horticulture,
              Microbiology and Zoology. The Consortium network also supports academic
              programs closely associated with the research groups.  Seven individual
              laboratory members come from departments that are not part of the Consortium.
              Over 800 individual accounts are supported from the Consortium network which is
              currently based on two servers: a Sun E4000 (installed 1998) for genetic,
              genomic, phylogenetic, and GIS data analysis and a Sun 670MP (age: 7 years)
              that is used to provide e-mail, web services, and administrative support for
              the Consortium members.

This award will be used to replace the Sun 670MP,
              which has reached obsolescence. The
exponential growth of data from genetic
              research supports the need for the much larger capacity server than the one
              currently in use. This second server will allow implementation of a database
              driven archival, retrieval and data analysis system. This will support storage
              and retrieval of large amounts of data for multiple simultaneous users and
              allow this information to be distributed using web-based technology to
              researchers anywhere on campus. The new server will provide important back-up
              for the Sun E4000 to ensure that the research can continue even if one of the
              servers is out of service. The CGRB currently generates more than 1000
              Megabytes (1 Gbyte) of research data per week. The amount of data that is
              generated is expected to triple in the near future with the increase in
              genomics research and the addition of new technologies such as DNA micro-array
              chip readers, capillary sequencing systems, and digital fluorescence microscopy
              systems.

The research projects of the five major user groups are as follows:
              analyzing evolutionary patterns in continuous characters; phylogenetic,
              biogeographic and revisionary studies of insects and construction of web-based
              specimen and insect collection databases; studies of auxin and cytokinin
              interactions in tomato and identifying the diageotropica (dgt) mutant of
              tomato; researching population genetics of ectomycorrhizal fungi; and studying
              poplars as a model system for tree genetic engineering, which focuses on how to
              control flowering in order to develop a reliable system to contain transgenic
              material. There are more than 100 principal investigators associated with the
              Consortium who will benefit from this new server.

