Title       : Electroactive Polymer Membranes for In-Situ Dynamic Mechanical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0070042

Award Number: 0070042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223339             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Leo donleo@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald G. Kander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas J. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI:						Don Leo 
Institution:				Virginia Tech 
Proposal
              Number				0070042
Proposal Title 	Electroactive Polymer Membranes for In-Situ
              Dynamic Mechanical Analysis


Project Abstract 

The objective of this
              research is to develop materials and techniques for in-situ dynamic mechanical
              analysis of polymer materials.  In-situ techniques for analyzing polymer
              degradation will have applications in polymer storage systems for chemicals,
              pharmaceuticals, and bioproducts, as well as the development of advanced energy
              storage systems such as polymer batteries and fuel cells. The techniques will
              be based on the development of a new class of polymers that have both
              electrochemical and electromechanical coupling.  The polymers will be
              fabricated with a Selective Laser Sintering technique that allows us to
              manufacture polymer membranes with alternating layers of electrochemically
              active and electromechanically active material.  The hypothesis of this
              research is that electrochemical properties of polymer materials can be
              inferred from measurements of critical electromechanical parameters, such as
              the glass transition temperature.  The work plans include (1) Developing
              electromechanical and electrochemical models of the polymer membranes, (2)
              Empirically correlating the time-temperature dependence of polymers to critical
              electrochemical properties such as proton conduction,(3) Developing an in-situ
              dynamic mechanical analysis technique using stress-strain measurements of the
              polymer material, and (4) Manufacturing electroactive polymer membranes using a
              modified Selective Laser Sintering (SLS) technique.  We will apply this
              technique to the development of a fuel cell proton exchange membrane that
              incorporates electromechanical coupling.  The diagnostic technique will be
              tested in a 1 kWe fuel cell test system.  The significance of this research is
              the development of new materials and techniques for nondestructive, in-situ
              diagnostics of polymer systems.  This development of safe and reliable polymer
              storage systems will have impact in chemical, pharmaceutical, and bioproducts
              industry.  Advanced transportation systems that utilize efficient and low
              emission fuel cells will also benefit.  This research will be a collaborative
              effort between the Mechanical Engineering Department and the Materials Science
              Engineering Department at Virginia Tech. 





