Title       : Deformations of Representations; and Prounipotent Groups in Differential Galois
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0070748

Award Number: 0070748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43309              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andy R. Magid amagid@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate (1) liftings and deformations
of representations
              of finitely generated groups; and (2) the structure of the
antiderivative
              closure of the field of rational complex functions, and its extensions
and
              their groups of differential automorphisms.
Regarding (1), a simple complex
              matrix representation of a finitely
generated group is deformable if it
              extends to a representation in matrices over complex formal power series.  Such
              an extension exists if there is a compatible family of liftings of the
              representation
to the finite dimensional quotients of formal power series. 
              Thus the
extension problem can be viewed as a sequence of (relative) lifting
              problems. 
Each such lifting problem is obstructed by an element in a certain
              cohomology group of a module
constructed from the original simple
              representation.  The proposed research will
investigate the lifting problem by
              studying these cohomological elements. 
Regarding (2), the antiderivative
              closure of the field of rational functions is the
maximal extension obtained
              by adjoining full sets of solutions of linear homogeneous
              ordinary
differential equations whose solutions can be obtained by repeated
              antiderivatives.
The group of differential automorphisms of such an extension
              is free prounipotent.
The research will exploit this structure to describe the
              antiderivative closure
directly in terms of the functions in the coordinate
              ring of the free prounipotent group. 
Antiderivative closures may not be
              antiderivative closed, so a tower of such closures
may result. The research
              will analyze the differential Galois groups of the steps in
this tower over
              the base field of rational functions.   These groups have a normal series with
              free 
prounipotent sections.  However, they are not known to be free
              prounipotent themselves. 

Groups are objects that mathematically encode the
              concept of symmetry, and
have been a mainstay in mathematics, chemistry, and
              elsewhere for over a
century.  Representations of groups are realizations of
              groups as
transformations of space.  A given group usually has infinitely
              many
representations.   These can be organized into a geometrical set. 
              
Representations which are not just isolated points of the set are
              called
deformable.  This research is aimed at understanding
              deformable
representations and their applications to group representations
              in
mathematics, chemistry, and elsewhere.  Integral calculus deals
              with
reconstructing a function, such as one describing the position of
              an
object, from the instantaneous rates of change of the function;
              the
reconstructed function is called an antiderivative.  The planned
              research
can be viewed as a method to solve, in principle, and all at once,
              all the
repeated integral calculus problems arising from polynomial
              functions.
This would have many applications in calculus.
