Title       : Foundation of the Geometric Function Theory in R^n: The Governing differential
               Forms, Variational Integrals and Nonlinear Elasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0070807

Award Number: 0070807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130722             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tadeusz Iwaniec tiwaniec@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract :


ANALYTICAL FOUNDATIONS OF THE GEOMETRIC FUNCTION
              THEORY;
VARIATIONAL INTEGRALS AND NONLINEAR ELASTICITY

Tadeusz
              Iwaniec



One of the major recent advances in the higher dimensional
              geometric
function theory is based on finding new differential equations
              analogous
to the Cauchy-Riemann system in the complex plane. Hodge theory
              of
differential forms has come to play a central role in this rather
              modern
approach. The Jacobian determinants and the wedge products of the
              exact
differential forms are subjected to a great deal of investigation, as
              they
provide the means of achieving continuity, compactness, or normal
              family
type results. It is important to realize that the higher
              integrability
properties of the Jacobians can only be observed for mapping in
              the
Orlicz-Sobolev classes. More recent developments have emphasized
              the
connection between quasiconformal mappings and the theory of
              nonlinear
elasticity already formulated by S.S. Antman and J. Ball in 1976-77.
              This
connection is an important aspect of the proposal. And that is why
              we
depart from the usual quasiconformal theory quite far towards
              mappings
(deformations of elastic bodies) with unbounded distortion. However,
              some
control, such as BMO-bounds, of the distortion tensor will be necessary
              to
achieve concreate results. The governing equations for mappings of
              finite
distortion are non-linear first order systems of PDEs. There are
              also
related second order systems which arrise naturally as the Euler-
              Lagrange
equations of the associated variational integrals (stored energy of
              the
deformation). An analogy between the analytic aspects of the
              holomorphic
functions and mappings of finite distortion is particularly
              pronounced in
even dimensions. A fruitful idea when studying these mappings is
              to view
them as conformal with respect to certain measurable metric or
              conformal
structures. Many of these notions extend to Riemannian manifolds,
              and
accordingly, while we do not develop this aspect in full all the
              machinery
we set up is ready and willing for these generalizations.
         
                The reader interested in developments along these lines and a
comprehensive
              account of the geometric function theory is warmly referred
to the forthcoming
              monograph of G. Martin and PI.





