Title       : Topics in Nonlinear Difference and Differential-Delay Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0070829

Award Number: 0070829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Nussbaum nussbaum@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator will study questions related to
so-called  nonlinear
              "functional differential equations" and, separately,
to questions concerning
              iterates of maps which do not increase
distance in some metric. Roughly
              speaking, a functional differential
equation is one in which the rate of
              change of an unknown function
x(t) depends not just on the value of x(t)
              itself but on the value of
x at certain earlier times. Such equations arise
              naturally in models
from physiology and nonlinear optics. Mappings which do
              not increase
distance with respect to a norm on a finite dimensional vector
              space
come up in many contexts, e.g., scheduling problems (the so-called
"sup
              norm") and nonlinear generalizations of the theory of
column-stochastic
              matrices (the so-called "ell-one norm"). 

    The principal investigator
              will study questions concerning certain
classes of nonlinear functional
              differential equations. An example of
interest is the the equation
              ax'(t)=f(x(t),x(t-r)), r:=r(x(t)), where
f and r are given functions and one
              is interested in the limiting
"shape" of periodic solutions of such equations
              as a approaches
zero. In a different direction the principal investigator will
              study
iterates of maps which are "nonexpansive", i.e., do not
              increase
distance with respect to a given metric. If the metric is the
              ell-one
norm on a finite dimensional vector space, one is led to a variety
              of
generalizations of the classical theory of column stochastic
matrices. The
              case that the metric comes from the sup norm arises in
many applications and
              has led to intriguing and apparently difficult
conjectures concerning the
              maximal cardinality of a periodic orbit for
a map which is nonexpansive in the
              sup norm on a finite dimensional
vector space.


