Title       : Characteristic Length of Quasi-Brittle Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0070062

Award Number: 0070062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph F. Labuz jlabuz@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Emmanuel Detournay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0070062
"Characteristic Length of Quasi-Brittle Materials"
PI: Joseph
              Labuz
University of Minnesota-Twin Cities

Abstract:

Field and laboratory
              observations of rock failure indicate behavior quite different for structures
              of various size and shape.  Due to the existence of a localized zone of
              microcracking, which seems to be a characteristic of the material, the nominal
              strength and the global response of a given geometry and load configuration of
              a rock structure are dependent on size.  For many problems in geotechnical
              engineering (for instance, breakouts in tunneling, comminution and drilling,
              pullout of reinforcement), the characteristics of a localized zone are
              important in predicting failure.  The objective of this research is to measure
              the characteristic length of various rocks.  The localized zone of
              microcracking prior to failure will be mapped with locations of acoustic
              emission, and space-time clustering analyses will help to define the
              dimensions.  As a complementary method, electronic speckle pattern
              interferometry will be used to measure surface deformation, providing a high
              resolution visual image of the displacement field.  Numerical modeling with a
              distinct element code will provide a basis for the extension of the
              experimental results to other materials and conditions.  By performing
              simulations designed to mimic the experimental measurements, the necessary
              constitutive behavior can be established, and the investigation of boundary
              value problems can be realized.


