Title       : Crop Genomics Research: Instrumentation for High-Throughput Processing of
               Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a0070371

Award Number: 0070371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224673             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thea A. Wilkins tawilkins@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Dvorak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jorge Dubcovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Michelmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0070371 PI: Thea A. Wilkins
Title: Crop Genomics Research: Instrumentation for
              High-throughput Processing of Samples

Project Abstract

The need for
              genetic diversity, increased productivity, and improved food and fiber quality
              in  the improvement of crop plants to offset a narrow germplasm base, yield
              plateaus and rising production costs has never been greater. Geneticists have
              been hard at work developing the tools and resources to improve crop plants
              using molecular approaches to augment traditional breeding programs and
              implement strategies for bioengineering elite cultivars. The introduction of
              innovative instrumentation that mechanizes labor-intensive procedures using
              robotics has revolutionized the study of genomes. The impact of such
              high-throughput processing on the study of large, complex genomes as those
              found in crop species is enormous, leading to an unprecedented investment in
              Plant Genome Initiatives by government agencies. Robotic equipment pivotal to
              high-throughput processing will nucleate the formation of a genomics facility
              that provides core services in support of genome projects. The equipment
              includes Genetix's Q-Bot, a unique multi-tasking, fully automated robot that
              specializes in high speed, high accuracy picking and spotting of clones in
              microtiter plates onto filters (macroarrays) and microarrays in high density
              gridded arrays. The high capacity HiGro orbital shaker optimizes the growth of
              bacterial cultures in microtiter plates in support of Q-Bot operations and
              high-throughput sequencing efforts.

Studies on the structure and function of
              crop genomes that hinge on Q-Bot-mediated tasks encompass two major areas of
              endeavor related to physical mapping and analysis of gene function. BAC
              libraries, both existing and soon-to-be constructed, will be picked and arrayed
              on high density filters for distribution to the research community. BAC filters
              serve  to fingerprint BAC clones and assemble BAC contigs for the purpose of
              preparing a sequence-ready physical map for beans, cotton, lettuce, rice, and
              diploid and tetraploid wheat. Such filters will also facilitate map-based
              cloning of important agronomic genes, including submergence tolerance in rice,
              vernalization in wheat, and cotton fiber genes. The Q-Bot will also speed up
              the gene discovery process in EST projects and facilitate the study of gene
              function. Macro- and microarrays will be used to study differential gene
              expression in response to a host of environmental, physiological and
              developmental stimuli to identify key gene functions in crop productivity,
              including nutritional seed quality (walnuts), stress (rice and wheat) and
              disease (Arabidopsis and lettuce) responses, and yield and fiber quality
              (cotton).

The crop genomics consortium will develop tools and resources in
              service of the scientific community for global distribution, and in so doing,
              evolve as a major center and focal point for activities to harness genomics in
              the development of novel germplasm with enhanced food and fiber quality in
              major crop species. Training of students and postdoctoral fellows in
              high-throughput technology will be an integral part of research and teaching
              activities offered by the group.


