Title       : Problems of Complex Analysis Arising in Complex Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a0070608

Award Number: 0070608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96501              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric D. Bedford bedford@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract.  Problems of Complex Analysis Arising in Complex Dynamics

The
              research of this proposal applies the methods of complex analysis to
several 
              problems of dynamical systems in the complex domain.  The dynamics
of a
              polynomial map of the complex plane  C  has been studied in depth and
has
              produced a theory which is both a beautiful and compelling model for
many
              systems in nature.  The dynamics of polynomial mappings of
two-dimensional
              complex space  C^2  should produce a theory with equal
beauty and utility.  
              The work of this project includes three parts:

1.  The first objective is to
              study mappings which are quasi-hyperbolic, a
condition which is more general
              and will be more easily verified than the
more traditional condition of
              (uniform) hyperbolicity.  At the same time,
the quasi-hyperbolic mappings have
              expansion/contraction properties which
makes them
understandable in a way
              similar to hyperbolic mappings.  The corresponding
dynamical sets will be
              shown to have bounded geometry.

2.  A second objective is to apply these
              complex methods to the study of
polynomial difffeomorphisms of the real plane.
               This will give a new
approach that will give results not easily obtained with
              purely real methods.

3.  The third objective is to understand the nature of
              parameter space, the
space of all mappings.  A particular focus will be on the
              connectedness
locus, which is a higher-dimensional analogue of the Mandelbrot
              set.

In each of these cases, the methodology involves the further
              development of
mathematical techniques from complex analysis: analytic
              functions and
varieties, harmonic measure, pluri-potential theory, and the
              geometric
theory of currents.



