Title       : RUI: Acquistion of a Fluorescence/PhosphorImager - MD STORM 860
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a0070401

Award Number: 0070401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : April 1,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59307              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne L. Hitt hitt@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arik Dvir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas L. Wendell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gabrielle A. Stryker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jill H. Zeilstra-Ryalls  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    313/377-2100

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9141,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Hitt

The first step toward understanding any biological system is to
              identify and quantify its components.  The second step is to determine the
              interactions between the components of a system.  A fluorescence/phosphorimager
              can provide the technology needed to begin to accomplish these steps.  The
              STORM 860 Fluorescence/Phosphorimager will be used to aid in the identification
              and quantification of molecules, e.g., proteins, DNA, RNA, of interest.  In
              addition, it will be used to visualize and analyze molecular interactions
              between well-characterized molecules and previously uncharacterized molecules. 
              

The imager will be used to address fundamental questions in biology
              including - investigations into protein structure and function, regulation of
              fatty acid biosynthesis, regulation of RNA polymerase assembly, analysis of
              recombinant protein expression by RNAse protection assays, and gene expression
              analysis by screening cDNA microarrays.

Because the
              fluorescence/phosphorimager imaging and analysis technology is very robust with
              wide-ranging applications for cellular, molecular and biochemical research
              programs, it will strengthen and expand active research programs at Oakland
              University.  Furthermore, the imager will strengthen and expand the training
              and education of university students, teachers, and other working professionals
              in biochemistry, cell and molecular biology.

