Title       : Multilinear Operators, Discrete Decompositions, and Spectral Resolution of
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0070514

Award Number: 0070514
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodolfo H. Torres torres@math.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:

The research to be conducted includes the analysis of operators
              associated with
multilinear singular integrals and the study of discrete
              functions spaces.  The
investigations will be based on techniques related to
              Littlewood-Paley theory,
molecular decompositions, and time-frequency analysis
              tools.  Specific aspects
proposed in the analysis of operators are to continue
              collaborations in the
development of a multilinear counterpart of the linear
              Calderon-Zygmund
theory, and to study various classes of multilinear
              pseudodifferential
operators.  Problems in the analysis of discrete function
              spaces include issues
about the sampling of functions with controlled mean
              oscillations and the
approximation of band limited signals.  The proposal also
              contains an
interdisciplinary component.  In particular, theoretical problems
              arising in the
analytic formulation of the scattering of light by structurally
              colored tissues
of living organisms will be considered.  The spectral
              resolution and
mathematical properties of quasi-ordered geometries will be
              investigated.  The
last part of the research will be assisted by numerical
              computation and data
visualization.


Operators associated with singular
              integrals arise as technical tools in
analysis and also as transformations
              encountered in the mathematical modeling of
certain physical phenomena.  Such
              transformations can be used to describe the
changes in the properties of a
              function or the transition from the input to the
output of a system. 
              Properties of functions or signals often need to be
understood from the
              information encoded in samples of the data.  Such
information can be
              quantified by function spaces and decoded by Fourier analysis
and related
              time-frequency techniques.  Fourier analysis is the mathematical
version of a
              diffracting physical prism.  It resolves a signal into a spectrum
of waves of
              different amplitudes and oscillations in a similar way that a prism
diffracts
              a ray of light into a rainbow of colors of different wavelengths.
Modern
              decomposition techniques in analysis provide a universal language for
              the
processing of complicated information.  Progress in this area of analysis
              always
produces important advances in scientific problems where large and
              complicated
sets of data need to be analyzed to search for ordered patterns,
              reduce
unnecessary information, or visualize intricate structures.



