Title       : A Confocal Microscope for Research and Teaching in Biology and Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a0070352

Award Number: 0070352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice R. Naegele jnaegele@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Kirn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Devoto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract Naegele NSF 0070352


A Confocal Microscope for Research and
              Teaching in Biology and Neuroscience 

	A Zeiss 510 Confocal Microscope will
              be used for research and training in developmental biology and neuroscience at
              Wesleyan University. This new confocal microscope will enable the three primary
              faculty users and members of their research laboratories to study the dynamic
              movements of cells and proteins in living embryos and to identify intercellular
              junctions between cells in thick sections of brain tissue. In addition,
              training on the confocal microscope will be an important component of a Biology
              department graduate-level course in advanced microscopy, including confocal,
              immunofluorescence, and electron microscopy. The confocal microscope facility
              is part of an Advanced Instrumentation Facility in the Science Center at
              Wesleyan University. This facility already contains scanning and transmission
              electron microscopes, an adjacent wet laboratory, a room for tissue sectioning,
              and a computer room with associated digital scanners and other image processing
              equipment.  

The projects to be carried out by major users of this confocal
              microscope, Drs. Devoto, Kirn, and Naegele, and members of their laboratories,
              each focus on vertebrate development. The Devoto laboratory will focus on the
              genetic and molecular guidance cues used by migrating muscle cells in living
              zebrafish embryos. The Kirn laboratory will address the mechanisms of neuronal
              replacement and neurogenesis in the brains of adult birds. The Naegele
              laboratory will study cellular and molecular signals regulating programmed cell
              death and engulfment of dying neurons in the rodent cerebral cortex and visual
              system. Occasional use of the confocal is also planned by five additional
              faculty in the Biology and Molecular Biology and Biochemistry Departments who
              study a variety of biological problems ranging from the role of transcription
              factors in embryo development to the cell cycle regulation in yeast. Additional
              minor use by one extramural group Pfizer, Inc. is planned for 2 days/month.
              Funds from this extramural group will be a significant source of revenue for
              long-term maintenance of the confocal, including service contracts. 

We
              anticipate that this confocal microscope and the associated research programs
              will have a significant impact on research and training at Wesleyan University
              in the fields of developmental biology and neurobiology. The objective of our
              science training programs at Wesleyan University is to provide high-quality
              research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
              postdoctoral fellows and visiting scientists. This hands-on training is of
              fundamental importance for careers in scientific research, technology, and
              education. Special initiatives at Wesleyan University advance women and
              minorities in science, as well as providing access for students with
              disabilities. It is anticipated that the new confocal microscope will
              contribute significantly to a basic understanding of how cells in the
              developing embryo migrate, form connections, and how some undergo programmed
              cell death as part of their normal developmental plan. These studies will
              ultimately lead to a better understanding of how the vertebrate brain and body
              are constructed during development and maintained throughout the life of the
              organism.  



