Title       : Homological Mirror Symmetry and Functional Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0070967

Award Number: 0070967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Polishchuk apolish@math.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract.

Homological mirror symmetry is a conjecture, formulated by
              M.Kontsevich, which asserts the equivalence of certain categories associated to
              complex and symplectic structures on mirror dual Calabi-Yau manifolds.  The
              investigator proposes to work on this conjecture in the case of elliptic
              curves. His previous results obtained in collaboration with E.Zaslow and
              D.Arinkin justify some part of this conjecture.  He proposes to apply these
              results to the study of indefinite theta series.  Another direction of research
              proposed here is related to a new class of functional equations associated to
              prehomogeneous vector spaces over local fields.  Prehomogeneous vector spaces
              and their zeta-functions were studied extensively by M.Sato and his school. 
              The investigator proposes to work on certain ``diagonalization'' of functional
              equations for Sato's zeta-functions.  The next stage of this research would be
              to relate the constants in these functional equations to local L-factors.  This
              would allow to find a new class of integrals for which the stationary phase
              approximation is exact.

The first part of this project is aimed at proving a
              conjecture which originated from mathematical physics.  This conjecture, which
              was proposed by M.Kontsevich in 1994, is expected to explain the phenomenon of
              mirror symmetry discovered by  physicists about a decade ago.  This discovery
              (along with other similar dualities in string theory) is an example of recent
              developments in theoretical physics which still lack solid mathematical
              foundation.  The present work should be considered as a contribution to laying
              such a foundation.  The second part of this project is devoted to some problems
              arising from number theory.  It was known already in the 19-th century that
              some deep properties of numbers are encoded in certain functions of complex
              variable called zeta-functions.  The proposed work is devoted to the study of a
              new class of functional equations satisfied by zeta-functions which arise in
              representation theory.


