Title       : Symbolically Finding Key Equations in Both Analysis and Engineering and Roots of
               Hereditary Polynomials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0070885

Award Number: 0070885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Stankus mstankus@calpoly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 The investigator develops efficient algorithms, as well as
additional
              techniques and methodologies, that can be used to
solve the noncommutative
              algebraic components of problems in
analysis and engineering.  The
              noncommutative algebraic component
of such a problem consists of solving a
              collection of equations
where each of the variables represents a matrix or
              bounded linear
transformation.  Solving such problems involves manipulating
              this
collection of equations until it is amenable to numerical
solution or
              until the manipulated collection has some desirable
property.  Methodologies
              based on noncommutative Groebner basis
were developed in a paper by J. 
              William Helton and the
investigator in 1998 and these techniques are effective
              for
solving a short list of problems.  Several directions of study
for the
              current project include removing the need for additional
"invertibility
              assumptions," removing redundant equations, and
finding appropriate changes of
              variables.  The new approaches
should widen the range of problems that can be
              solved.
     Ordinary arithmetic is commutative: 2 times 5 is the same as
5
              times 2, and in fact A times B is the same as B times A for any
numbers A and
              B.  The arithmetic of matrices -- rectangular arrays
of numbers that can
              represent, for example, the forces on
diferent parts of a bridge or airplane
              -- is not commutative: A
times B is not always the same as B times A.  The
              development and
implementation of algorithms for solving collections
              of
polynomial equations spurred a great amount of activity in
commutative
              algebra.  In an analogous way, the development of
algorithms and methodologies
              for solving collections of matrix
equations can have a dramatic impact on
              solving engineering and
analysis problems that have noncommutative algebraic
              components,
where the order in which components of the calculation
              are
arranged can change the answers.  With currently developed
techniques,
              some computations that arise commonly in engineering
require a considerable
              amount of time to perform by hand, but can
be done very quickly on a computer.
               The development of new
methods for noncommutative algebra should
              significantly increase
the number and types of problems that can be solved
              efficiently
with the assistance of computers.
