Title       : Inverse Design of Thermal Systems with Predominant Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0070545

Award Number: 0070545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299957             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Howell jhowell@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ofodike A. Ezekoye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Design of equipment for high-temperature thermal processes is very complex when
              multiple modes of heat transfer (radiation, convection and/or conduction) are
              present. When the modes are present and coupled, the equations describing
              energy transfer are very nonlinear, and may be integro-differential in form.
              Very sophisticated programs have been developed to model such systems.  These
              programs are expensive to run and require large memory and storage capacity .
              They are based on forward design; that is, the geometry and boundary conditions
              are specified, and the resulting temperatures and rates of heat transfer are
              computed. If these are unsatisfactory, then the geometry or other conditions
              are altered, and the program is rerun. This process is repeated until the
              desired outcome is reached and the design is then fixed. 
An inverse design
              method specifies the desired outcome, and directly finds the conditions
              necessary to achieve this outcome without iteration. However, the mathematics
              of inverse techniques is less developed than is the case for forward problems,
              because the equations describing inverse design are ill-behaved
              (near-singular). Based on successful methods we have previously applied to
              inverse design of radiating systems, we propose to extend inverse design
              techniques to the much more complex case of multimode heat transfer with
              significant radiative transfer including combustion sources, where the
              mathematics becomes not only inverse, but non-linear. The results, if
              successful, will lead to much more efficient practical design of
              high-temperature equipment such as turbine engines and industrial/utility
              furnaces and boilers.


