Title       : Electronic Phenomena in Carbon Nanotubes: Quantum Mechanics in Low-Dimensional
               Systems with Topological Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0070661

Award Number: 0070661
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Carroll dcarrol@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to a young faculty member at Clemson
              University, with a sub-award to a researcher at Rensselaer Polytechnic
              University. This project will systematically and quantitatively study the
              changes in local electronic structure of carbon nanotubes as a function of
              topological symmetry breaking and correlate it to long-range transport
              behavior, as well as to the modification of their interactions with their
              surroundings (i.e. contacts). Recently developed techniques of synthesis,
              manipulation, and chemical modification, will be coupled with atomic scale
              electronic characterization, based on scanning probe microscopies and
              spectroscopies, to yield a direct visualization of topological effects in
              low-dimensional solids. Several forms of nanotube structures, both ordered
              aggregate clusters and individual single walled nanotubes, will be synthesized
              at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute using electric arc discharge and chemical
              vapor deposition.  The topological characterization experiments will be
              performed using the low temperature scanning tunneling microscopy and
              spectroscopy at Clemson University. This project will provide a number of basic
              insights into the electronic nature of nanotubes when they become imperfect.
              This should be extremely useful for device applications based on nanotubes,
              since symmetry breaking will strongly influence the electronic properties of
              these low dimensional systems. Students and post-doctoral associates involved
              in the program will receive interdisciplinary training in physics and materials
              science and in some of the basic experimental tools in
              nanotechnology.
%%%
Carbon nanotubes are fascinating structures with
              remarkable physical properties. They are seamless cylinders of graphite sheets,
              with diameters in the nanometer size and large aspect ratios. The electronic
              structure of these objects, which can vary from metallic to semiconductor-like,
              depends on lattice helicity and the presence of local defects, the latter of
              which changes topology and composition. It is important to study the effect of
              defects (or more generally symmetry breaking) in these structures on their
              electronic properties, for applications as electronic devices. This is an
              individual investigator award to a young faculty member at Clemson University,
              with a sub-award to a researcher at Rensselaer Polytechnic University. The
              project that will systematically and quantitatively study the changes in local
              electronic structure as a function of symmetry breaking and correlate it to
              long-range transport behavior.  Several forms of nanotube structures will be
              fabricated using electric arc discharge and chemical vapor deposition. Low
              temperature scanning tunneling microscopy will be used for the characterization
              of these structures to quantify the effects of symmetry breaking. The project
              is an interdisciplinary effort between the physics department at Clemson
              University and the materials science and engineering department at Renssleaer
              Polytechnic Institute and the students and post-doctoral associates who will be
              trained on this project will receive training in both disciplines. In addition
              the students will train on the basic experimental techniques that are important
              in nanotechnology, which is becoming an important area in future condensed
              matter physics and materials science.
***

