Title       : An Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for the Biological Sciences at the University
               of Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2000       
File        : a0070393

Award Number: 0070393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Williams dgw@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Dettman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven W. Leavitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Therese A. Markow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carlos Martinez del Rio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Stable isotope ratio mass spectrometry is a fundamental tool used to study
              energy and nutrient flow, metabolism, and physiology in natural and
              human-dominated ecosystems.  Stable isotopes of the light elements (C, H, N, O,
              and S) occur naturally at different abundances among organic and inorganic
              molecules cycling within the biosphere. Isotopes within these molecules tend to
              separate between product and reactant in biochemical reactions and during
              diffusional flux across concentration gradients, leaving a characteristic
              fingerprint of these processes on ecosystems.  Thus, stable isotopes contain
              information on physical, biophysical, and biological processes that govern the
              fate of materials in Earth's ecosystems.  Stable isotope measurements offer
              unique insights into physiological variation, integrating processes at
              different spatial and temporal scales.  Measurements of stable isotope ratios
              in soils and plant samples are used to reconstruct past climates and vegetation
              distribution, evaluate physiological responses of wild and domesticated plants
              and animals to environmental stress, characterize patterns of material
              transfers and transformations among plant, animal, and microbial components of
              ecosystems, and understand atmosphere-biosphere interactions.  Stable isotope
              measurements offer great promise for evaluating responses of Earth's ecosystems
              to human activities at the global level.
    A continuous-flow isotope ratio
              mass spectrometer equipped with automated peripherals for sample-preparation
              and analysis from Finnigan MAT will be used for studies in ecosystem ecology,
              plant and animal physiological ecology, evolutionary ecology and global change
              biology.
     The new mass spectrometer system will greatly enhance
              undergraduate, graduate, and post-doctoral education at the University of
              Arizona.  The five major users collectively advise 13 graduate students, 16
              undergraduate students, and 4 post-docs, all of whom will use the mass
              spectrometer.  At least six formal University of Arizona courses cover stable
              isotope theory and/or methodology.  This new mass spectrometer system will
              ensure that the University of Arizona has the technological capability to meet
              research and teaching challenges well into the future.

