Title       : Problems in Function Theory and Operator Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0070642

Award Number: 0070642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169116             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Rochberg rr@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:

The applicant proposes to work on several related problems in
              function
theoretic operator theory and in Euclidean harmonic analysis. He
              plans to
use his recent work with Arcozzi and Sawyer as a basis for the study
              of
interpolating sequences in Besov spaces. He proposes to use phase
              space
methods to study eigenvectors of pseudodifferential operators and as
              well
as solutions to other extremal problems. He also plans to use his
              recent
work with Holland on the asymptotic behavior of Bergman kernel
              functions
as a starting point to investigate whether generalized
              Segal-Bargmann
spaces can be used to give quantum deformations of the plane.
              Finally, he
plans to investigate whether certain techniques that arose in
              recent work
on higher order Hankel operators have broader application in
              operator
theory. The work proposed will advance the understanding of the
              function
theoretic operator theory on spaces of holomorphic functions and
              of
operators arising in Euclidean harmonic analysis. It will also develop
              new
viewpoints and techniques that will have general applicability in
              those
areas.

More generally, the proposed work is at the interface of
              operator theory,
function theory, and harmonic analysis.  The unifying theme
              of the work is
the systematic use of phase space methods, both as a technical
              tool and,
more importantly, as a unifying conceptual structure.  Those tools
              and
that viewpoint have been very productive, both historically and
              recently,
of important new techniques in theoretical mathematics and of major
              new
applications of mathematics to science and engineering.  The recent
              work
Lacey and Thiele on bilinear operators is an example of the first and
              the
impact of wavelet and related methods on signal processing is
              a
spectacular example of the second.  One certainly expects that
              further
research in these areas will continue to produce important
              additional
contributions inside and outside of mathematics.




