Title       : Mirror Symmetry and Frobenius Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a0070681

Award Number: 0070681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph M. Kaufmann   (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis Bonahon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project will study the mirror-symmetry conjecture in the framework of
              Frobenius manifolds.  his conjecture has many levels, from a purely topological
              statement about Hodge numbers to the most advanced formulation in terms of
              equivalences of A-infinity categories.  There is an intermediate level
              described by Frobenius manifolds, where the structures which are supposed to be
              related by this symmetry are richer than the topological picture, but also  do
              not have the full not easily handleable categorical structure.  In the physical
              framework there is a way to construct mirror-symmetric partners by using
              elementary building blocks and the two operations of tensor product and
              orbifolding.  One of the two operations, the tensor product has been the object
              of previous research of R. Kaufmann and is fully understood within the theory
              Frobenius manifolds.  The equivalent of the elementary building blocks will be
              a version of the miniversal unfoldings of singularities of functions with
              isolated critical points.  The last step, however, remains to be completed;
              i.e. the definition of orbifolding.  This amounts to studying finite group
              actions and defining the correct quotient in the category.

In the past few
              years a fruitful interaction between the mathematics and physics communities
              has developed driven by the subject of string theory.  This has for instance
              united algebraic geometers and physicists in looking into questions about
              mirror symmetry.  This is a conjectural symmetry based on physical arguments,
              which has striking implications for algebraic and enumerative geometry.


