Title       : Fundamental Properties of GaAsN and InGaAsN - Toward Optoelectronic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0070240

Award Number: 0070240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Holtz mark.holtz@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carmen S. Menoni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henryk Temkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               

It is proposed to grow and characterize ternary alloys of conventional
              III-V
compounds (e.g. GaAs, InAs) with III-N compounds (e.g. GaN, InN) on
              GaAs
substrates. These alloys are expected to be cubic with the zincblende
              structure and to
possess a direct bandgap. However, the large lattice mismatch
              between GaAs and GaN
and the difference in atomic orbital energies between As
              and N result in a very unusual
compositional dependence of the bandgap. The
              optical bowing coefficients in GaAs1-xNx
are at least an order of magnitude
              greater than those encountered in common III-V
alloys. Its bandgap decreases
              rapidly with increasing N fraction. This offers a possibility
of preparing
              novel optoelectronic devices, on GaAs substrates, operating in the 1.3 -
              1.55
mm range. 

The materials needed for this study will be grown by
              Metalorganic Molecular
Beam Epitaxy (MOMBE). The effect of nitrogen
              incorporation on physical
microstructure and optical bandgap of epitaxial
              layers will be determined by a variety of
experimental techniques. Raman
              scattering will be used to investigate microstructural
effects such as
              nitrogen incorporation, spontaneous ordering, and phase separation.
Raman
              results will be modeled using bond polarizability, a two-component
              molecular
model, finite size, and strain effects. Near band edge optical
              properties will be studied
extensively by cw and time-resolved
              photoluminescence. These will focus on how
nitrogen incorporation modifies
              carrier recombination. Ellipsometry and reflectance
methods will be used to
              gain information of the above-bandgap optical properties.
Phenomenological
              deformation potentials model will be used to account for strain effects
in
              quantum wells and superlattices of InGaAsN/GaAs. Finally, quantum well
              structures
based on InGaAsN/GaAs will be used as active layers to make
              vertical cavity lasers
operating in the wavelength range of 1.3-1.55 mm.


              

