Title       : Probabilistic Approach in Geometric Functional Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0070458

Award Number: 0070458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67185              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Rudelson rudelson@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI plans to study metric spaces and convex bodies using the methods of
              Probability. For many problems of Convex Geometry, like finding sections of a
              convex body with certain nice properties or approximating a convex body by
              another body, having a better structure, the explicit constructions are
              unknown. In these cases random constructions were proved to be very effective.
              It is often possible to define a random section or approximation and to show
              that it has the desired property with high probability. This approach combined
              with advanced probabilistic tools, like measure concentration, led to major
              discoveries in Convex geometry and Functional Analysis, including Dvoretzky's
              Theorem and inverse Santalo Inequality. The PI intends to apply the
              probabilistic method to study embeddings of different metric spaces, such as
              groups, graphs etc., into Banach spaces. These metric spaces are often equipped
              with a probability measure, which has strong concentration properties. Then it
              is possible to obtain significant information about the embedding of such
              metric space into a Banach space by studying the distribution of the image of a
              random point. Another direction of the proposed research is related to the
              study of convex bodies, which are not necessary symmetric. The results obtained
              in the last 3 years by several researchers, including the PI, show that many
              properties, previously known only for convex symmetric bodies, hold without the
              assumption of symmetry. The PI plans to continue his work in this area with the
              aim of constructing a theory of general convex bodies, which would be parallel
              to the existing theory of convex symmetric bodies.


The proposed research
              will provide new connections between Functional Analysis, Convex Geometry and
              Probability. The results on embedding graphs into Banach spaces will be useful
              for finding small separators of graphs. This can lead to construction of more
              effective algorithms in several Computer Science problems, in particular in
              numerical solution of partial differential equations. The non-symmetric convex
              sets, which are one of the main objects of the proposed research, arise
              naturally in a broad class of optimization problems. So, better understanding
              of the structure of such bodies will result in constructing more effective
              optimization algorithms. The stochastic processes related to a convex body are
              also of considerable interest for the Control Theory.


