Title       : Combinatorial Problems in Algebra, Topology and Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a0070757

Award Number: 0070757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Helen G. Grundman                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82268              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Shareshian   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator studies combinatorial problems which arise
in various areas of
              mathematics.  In joint work with R. Guralnick,
the investigator examines
              branched coverings of Riemann surfaces
whose monodromy groups are the
              symmetric and alternating groups
S_n and A_n acting on subsets of a fixed size
              from the n-set. The
main goals of this project are 1) to show that with a
              small and known list of exceptions, the genus of the covering surface must grow
              with both the number of sheets of the covering and the number of branch points,
              and 
2) to determine all such coverings for which the genus of the
              covering
space is at most one.
This project is one of the final steps in a
              program initiated by
Guralnick and J. Thompson. In addition, the investigator
              continues his
study of monotone graph and hypergraph properties which arise in
              V.
Vassiliev's theory of finite type invariants of knots and
              ornaments.
Finally, the investigator continues his examination of order
              complexes
of subgroup lattices of finite groups. He attempts to use
              topological
methods to distinguish intervals in subgroup lattices of finite
              groups
from arbitrary finite lattices.  With V. Welker, he investigates
              the
topology of the order complexes of subgroup lattices of finite
              simple
groups.

The investigator's main interests are in combinatorics,
              which is the
study of discrete, usually finite mathematical objects. 
              Combinatorial
objects arise in various areas of applied mathematics and
              computer
science, including communications and the theory of
              algorithmic
complexity.  Also, there are complicated nondiscrete
              mathematical
objects which can be better understood by examining
              associated
combinatorial objects.  The investigator studies combinatorial
              objects
which arise in this manner.
