Title       : Representation Theory of Finite Dimensional Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a0070506

Award Number: 0070506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Birge Huisgen-Zimmermann birge@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator's main theme is to explore the representation theory
of wild
              finite dimensional algebras by analyzing specific classes of
representations
              and the homomorphisms among them with an array of
methods, ranging from
              geometric through combinatorial to
homological.  Roughly, these classes can be
              grouped under the
following headings: (1) Classes of modules having fixed
              sequence of
radical layers and, more generally, classes of modules with fixed
              top
and fixed vector space dimension. (2) Classes of modules
              forming
contravariantly finite or covariantly finite subcategories within
              the
full category of finitely generated modules. (3) Classes of
              infinite
direct sums (mainly of generic and finitely generated
              modules)
enjoying finiteness conditions over their endomorphism rings. 
              A
related investigation aims at the geometry of finite complexes of
modules
              and derived categories as an alternate setting for the study
of maps among
              representations. There are methodological
interconnections among these lines,
              as well as strong links in terms
of the overall strategy of gaining a better
              understanding of algebras
that have wild representation type. 

Under a
              wider angle, the project should be seen in the following
framework: The
              majority of our physical models for the universe are
placed within finite
              dimensional vector spaces. Frequently, such
spaces carry additional structure,
              such as a Lie or associative
algebra structure, for example. Associative
              finite dimensional
algebras are the objects of the investigator's research.
              One approach
towards understanding them is to explore their representations,
              which
can be thought of as 'linearized photographs' within sets of
              square
matrices, both coarse-grained and fine-grained pictures
              containing
valuable information. The representation type of the
              considered
algebra is called 'tame' if the representations of any fixed
              matrix
size can be subdivided into finitely many 'manageable' series
              (these
series themselves may be infinite), otherwise it is called 'wild'.
The
              wild case being the one predominantly encountered in mathematical
nature, this
              is the case which the investigator is presently
tackling. Her idea is to
              thoroughly understand important subclasses
of the full class of
              representations of algebras of wild type, and to
thus establish an interlinked
              mosaic of analyzed territory. Attention
is being paid to choosing lines that
              optimally connect with the needs
of adjacent fields (such as the theory of
              algebraic or quantum groups)
and with the body of insights already
              established.
