Title       : Topics in Complex and Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0070044

Award Number: 0070044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160621             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos A. Berenstein carlos@isr.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Berenstein intends to continue his research in several problems of
              complex analysis, commutative algebra, and integral geometry.  For instance,
              the membership problem, which consists of deciding whether a polynomial belongs
              to a given ideal, appears in robotics, control theory and computational
              geometry.  For that reason, it is of great interest to estimate its complexity
              and obtain a priori knowledge about its solvability.  Using methods from
              complex analysis (multidimensional residues, integral representation formulas),
              Berenstein, in collaboration with Yger, has already obtained important results
              in this area.   For instance, sharp estimates about the degrees and sizes of
              the coefficients of n-variable polynomials solving Hilbert's Nullstellensatz
              for fields of arbitrary characteristics.  Berenstein plans to continue working
              on these problems and solve related questions in trancedental number
              theory.
Several problems in tomography will also be investigated by Prof.
              Berenstein.  For instance, an algorithm that allows a significant reduction in
              the radiation dosage for CAT scans was obtained by Berenstein with Walnut et
              al. (A patent will be awarded to this invention).  Continuation of this work,
              with possible applications to lung cancer detection is envisioned.  Electrical
              impedance tomography is another kind of non-intrusive medical imaging and also
              used in the detection of cracks in materials.  The geodesic Radon transform in
              the hyperbolic plane plays a role in the algorithms.  Another imaging problem
              lies at the heart of the Pompeiu transform, which models a homogeneous detector
              of arbitrary geometrical shape.  Earlier work on this problem, done jointly
              with Gay, has lead both to the consideration of problems of complex analysis in
              the Heisenberg group, as well as several other questions of non-destructive
              evaluation of materials.		

