Title       : CombinaTexas: A Combinatorics Conference for the South-Central U.S.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a0070834

Award Number: 0070834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : June 15,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8244               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan McCammond jon.mccammond@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura M. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:

The Principal Investigators are organizing a conference on
              combinatorics to be held at Texas A&M University in late March, 2000.  The
              intent is to establish an annual combinatorics conference to be held each
              spring at a university in the South-Central United States.  There are currently
              several regional combinatorics/graph theory conferences held annually,
              including the Southeastern Combinatorics Conference, the Midwest Graph Theory
              Conference, the Cumberland Conference in the Ohio River Valley, and the Smith
              Conference in Massachusetts.  No similar series of meetings are currently being
              held in Texas or any of the surrounding states.  At the same time, the number
              of combinatorialists in the region has been rising steadily in recent years,
              creating a need for a regular vehicle for communication. The conference series
              will strive to bring in speakers from diverse subfields of combinatorics, at
              varying career stages, and from different universities within the region, as
              well as a small number of distinguished speakers from outside the region.
              Speakers for the first talk include two international speakers (Guenter Ziegler
              of the Technische Universitaet Berlin and Dominic Welsh of Oxford University)
              as well as five speakers from the region (Margaret Bayer of the University of
              Kansas, Joseph Kung of the University of North Texas, James Oxley of Louisiana
              State University,William Trotter of Arizona State University, and Catherine Yan
              of Texas A&M University).  The funds provided by the NSF will enable the
              proposers to offer stipends to graduate students and postdocs from other
              institutions to allow them to attend the conference as well as to provide
              domestic travel expenses and modest honoraria for the seven primary
              speakers.

The growth of the combinatorics community in the region is
              reflective of the growth in the activity and importance of combinatorics in the
              last few decades.  The proliferation of computer technology has only
              accelerated this trend, since combinatorics and discrete mathematics provide
              the foundations on which the theories and practices of computation are based. 
              The speed of this growth and the breadth of the field's application increases
              the need for regular communication between researchers.  This is especially
              true in this part of the country, in which the geographical distances between
              researchers impedes more impromptu communication. The format of the conference
              addresses these needs, encouraging broad-based talks from diverse subfields and
              including a poster session and other occasions for informal discussions.

