Title       : Pattern Classification in Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a0070842

Award Number: 0070842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84414              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xubo B. Song xubosong@ece.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Pavel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In the real world, the identity of an object is often ambiguous due to noise or
              lack of information.  This ambiguity can sometimes be reduced by utilizing
              extra information, referred to as context, provided by surrounding objects.  
              Unfortunately, existing approaches that utilize context collapse when the
              number of context-bearing objects is large.   Furthermore, there has been no
              attempt to separate relevant context from irrelevant context.   In this project
              PI will develop algorithms that can reliably identify relevant context and then
              exploit it in a decision making process for pattern classification that is
              computationally tractable.   The approach employs a Bayesian framework that
              incorporates "partial" context represented as the "derivative" of the
              identities of surrounding objects.   The criteria for evaluation of context
              relevancy include information-theoretic measures such as mutual information and
              "expected relative entropy", as well as complete factorization of Bayesian
              networks.  The development of the algorithms was initially motivated by and
              will be ultimately tested on two related yet different medical diagnostic
              applications:   white blood cell differentiation and microscopic urinalysis
              image classification.   The resulting classification will provide diagnostic
              information about real patients.   Although the testbed applications relate to
              medical diagnosis, the results of this research will be general and can find an
              abundance of uses in other areas, so this work will impact the broader scope of
              knowledge discovery, data mining, machine learning, and pattern recognition
              where context plays a role.
