Title       : Base Loci of Linear Series and Diophantine Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0070190

Award Number: 0070190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Nakamaye nakamaye@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              From the most abstract concepts of theoretical physics to the
cryptosystems
              used by millions of people every day (often without realizing it) , 
algebraic
              geometry and number
theory have a genuine and vital presence in twenty-first
              century life.  
This proposal seeks to develop tools of algebraic geometry
              with a view
toward number theoretic applications.  Of central importance is
              the 
problem of finding rational or whole number solutions to
              polynomial
equations, the most famous example of which is Fermat's Last
              Theorem
recently established by Wiles.   The new geometric techniques
              developed under this 
proposal will be applied to limit the number of rational
              solutions of a more general
polynomial equation.

Many situations in
              diophantine approximation produce a linear series on a
smooth projective
              variety.   Often there are arguments employing vanishing theorems and
              intersection theory that force the series to move, showing the base locus to be
              empty.  On the other hand, varous hypothetical assumptions-for example,
              assuming that there are infinitely many rational points on a curve of genus at
              least two, or assuming that there are good rational approximations of an
              algebraic irrational number-- 
force the linear series in question to have a
              non-empty base locus.  The resulting contradiction 
shows the hypothetical
              assumption to be false.  This line or reasoning has been used to 
establish
              Mordell's conjecture and Roth's theorem respectively, and
will be applied in
              this project to study higher dimensional problems, such as the
Schmidt
              subspace theorem and Faltings' theorem on rational points of
subvarieties of
              abelian varieties, with a long term goal of extending and
or strengthening
              these theorems.  The key algebro-geometric background
required in these
              arguments is a detailed study of numerical properties of
the base locus of a
              linear series.  In particular, a key question is
whether or not Seshadri
              constants control the existence of global sections
of a line bundle even when
              the bundle is not positive.
