Title       : Invariant Distributions on p-adic Lie Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a0070649

Award Number: 0070649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca A. Herb rah@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Technical Description:  Let G be a connected reductive p-adic group, and let
              L(G) be its Lie algebra.  The proposal is to study the
              G-invariant
distributions on L(G) which are Fourier transforms of invariant
              distributions with compactly generated support. This class of distributions
              includes the  Fourier transforms of orbital integrals, which are important for
              the theory of characters on the group G.  Harish-Chandra proved that these
              distributions are given by functions which are locally constant on the set of
              regular elements of L(G), and can be normalized to be locally bounded on L(G). 
              When G is a real Lie group, the restrictions of these functions to Cartan
              subalgebras have simple formulas because they satisfy differential equations. 
              In the p-adic case, there are analogous formulas for the Fourier transforms of
              orbital integrals restricted to Cartan subalgebras of L(G), but they are only
              valid for large enough sufficiently regular elements in the Cartan subalgebra. 
               These formulas can be used to develop a theory of the constant term analogous
              to that for the real case. One goal of this proposal is to use these formulas
              at infinity to prove global bounds for the restrictions of Fourier transforms
              of orbital integrals to Cartan subalgebras. In order to do this it is necessary
              to control behavior at infinity uniformly as regular elements approach singular
              hyperplanes. A further goal of this proposal is to suitably generalize this
              work to the class of distributions obtained as Fourier transforms of invariant
              distributions with compactly generated support.

	Non-technical Description: 
              The theory of Fourier series and Fourier transforms was developed, starting in
              the 18th century, to study functions of a real variable.  The idea is to write
              an arbitrary function as a sum or integral of the well-understood trigonometric
              functions.  This theory today has many applications in the sciences, in
              engineering, and in mathematics.  Many of the basic ideas involved in Fourier
              analysis can be extended to analyze functions on any space with sufficient
              symmetry.  One class of spaces of special interest in physics and many areas of
              mathematics is linear algebraic groups and their Lie algebras, the analysis on
              the Lie algebra being a linearization of the analysis on the group.  These
              groups and algebras can be realized as  matrices.  Classically, the entries of
              the matrices are real or complex numbers.   However there is also an
              interesting theory when the entries come from other fields, in particular the
              fields of p-adic numbers.  These fields are important in number theory, and the
              study of p-adic groups has many applications to number theory.  In the
              classical situation, much of the analysis involves the use of differential
              equations.  This tool is not available in the p-adic case. The goal of this
              proposal is to analyze the behavior at infinity of certain important
              distributions on p-adic Lie algebras.  The classical results are available as
              motivation, but the techniques of proof are necessarily completely different.

