Title       : Circular Dichroism Spectrometer for Protein/Peptide Structure/Function Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a0070169

Award Number: 0070169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 1,  2001         (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51415              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Crowder   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Lorigan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jan G. Jaworski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Minto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher A. Makaroff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy is an important tool for studying the
              structure of proteins and peptides in solution.  The technique has been
              extensively used to probe the structure of proteins after specific amino acids
              in the proteins have been altered.  This technique has also been used as a
              guide in the preparation of protein and peptide samples for subsequent
              structural studies.
    A CD spectropolarimeter with a temperature controller
              will be used to probe whether a change in the structure of proteins occurs when
              important amino acids are changed.  The proteins under study are (1)
              metallo-beta-lactamase (which confers antibiotic resistance to bacteria), (2)
              3-ketoacyl-ACP synthase III (which is involved in fatty acid synthesis in
              plants and can be potentially used to generate commercially-interesting oils),
              (3) glyoxylase II, and (4) DEX1 (which is involved in meiosis).  The CD
              instrument will also be used to guide the preparation of samples to be studied
              with NMR spectroscopy.  These studies involve the characterization of the
              membrane spanning proteins, phospholamban and plant desaturase/acetylenases,
              when embedded in micelles.
     Undergraduate students, graduate students,
              postdoctoral associates and faculty researchers will use the circular dichroism
              spectrometer. Specific use by undergraduates includes use by students supported
              under an NSF-funded Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program, in a
              biochemistry laboratory course, and in a physical chemistry lab course. The
              instrument will be housed in a common-use, departmental instrumentation lab and
              will be accessible to all researchers at Miami University. The circular
              dichroism spectrometer will contribute significantly to the training of future
              scientists by providing access to important instrumentation for solving
              research problems in biochemistry and biophysics.

