Title       : Problems in Measurable Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0070511

Award Number: 0070511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Rudolph djr@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A  range of studies in measurable dynamics of are  proposed.
They lie generally
              in extensions and applications of orbit equivalence methods.  The PI
has
              helped to develop two general approaches here.  The first is Restricted Orbit
              
Equivalence, where
one places restrictions on the sorts of orbit preserving
              maps allowed.  The second,
and new, method is an "orbit transference method"
              where the orbit equivalence is 
arbitrary
but measurable with respect to an
              algebra orthogonal to the algebra of interest.   
Among the
applications
              proposed for these methods are:
1) a deeper and perhaps complete understanding
              the the Weak Pinsker property of 
Thouvenot
2) a version of the theory of
              Isometric Extensions of Bernoulli automorphism for some 
class of restricted
              orbit equivalences, in particular for standard dyadic reverse
              
filtrations.
3) extensions of restricted orbit equivalence beyond actions of
              descrete amenable 
groups to spaces of labeled random graphs, to not
              necessarilly descrete groups and 
to non-singular actions.  Most important
              here is that one should look for good examples, 
for example an entropy theory
              for nonsingular actions.

Large scale phenomena can often exhibit a random
              behavior. Crystals often include random inclusions.  Large data bases often
              (always?) 
include random errors.  The genome can be modeled as an infinite
              sequence of base 
pairs that in places is random and places not so.  One
              models such  structures in 
probabilistic terms as a space of linked nodes to
              which are attached labels, colors if 
you will, endowed with some notion of
              the probability of occurance of some particular 
local labeling or picture
              occuring within an infinite picture.  It is natural to look for ways of
              
coding and comparing  such random arrays among themselves.   One can seek
              
extremely rigid encodings that allow no  distortion of the nodes and their
              links, just an 
encoding of the label at a particular node to that same node
              in the other labeling
of the array.   Or  more generally and interestingly 
              one can allow the nodes and links to 
distort as well.   By setting some
              control on the distortions one can craft an approach to 
understanding a
              variety of properties of such systems.  Although the goals of this 
proposal
              are of an abstract nature, one of the first such controlled distortions (called
              
f-bar) was brought over from genetics where it was used as a measure of
              evolutionary 
relatedness among DNA molecules.   What is proposed here are a
              variety of 
applications of methods involving controlled distortion of such
              labeled arrays to 
understand such random phenomena more deeply.  


