Title       : Measurement of Microscopic Residual Stress Based on the Evolution of Surface
               Roughness During Shallow Chemical Etching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a0070057

Award Number: 0070057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250593             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyung-Suk Kim kim@engin.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A study will be made of stress-induced surface roughening caused by shallow
              chemical surface etching.  The results will be adapted to residual-stress
              measurement.  Previous work has shown that a simple spectrum analysis of
              nanometer-scale height changes in surface roughness caused by chemical etching
              permits determination of residual-stress components in solids. The principle of
              the analysis is that etching triggers stress-induced surface instability,
              resulting in a roughening of the surface controlled by the magnitude of the
              residual stresses and their direction. The experimental method is called
              "surface roughness-evolution spectroscopy (SRES)," and it measures residual
              stress components in solids with high spatial resolution. 

The study will
              include modeling and experimental studies of surface roughening caused by
              various etchants in shallow chemical etching; this research is expected to
              provide fundamental understanding of the roughening process of stressed solid
              surfaces, while etched chemically. In addition, the understanding will be
              applied to measuring microscopic residual stresses in technologically important
              solid structures, e.g. manufacturing-induced residual stresses in optical
              fibers and intra-granular residual stresses in polycrystalline solids. 

The
              resulting experimental method of skin test for residual-stress measurement is
              expected to make a significant impact in assessing manufacturability,
              reliability and residual life of solid components, which is essential in
              developing and maintaining proper infrastructures of civil and mechanical
              systems.

