Title       : Representation Theory and Automorphic Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0070561

Award Number: 0070561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234783             (Estimated)
Investigator: Birgit Speh speh@cartan.msi.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan Barbasch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Speh/Barbasch

Professor Barbasch will investigate properties of
              unipotent representations of reductive groups such as their unitarity and 
              their relation to automorphic forms and the orbit method.  He will continue his
              joint work with A. Moy and S. Evens on related topics. Professor Speh will
              continue her joint work with J. Rohlfs on Eisenstein cohomology aiming to
              compute Tamagawa numbers and obtain rationality results for periods integrals.
              Jointly with Dan Barbasch she will continue work on lifting automorphic forms
              from twisted endoscopic groups. Birgit Speh will also continue her work on
              Seiberg-Witten equations and twisted torsion.
This proposal falls in the
              general area of representation theory of Lie groups and its applications to
              automorphic forms. Lie groups (named in honor of the Norwegian mathematician
              Sophus Lie) and their representation theory,  have been one of the major themes
              in twentieth century mathematics.  As the mathematical vehicle for exploiting
              the symmetries inherent in a system, the representation theory of Lie groups
              has had a profound impact in analysis and theoretical physics, especially
              quantum mechanics and elementary particle physics. The theory of automorphic
              forms in its modern form was initiated by Gelfand, Piatetski-Shapiro, Langlands
              and Borel and relies heavily on the representation  theory of Lie groups. It
              has had a significant impact on problems arising in classical number theory and
              is expected to continue to do so.  These theories are very abstract, but have
              surprising important applications in areas like theoretical computer science
              and coding theory.  

