Title       : A Theoretical Study of Hadronic Interactions and the Structure of the Nucleon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0070368

Award Number: 0070368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Londergan tlonderg@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0070368
Londergan
	There are two major topics to be studied in this proposal. 
              The first deals with the quark sub-structure of protons and neutrons, and
              
related baryons.  We are studying the validity of charge symmetry, 
which
              states that up quarks in the proton and down quarks in the
neutron should
              behave in identical ways.  This approximate symmetry 
is very well preserved
              in nuclear physics, but we showed that 
previous experiments appeared to
              require significant deviations from
charge symmetry at the quark level.  A
              re-analysis of the experimental  data suggests that charge symmetry is valid to
              a high degree of precision in high energy physics.  We also propose to
              investigate the process by which quarks produced at high energies ``fragment''
              into baryons.  We want to see whether these processes depend on the type, or
              ``flavor,'' of quark which produces the baryon.  We are developing a model for
              this process, and looking at the production of Lambda hyperons.  The simplest 
              model for the Lambda particle consists of an up, down and strange quark.  It is
              customary to assume that up, down and strange quarks contribute equally to the
              fragmentation leading to a Lambda particle.  Our preliminary investigations
              suggest significant differences from this simple ``flavor symmetric'' model. 
              We can explain in simple qualitative terms why this model should be wrong, and
              we predict where large flavor symmetry violation should occur.  
	We also
              propose to investigate bound state and scattering properties for particles in
              two dimensional systems.  We are particularly interested in systems whose
              transverse dimensions are of the same order as the particle wavelength.  In
              these cases, binding and scattering are dominated by wave effects.  We have
              recently published a book on this subject ("Binding and Scattering in
              Two-Dimensional Systems", Londergan, Carini and Murdock, 
Springer-Verlag,
              1999).  We have shown that our work is relevant to the properties of electrons
              in quantum wires, confined electromagnetic modes in waveguides, and confined
              and propagating states in optical systems called ``photonic crystals.''  In
              this proposal we will focus on the properties of ``defect states,'' which are
              found when one starts with a finite periodic system, and then changes the
              properties of one or more of the cells producing the periodic system.  
	The
              principal investigator is Director  
of the Indiana University Nuclear Theory
              Center.  

