Title       : Real and Combinatorial Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0070494

Award Number: 0070494
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Sottile sottile@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9215,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project studies the related areas of real and effective
              algebraic
geometry, particularly enumerative problems, and combinatorial
              problems
arising from enumerative algebraic geometry.  A focus is the real
              number
solutions to classical geometric problems arising from the
              Schubert
calculus, work that is informed by substantial computer
              experimentation.
These effective and computational techniques rely upon the
              combinatorics of
Schubert varieties, Bruhat orders, and the cohomology rings
              of flag
varieties, which Sottile also studies.  An important part of
              this
project is to write a book, "Applicable Algebraic Geometry" jointly
              with
Jaochim Rosenthal and Alex Wang, on application-driven uses of
              algebraic
geometry, providing a useful and motivated introduction to
              algebraic
geometry for applied scientists.

Algebraic geometry, which is the
              study of solutions to systems of
polynomial equations, is important for its
              potential applications--
polynomial equations are ubiquitous in mathematics
              and the applied sciences.
Computational and real aspects of algebraic geometry
              are of particular 
interest, as applications often demand explicit,
              real-number answers to
mathematical questions.   Techniques to obtain such
              explicit answers
often exploit special combinatorial structures of particular
              problems, 
and hence rely upon a good understanding of these structures.  This
              project 
increases the applicability of algebraic geometry by studying
              computational 
and real aspects of algebraic geometry, by deepening the
              understanding 
of related combinatorial structures, and lastly by Sottile
              writing an
application-driven algebraic geometry text for applied scientists
              with 
Rosenthal and Wang.
