Title       : Bad Reduction of Curves and Abelian Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0070522

Award Number: 0070522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76497              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dino J. Lorenzini lorenz@alpha.math.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the main problem in arithmetic geometry is the determination of the set
              
of rational solutions of a system of polynomial equations with rational
              
coefficients. One of the most successful technique in the study of such a set
              
of solutions is to reduce the equations modulo a prime p and to study first
              the 
set of solutions of the latter system of equations. It turns out that in
              many 
situations, it is possible to describe a canonical way of reducing the
              
equations modulo p. For instance, the canonical reduction of an abelian
              
variety is called its Neron model, and is the object of study in Lorenzini's
              
first research project. The canonical reduction of a curve is called its
              
regular minimal model, and is the object of study in Lorenzini's second
              
research project. For all but finitely many prime p, the canonical reduction
              
is `good' and, as the name suggests, such a reduction type  can be better
              
understood than the reduction at the finitely many remaining primes. Our
              
present understanding of the information encoded in the canonical reductions
              
that are not good (and not semistable) is far from complete. Some very
              
difficult problems arise when studying reductions modulo small primes. One
              
such difficulty can be stated as follows. A famous theorem due to
              Grothendieck 
and others states that there exists a finite field extension L/K
              such that 
the reduction of the initial equations viewed as equations over L
              is either 
good or semistable. In other words, it is possible to improve the
              reduction 
by extending the initial field. When p is large, the extension L/K
              is totally
understood once its degree is known: it is the unique cyclic
              extension of that
degree. When p is small and divides the degree of L/K, there
              are infinitely 
many extensions of that given degree, and almost nothing is
              known about the 
specific extension L/K needed to improve the reduction of the
              initial 
equations. Lorenzini's proposed research will shed more light on this
              
and other special phenomena that arise when the reduction modulo a small
              
prime p is not `good'.

For centuries, human beings have been fascinated
              with solving diophantine 
equations, named after the Greek mathematician
              Diophantus who lived in 
the third century AD. The field of diophantine
              equations has taken on
added significance in the modern world as it finds
              applications in a
variety of areas including, for example, encryption. A
              diophantine equation 
is a mathematical expression in several variables, say x
              and y.  The central 
problem in the field is to find all possible solutions
              where x and y 
are both whole numbers or both fractions. For instance, the
              equation xy-10=0 
has many solutions (e.g., x = y = square root of 10) but the
              solutions in 
whole positive numbers are in this case the divisors of 10,
              namely 
(x,y) = (1,10), (2,5), (5,2), and (10,1). While such an  equation is
              very 
simple, a slight modification, such as replacing 10 by a very large
              number 
(for instance, one having 150 digits) renders the new equation
              extremely hard 
to solve in practice. It is this fact, that it is so hard to
              solve such 
equations, that is the key to many of the safest current military
              codes and 
data encryption systems. The complexity of the determination of all
              solutions 
in whole numbers or fractions of an equation increases with the
              power at which
the variables appear in the equation. For instance, the
              equation `x to the 
power n plus y to the power n equals 1' was conjectured in
              the 17th century 
to have only two solutions when n is any odd number greater
              than 1. 
(Those two solutions are (x,y)=(1,0) and (x,y)= (0,1). This 
              conjecture 
is called Fermat's Last Theorem and was proved only in 1994. Since
              the time 
of the Greeks, mathematicians have developed sophisticated tools to
              aid in 
solving equations. This investigator has developed some such
              mathematical 
tools and is currently working on further contributions to this
              field.
