Title       : Self-Similarity, Tiling, and Wavelets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0070586

Award Number: 0070586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yang Wang wang@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
	
This proposal concerns several interrelated areas of mathematics:
              
self-affine tiles and reptiles, refinable functions and wavelets,
              spectral
sets, and mathematical quasicrystals. Although the subjects may
              appear to be
rather distant from each other, the proposal actually has a very
              coherent
central theme, which is self-similarity and tiling, and using
              analytical
techniques to study them.  The theme occurs naturally in
              self-affine tiles and reptiles, and in the branch of quasicrystal questions the
              PI proposes here. It occurs, although
less obviously, in refinable functions
              and in spectral sets. 
The refinement equation satisfied by a refinable
              function is a generalized self-similarity,
and it is closely related to
              self-affine tiles and self-similar measures.
Spectral sets, on the other hand,
              are closely tied with tiling, as it is
conjectured that a set is a spectral
              set if and only if it tiles by
translation.
 
       A self-similar tile is
              one that can be disected into several pieces
such that all pieces are
              identical in shape and are similar to the original
tile. The simplest example
              of such a tile is the square, which can be
disected into 4 identical squares
              half in dimension of the original square.
By repeated inflation and disecting
              of a self-similar tile we can cover
a larger and larger area, and this results
              a self-similar tiling. Self-similar
tilings are fascinating, and many of the
              aperiodic tiles discovered
in recent years, such as the Penrose aperiodic
              tiles, can be viewed
as generalized self-similar tiles. Furthermore,
              self-similar tilings
have been linked to quasicrystals, materials whose atomic
              structures
are aperiodic rather than the usual periodic structures. It is
              not
clear how these types of atomic structure are formed, but models
              have
been conceived by physicists using aperiodic tiles. 


