Title       : Dynamics of Slow Granular Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0070329

Award Number: 0070329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Durian durian@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This experimental condensed matter physics project will investigate the dynamics
              of granular flows that exhibit on/off intermittency. Such behavior is very
              common, but traditional measurement techniques do not have sufficient
              resolution and dynamic range to capture the very rapid grain-grain collisions
              and the slow on/off switching of the flows. A new approach will be employed in
              which this information is extracted from the second- and fourth-order intensity
              correlation functions for temporal fluctuations in the intensity of light
              multiply-scattered by the sample. Data will be obtained for intermittent
              surface flows (avalanches), Couette flows (stick-slip), and vibrated flows
              (periodic). Particular interest is in the crossover between smooth and
              intermittent flows as a function of forcing rate. This should aid in testing
              and developing theories, which are currently limited to either quasi-static or
              fully-fluidized regimes. This should be useful in a wide variety of industries,
              where transport and processing of granular materials is now accomplished only
              with great inefficiency. Insight may also be gained into closely related
              geophysical events such as landslides, erosion, and earthquakes. The project
              provides excellent training for graduate students in state-of-the art
              experimental methods and for introducing them to materials and topics at the
              forefront of modern condensed matter physics.
%%%
This experimental condensed
              matter physics project investigates the microscopic dynamics of granular flows
              that are slow and, hence, intermittent. Such behavior is familiar to anyone who
              has slowly poured a small amount of sand from a bucket, or rice from a bag, or
              tried to shake out one pill from a bottle. These flows are all smooth, like a
              liquid, only if very fast; if slow, they are intermittent via a series of
              avalanches. This behavior is important in a wide variety of industries, where
              foods, pharmaceutical and ceramic powders, building materials, raw ores, etc.
              need to be -but are often not- processed and transported efficiently without
              jamming. This behavior is also important in geophysical events such as
              landslides, erosion, and earthquakes. In spite of their ubiquity and
              importance, slow flows and the crossover to smooth fast flows are not yet
              understood. Current engineering theories are applicable only to smooth flows,
              and current physics theories are applicable only to very infrequent flows; none
              can capture the full range of behavior. The usual experimental methods are also
              incapable of simultaneously capturing the rapid grain motion during flow along
              with the slow on-off switching of the flow itself. This project will do so, for
              the first time, by state-of-the-art techniques involving photon correlations
              from laser light bounced off a sample. In addition to practical impact on
              industry and geophysics, this project will provide excellent training for
              students in new experimental methods and will introduce them to materials and
              topics at the forefront of modern condensed matter physics.


