Title       : A Confocal Imaging Facility for Upright and Inverted Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0070391

Award Number: 0070391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147349             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael V. Danilchik danilchi@ohsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	A confocal microscope imaging facility will be established for six
              developmental biologists investigating cellular structures, events, and gene
              expression patterns in early Xenopus laevis embryos, in developing Manduca
              sexta nervous systems, and in mammalian endothelial cell-culture preparations. 
              The confocal system will be configured with 3 sensitive photomultipliers and
              two lasers producing four visible-light lines, and with a compound upright
              microscope equipped with long-working distance water-immersion objectives to
              facilitate in vivo experiments involving microinjection or
              micromanipulation.

	The PI (Danilchik) has used a confocal system with an
              inverted microscope for several years to study the development of early Xenopus
              embryos, particularly on the vegetal (underside) surface of the fertilized egg,
              where localized molecules are relocalized via interactions with a complex and
              dynamic cytoskeleton.  Recent work has turned to cytoskeleton-membrane
              interactions on the animal (upper) surface of the egg during cytokinesis. 
              Current research plans are to follow particle motions, membrane fusion events,
              and cytoskeletal reorganization in the animal surface of living embryos. 
              Because amphibian embryos cannot develop normally when turned upside down, an
              upright confocal system will be vital for these studies.  Three other users
              (Copenhaver, Kent, Morton) study aspects of neural development and neuronal
              signalling in the tobacco hornworm Manduca sexta:   Copenhaver studies the
              guidance of neuronal migration in Manduca, and has developed a live preparation
              in which neurons migrate in plain view along the dorsal surface of the gut. 
              Kent uses Manduca as a model system to study developmental changes in motor
              terminals and dendrites in large whole-mount preparations and to examine
              synaptic specializations and growth cone morphology of identified motor neurons
              in vitro.   Morton is examining the regulation of cyclic GMP (cGMP) production
              by neuropeptides in Manduca and C. elegans, and will require confocal
              microscopy with multiple laser lines to demonstrate colocalization of two or
              more antigens in wholemount preparations.  Christian will use the confocal
              system to study the subcellular localization of components of the TGFBeta
              signal transduction pathway in developing Xenopus early embryos.   Farrell
              studies the role of extracellular matrix components in the process of
              angiogenesis, and is interested in developing confocal methods to screen cell
              lines transfected with regulators of integrin receptor
              expression.

	Acquisition of a state-of-the-art confocal system with multiple
              laser lines and enhanced photon detection will greatly enhance and expand our
              individual research efforts, and will give us the ability to develop crucial
              live-cell imaging techniques. The instrumentation will be available for
              graduate students throughout the year and undergraduates in summer programs.
              


