Title       : The Relative Trace Formula and its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0070779

Award Number: 0070779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan D. Rogawski jonr@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION

The relative trace formula (RTF) is used to
              study automorphic representations of a reductive group G that are distinguished
              by a subgroup H obtained as the fixed-point set of an involution.  One hopes to
              characterize distinguished generic representations as functorial transfers from
              a third group G' (which can be specified conjecturally in terms of the
              involution) by comparing RTF with the Kuznetzov trace formula on G'.  To this
              end, it is important to obtain a fine spectral expansion of the RTF and, in
              particular, to write the spectral expansion in terms of relative Bessel
              distributions. Progress towards this goal was made in prior joint work by the
              PI, Jacquet and Lapid for the case of the standard Galois involution on GL(n). 
              They developed a procedure for defining regularized periods of Eisenstein
              series, which turns out to be key ingredients in the fine spectral expansion.
              In some cases, it has been possible to express the regularized periods in terms
              of certain integrals analagous to intertwining operators which have been called
              intertwining periods.  The PI intends, in collaboration with E. Lapid, to
              extend this previous work to the general case.  This will involve analytic
              problems related to Eisenstein series and combinatorial problems related to the
              structure of the orbits of the Borel subgroup on G/H. It will also be necessary
              to develop a suitable truncation operator.  One would like to express the
              regularized periods of cuspidal Eisenstein series in terms of  L-functions.  In
              general, however,  the regularized period will be equal to an infinite sum of
              intertwining periods.  To deal with this problem, the PI and Lapid intend to
              develop a formalism for forming linear combinations of the intertwining
              periods, in analogy with the linear combinations of characters that occur in 
              the endoscopic theory of Langlands-Shelstad. Closely related is the problem of 
              establishing identities between relative Bessel distributions for the pair
              (G,H) and Bessel distributions on G'.  In a related project to be carried out
              with D. Ramakrishnan, the PI will investigate certain limit formulas connected
              with relative trace formulas. This will lead to a new method of proof and more
              precise versions of previously known results of W. Duke and others on the
              distribution of certain special values of GL(2) L-functions.  The distribution
              results will involve certain measures on the spherical dual. Higher rank cases
              will be investigated and a general context in which to place the results will
              be sought.


NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION

The history of mathematics has
              shown that the simplest phenomena are sometimes the hardest to understand
              deeply.  The correct explanation may emerge only after the right theoretical
              framework has been found.  The reciprocity laws of number theory fall into this
              category of mathematical phenomena.  The simplest law of this type, the
              so-called law of quadratic reciprocity, is a beautiful and mysterious fact
              about ordinary whole numbers.  It can be explained to a curious high school
              student, but its true structural meaning can only be understood within the
              context of a sophisticated and advanced part of number theory called class
              field theory.  One of the great challenges of modern number theory is to fully
              explore the most general reciprocity laws.  A framework for formulating such
              laws was developed 30 years ago by R. Langlands, and as a result, we know that
              there must exist a vast web of interrelated reciprocity laws.  As a totality,
              these conjectural laws are called the functoriality principle.  The
              functoriality principle seeks to explain the reciprocity laws within the
              context of a theory that originated in theoretical physics, the so-called
              representation theory of semisimple groups.  In addition to ties with advanced
              theoretical physics, the theory of functoriality has found applications in
              diverse areas of combinatorics, coding theory, and cryptography.  Enormous
              progess in the theory of functoriality has been made during the last thirty
              years which in turn has motivated much outstanding research, including the
              solution of the famous Fermat's Last Theorem.  Despite this, our understanding
              of functoriality remains rudimentary in many respects.  When a fully developed
              theory of functoriality is eventually developed, we can expect it to have a
              profound influence on mathematics and some areas of its applications.  The goal
              of the project supported by this grant is to advance our understanding of the
              Relative Trace Formula, which is one of a handful of valuable tools that we
              have for studying functoriality.  The results of this study will make it
              possible to study the functoriality principle from the point of view of "period
              integrals".  Hopefully, this will play a role in advancing our knowledge of the
              general functoriality principle. 
