Title       : The Fekete-Szego Theorem on Curves, with Splitting Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a0070736

Award Number: 0070736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102603             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Rumely rr@math.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his students study capacity theory and its applications
              
to arithmetic geometry. Capacity is a measure of size for sets, which arises
              
in potential theory and has applications in probability, complex analysis,
              
and number theory.  The chief goal of this project is to prove a very strong
              
version of the Fekete-Szego theorem on algebraic curves, which asserts that
              
if an adelic set on a curve has large enough capacity, then there exist
              
algebraic points with all their conjugates near it, in an adelic sense. 
The
              new theorem will be a basic existence theorem producing algebraic points
              
which are subject to real and p-adic rationality conditions, as well as
              
topological constraints. To fix ideas, for sets in the complex plane, the
              
capacity of a circle turns out to equal its radius, and the capacity of a
              
line segment is a quarter of its length.  In analysis, the primary
              distinction 
is between sets of capacity  0  and sets of positive capacity: 
              sets of 
capacity  0  are 'invisible' to holomorphic functions.  In number
              theory, 
the main distinction is between sets of capacity greater than  1, 
              and less 
than  1.  The classical theorem of Fekete and Szego says that for a
              set in 
the complex plane stable under complex conjugation, if the capacity of
              the 
set is greater than 1, then every neighborhood of the set contains
              infinitely 
many Galois orbits of algebraic integers.  David Cantor
              generalized the theorem 
to adelic sets on the projective line, and
              subsequently the investigator 
generalized it to adelic sets on algebraic
              curves.  As an application, 
the investigator proved an existence theorem for
              algebraic integer points on 
affine algebraic varieties, which has been the
              object of considerable work by 
Moret-Bailly and Szpiro and their students. 
              Earlier, Raphael Robinson had 
extended the Fekete-Szego theorem in another
              direction, showing that if a 
set of capacity greater than  1  were contained
              in the real line, then every 
real neighborhood contained infinitely many
              Galois orbits of totally real 
algebraic integers.   Recently the investigator
              proved an adelic version of 
Robinson's theorem, proving the existence of
              algebraic numbers which were 
totally real and totally p-adic at a finite
              number of places.  The goal of 
the project is to generalize this theorem to
              algebraic curves.  The methods 
used will involve p-adic analysis, potential
              theory, and approximation theory 
for algebraic functions. 

The study of
              diophantine equations (looking for integer solutions to 
polynomial equations
              in several variables) is a very old and very difficult 
subject, going back to
              the Greeks.  It is only within the last half-century 
that much progress has
              been made, using methods of modern number theory.  Two 
famous results were a
              negative solution to "Hilbert's Tenth problem" 
(by Matiyasevich in 1970),
              which asks if there is an algorithm for determining 
whether or not a given
              equation has integer solutions;  and the negative 
resolution of Fermat's Last
              Theorem (by Wiles in 1995), which asks if sums of 
n-th powers of integers can
              be n-th powers.   The investigator's work pursues 
a different direction,
              showing that for much larger arithmetic domains than 
the integers, under
              appropriate conditions there do exist solutions;  and 
moreover there exist
              algorithms for telling whether or not they exist.  
The current work will
              considerably reduce the size of the domains where 
solutions are known to
              exist.
