Title       : A Confocal Microscope for the Hopkins Marine Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a0070395

Award Number: 0070395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart H. Thompson stuartt@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract Thompson 

	A confocal laser scanning imaging system will be used by
              faculty, graduate students, undergraduates and visitors to Stanford
              University's Hopkins Marine Station.  The equipment includes a Zeiss Axiovert
              SI00 inverted microscope and a Noran Oz confocal scanning system.This equipment
              will: I) Enhance ongoing faculty research, 2) Promote new research activities,
              3) Promote the training of graduate and post-doctoral students in modern
              methods of optical microscopy in a way that will enhance their research and
              career
development, and 4) Strengthen ongoing efforts to permit
              undergraduate
students access to the lasted research techniques.
	The
              confocal imaging system will be used by four principle investigators
to
              address a number of cell biological questions using methods ranging from
ion
              imaging, sophisticated fluorescence microscopy, high resolution
Nomarski DIC, 
              to morphometry.  One group is investigating the spatial and
temporal aspects
              of second messenger signaling in neurons following the
activation of surface
              receptors by neurotransmitters, including the
dynamics of Ca2+ and NO signals.
               A second group is investigating the
development and biophysical properties of
              motor systems in the squid using
neuroanatomical and immunocytochemical
              methods.  A third study focuses on
the specializations of fish heater organs
              and cardiac cells using
immunocytochemistry and antibodies specific for
              different isoforms of Ca
pumps and myosin  ATPase.  The fourth group uses
              fluorescence imaging
techniques to investigate the time course and spatial
              pattern of NO and
Ca2+ during fertilization of the sea urchin egg. 
	The
              principle investigators are addressing questions at the leading edge
of their
              disciplines.  This shared confocal microscopy center adds
substantially to
              their ability to further their science, enhances their
teaching efforts, and
              increases collaboration with Stanford colleagues and
visitors from other
              institutions.  This is in keeping with the role of the
Hopkins Marine Station
              as a regional center for marine biology research.



