Title       : Lasers and Detector for Spectroscopy and Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a0070220

Award Number: 0070220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Nordlund nordlund@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A laser-based multiphoton and fluorescence lifetime spectroscopy system will be
              purchased for research into the mode of action of cardiac muscle fibers, the
              proliferation of malignant cells, protein-DNA interactions, the imaging of
              visual cell constituents, and the generation of improved optical techniques to
              microscopically image cellular components in real tissues.  The laser will be
              broadly variable in wavelength and intensity, allowing excitation of many
              biological samples.  This sophisticated equipment will allow many in the
              research community at the University of Alabama to actively acquire data. 
              Immediate research goals include (i) determination of distances of movement in
              molecular "motor" proteins, (ii) measurement of DNA structural changes induced
              by UV light and cellular processes, and (iii) determination of optimal
              conditions for laser excitation of dyes and cells for microscopic imaging. 
              Ultimately, the requested instrumentation will be used to discover how
              subcellular components move and use energy in their activity as biological
              nanomachines.

A titanium:sapphire laser (Mira 900D V10 XW) with wide-band
              optics and dual picosecond/femtosecond pulsewidth capabilities, pumped by a
              10-watt diode-pumped Nd:vanadate laser (Verdi V10), with needed harmonic
              generator (Model 9300) and "Pulse Picker" (Model 9200) will be purchased from
              Coherent Laser Group.  This equipment will allow reliable picosecond
              time-resolved fluorescence measurements and multiphoton excitation spectroscopy
              and spectroscopic imaging.  A vibration-free optics table (Newport
              RPR-410-12/I-2000-428) and ultrafast photomultiplier (Hamamatsu R3809U-50) with
              associated electronics will be added to support the laser and detection
              capabilities. 

The educational program supported by this award  will develop
              new research ideas, train personnel in laser and biotechnology, attract
              top-flight students and faculty, and train regional scientists.  Personnel from
              professors to promising high school scientists are presently involved in
              research and training at the University of Alabama at Birmingham.  Credit and
              non-credit research training courses introduce undergraduates and graduate
              students to principles of new laser technologies and applications in biophysics
              and imaging.  Biomedical faculty supervise physics graduate doctoral
              dissertations in biology and biophysics.  The number of major American
              universities offering such educational programs, especially at the level of
              training and recruitment of future physical scientists from high school, is
              small.  Through its strong reputation in mainstream biomedical research and its
              rapidly-developing reputation in laser technology and biophysics, the
              University of Alabama at Birmingham has the opportunity to lead in the
              production of scientists with documented expertise in laser-based spectroscopic
              and imaging research in biological systems. 


