Title       : Observations of the z=1-4 Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0070773

Award Number: 0070773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles C. Steidel ccs@astro.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0070773
Steidel

This work involves the detailed study of the physical
              properties, large-scale distribution, and star forming characteristics of high
              redshift galaxies. The PI will use wide-field imaging to map out the large
              scale structure of the luminous material and combine this with quasar
              absorption line studies to map out and identify the associated intermediate
              redshift (z=1.3 to 2.5) gas. The star formation rates for these intermediate
              redshift objects, their chemical composition, and their association with the
              gas will then be analyzed using near IR spectroscopy. 

These studies focus
              on the properties of galaxies and their large--scale spatial distribution
              during an interval of cosmic time when the universe was between 10% and 40% of
              its current age. This time interval is believed to be the epoch when when the
              galaxy formation activity that produced the galaxies of the present-day
              universe was at its peak and when most of the stars in the present day universe
              formed.   In the last few years, facilities and techniques have become
              available,  which allow us to gather extensive empirical data on galaxies at
              these early cosmic epochs.  The studies proposed here will use the facilities
              of the Palomar and Keck observatories to:  1) ``map'' the large-scale structure
              traced by early galaxies over volumes of space comparable to the most ambitious
              galaxy surveys of the local universe 2) compare the galaxy distribution at
              early epochs to the properties of the diffuse intergalactic gas in the same
              volumes (observed using complementary techniques) 3) explore new techniques for
              finding and studying large samples of galaxies in the time interval that is
              currently least accessible to observation-- when the universe was ``middle
              aged'' and  4) measure the chemical content and masses of significant samples
              of these early galaxies.  All of these studies are intended to make significant
              progress toward a physical understanding of the galaxy formation process, in
              the context of cosmological models in which galaxy formation and evolution is
              the observable manifestation of the changing distribution of matter in the
              universe as a function of time. Funding for this project was provided by the
              NSF program for Extragalactic
Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).

***




