Title       : Investigation of Kinematic Coagulation Mechanism to Improve Air Quality in
               Machining Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a0070088

Award Number: 0070088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna J. Michalek donna@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Sutherland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the investigation of effective and
              cost-efficient methods to reduce the levels of cutting fluid mist present in
              machining environments.  Experimental and analytical efforts will result in the
              development of a mist baseline, and a computational model to predict the mist
              motion.  The mist baseline, derived from experimental data, will contain
              detailed information concerning the mass concentration and partial size spatial
              distribution of the mist over time.  The computational fluid dynamics code,
              including a coagulation model, will be capable of simulating laminar or
              turbulent multi-phase flows by using a combined Lagranian/Eulerian method to
              explicitly track the fluid mist in the air.  Using these tools, an
              investigation of the utilization of kinematic coagulation, the capture of mist
              particles through the introduction of a spray of larger cutting fluid droplets
              into the machining environment, will be performed.  Experiments will be
              conducted to validate the developed analytical coagulation model and to
              investigate the performance of the kinematic coagulation system based on its
              environmental and health impact.  Cost analysis for the implementation of this
              system will be performed and compared to systems currently in use.  

If
              successful, this project will result in the development of new strategies that
              will substantially reduce or eliminate the airborne mist present in current
              machining environments.  This will be accomplished, in part, by using the mist
              baseline to identify the most hazardous machining process conditions.  More
              importantly, implementation of the proposed analytical work will lead to the
              development of cutting fluid mist removal systems that are cost-efficient,
              provide healthier industrial environments, and serve as solutions to the air
              quality problem until such time as other processes, such as dry machining, are
              feasible and can be affordably implemented by all industries.  The final result
              will be a significant reduction in the acute and chronic effects of mist on
              workers.  


