Title       : Algebraic Structures of Representation Theory of Infinite Dimensional Lie
               Algebras and Quantum Field Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0070551

Award Number: 0070551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor B. Frenkel frenkel@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The relation between representation theory of certain
              infinite-dimensional Lie algebras such as affine LIe algebras, Virasoro
              algebra, etc. and 2-dimensional conformal field theory was actively developed
              in the past 20 years.  It has led to unprecedented synthesis of different areas
              of mathematics and mathematical physics that include integrable Hamiltonian
              systems, theory of Riemann surfaces and vector bundles, theory of knots and
              three dimensional manifolds, representations of the Monster group and other
              sporadic groups, Brownian motion on compact groups and more general path
              integration, theory of modular functions, commutative systems of differential
              and difference equations and theory of generalized hypergeometric functions,
              integrable models of statistical mechanics, string theory and others.  One part
              of the proposal contains further steps extending this relation.  The author
              proposes an approach to q-deformation of a class of vertex operator algebras
              and the related problem of elliptic deformation of certain braided tensor
              categories.  There is a strong evidence that the resulting algebraic structures
              will provide an algebraic foundation of 2-dimensional quantum field theory,
              which does not possess the conformal invariance. 

    The main part of the
              proposal is dedicated to the first substantial representation theoretic
              approach to 4-dimensional quantum field theory.  The principal investigator
              plans to develop the theory of vertex representations, which played the key
              role in 2-dimensional conformal field theory, using representation theory of
              families of finite groups called wreath products and associated quadratic
              algebras.  In this algebraic approach, which has also a deep geometric
              counterpart, various structures of vertex representations studied by the
              proposer and other mathematicians in the last 20 years can be realized as
              Grothendieck rings and operations between them.  Since the Grothendieck rings
              are always "tips of icebergs" of the full representation categories underlying
              these rings, one of the main objectives is to extend this realization to a
              level of representation categories and functors between these categories.  This
              is the long range goal of the present proposal.  It is expected that in the
              same way as theory of vertex representations is an algebraic foundation of
              2-dimensional conformal field theory, the new theory will provide an
              appropriate algebraic structure for the 4-dimensional generalization, which
              will lead in the next 20 years (or longer!) to a synthesis of practically all
              areas of pure mathematics and mathematical physics.


