Title       : Nuclear Structure and Nuclear Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0070911

Award Number: 0070911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $720000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Zelevinsky zelevinsky@nscl.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mihai Horoi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Alex Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0070911
Zelevinsky
	The most important problems for nuclear physics in the
              new
century are related to the boundaries of the existence of
              nuclei,
properties of very short-lived isotopes and the clarification of
the
              path of the synthesis of chemical elements in stars in the
process of the
              evolution of the Universe. Recent developments in 
accelerators and
              experimental technology now make it possible
to produce thousands of new
              isotopes and study their physics.
Along this road it will be possible to study
              what is the origin 
of the elements of the cosmos, what are the features of
              nuclear 
matter with unusual proton-neutron composition, what are
              sizes,
shapes and excitation modes of exotic nuclei. The large discovery
              
potential of nuclear physics in this vast terra incognita was 
already
              demonstrated by observation of nuclear halos, new types
of radioactivity,
              superheavy elements and so on. Nuclear theory
must meet a great challenge and
              find a consistent way of describing
new phenomena and making reliable
              predictions for the future.
The proposal is directed toward achieving that
              goal. We hope to
address a few important issues such as the limits of nuclear
              stability,
nuclear reactions of astrophysical interest, the description 
of
              loosely bound nuclear systems, new cluster effects, new modes of collective
              behavior, weak interactions in exotic systems,the coexistence of chaotic and
              regular dynamics far from the line of nuclear stability. As happened in the
              past, the new theoretical 
approaches and computational methods are expected
              to cross-fertilize other areas of physics - mainly astrophysics and physics of
              mesoscopic systems.



