Title       : LTREB: Long-term Research on Environmental Gender Determination in a Model
               System (Chrysemys)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0089680

Award Number: 0089680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294471             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fredric J. Janzen fjanzen@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089680
Janzen
In contrast to the sex-determining mechanisms of most
              vertebrates, sex in many reptiles is determined by environmental temperatures
              determined during embryonic development. The unusual nature of this
              sex-determination system, with its potential to produce strongly-biased sex
              rations, has generated considerable interest in its evolutionary origin and
              biological significance. Nonetheless, little is understood about the importance
              of many aspects of this temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD) that
              could lend insight into these fundamental questions. In particular, the impact
              of long-term climatic variation on crucial demograpic parameters, namely
              offspring and population sex ratios, is unclear in reptiles with TSD.
              Furthermore, the role of nest-site choice in this system is virtually
              unexplored, especially across the long reproductive lifespans that characterize
              these taxa, despite its significance in most theoretical models of sex-ratio
              evolution. Predation, biased or otherwise, also occupies a significant role in
              theoretical models of population dynamics but its impact on offspring sex ratio
              is unknown. Organisms with TSD are ideal model systems with which to explore
              the impact of these major factors on population dynamics and sex-ratio
              evolution in nature. 
	The proposed LTREB research will investigate several
              significant aspects of the evolutionary ecology of TSD in a natural population
              of long-lived painted turtles, which has been studied in detail since 1988.
              First, how does long-term climatic variation covary with annual cohort sex
              ratio and thus influence population demography and the evolution of TSD?
              Second, do females with TSD exhibit long-term ontogenetic repeatability of
              nst-site choice with respect to available thermal environments and thereby
              provide a target for evolutionary response to sex-ratio selection imposed by
              rapid climate change and human habitat modification? Third, what are the
              long-term spatio-temporal dynamics of nest predation and offspring sex ratio in
              a natural population with TSD and thus their impacts on population demography
              and sex-ratio evolution? Obtaining answers to such questions assumes greater
              urgency given rapid climate change and human habitat modification.

