Title       : Scalable and Sustainable Technologies for Reading Instruction and Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a0089259

Award Number: 0089259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107060             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Kintsch wkintsch@psych.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn E. Snyder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald A. Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard K. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donna J. Caccamise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7180,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Kintsch Summary


The project will plan for the creation and assessment of an
              ambitious program to improve reading and writing achievement with the
              participation of Boulder Valley School District (K-12) and the State of
              Colorado Department of Education. The project brings together a team of
              cognitive scientists, speech scientists, educational researchers, computer
              scientists, administrators and educators to work to design an program that uses
              state-of-the-art language technologies to help students learn to read fluently
              and to write effectively and creatively. 

Specific objectives of the
              planning phase include (a) establishing the full interdisciplinary team, (b)
              working with administrators and educators in Colorado schools to create an
              integrated program in which interactive learning tools optimally complement and
              enhance existing teaching methods,  (c) developing an evaluation plan that will
              assess the effectiveness of the program.  The work will be performed in close
              collaboration with teachers, including the design of an initial program in
              which reading tutors will be used to recognize and interpret students' reading
              and writing behaviors and provide feedback to improve phonological awareness,
              reading fluency, comprehension and composition skills. Though much of the
              current work of members of the team is focused on early reading instruction;
              some of the methods (e.g., the comprehension-based methods that facilitate
              reading to learn) are also relevant for later grades. 
