Title       : Self-Sensing Actuation and Control with Shape Memory Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0089977

Award Number: 0089977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235804             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine Brinson cbrinson@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce H. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Peshkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Cate Brinson, Michael Peshkin, Bruce Wilson 
Northwestern University 

Shape
              memory alloys (SMAs) have been used in a variety of actuation,
              energy-absorbing, and sensing applications.  The key feature of this material
              is its ability to undergo large seemingly-plastic strains and subsequently
              recover these strains when a load is removed or the material is heated.  This
              unique ability occurs due to a reversible thermoelastic phase transformation
              between austenite and martensite.  The key feature allows SMAs to serve as very
              compact actuators. As SMAs can be used for both material-stiffening and
              energy-absorption, they have generated much interest in the smart structures
              field.  Further, no other material or device can generate significant tensile
              forces over a large displacement while occupying such a small volume. A second
              useful feature of many SMAs is a change in resistivity with a change in strain.
               The change in resistivity as an SMA undergoes strain has enabled investigators
              to use them as coarse position sensors.  The coarseness is due to a complex
              relationship between resistivity and the material state and its coupling with
              mechanical load and temperature.  

Given the material characteristics above,
              economical, power-dense self-sensing-actuation (SSA) can be achieved with shape
              memory alloys.  However, the nonlinear nature of SMA actuation and sensing,
              incomplete understanding of SMA thermomechanical response and the lack of
              suitable models for control result in an under-utilization of this useful
              material as an actuator, sensor, and SSA. In this research, a focused effort
              will be targeted at (1) improving the characterization of SMAs for a sensing
              and control context, (2) refining material modeling, (3) developing model-based
              control algorithms, and (4) demonstrating these in hardware to advance the
              understanding and range of applications of SMAs as actuators, sensors, and
              SSAs.  
