Title       : The Development of Fluent and Automatic Reading: Precursor to Learning from Text
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0089258

Award Number: 0089258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Stahl sstahl@coe.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paula J. Schwanenflugel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7180,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Being able to read fluently is a critical developmental step in all young
              children's education.  Reading fluency is neccessary for learning from science
              and social studies texts in later grades.  The objectives of the proposal is to
              investigate the devleopment of fluency and automaticity in early elementary
              school reading.  The  research will refine existing programs for the
              development of fluent reading in classrooms and remedial reading settings.  The
              study has three goals:  (a) to develop and validate pedagogical approaches to
              developing reading fluency, specifically repeated reading and wide reading
              approaches; (b) to determine the effectiveness of approaches to providing
              remedial support for low-achieving children including decoding instruction,
              speeded word identification strategies, and repeated reading strategies; (c) to
              develop an empirically-based model of the development of fluency in beginning
              readers, particularly obligatoriness, spped, and resource availability aspects
              of fluent reading.  Strand 1 will train classroom teachers in Fluency-Oriented
              Reading Instruction (Stahl, Heubach, & Cramond, 1997) and Wide Reading
              approaches in their classrooms in schools in Atlanta, Rural Georgia, and New
              Jersey.  The development of fluency in children in these classrooms will be
              measured through standardized and experimental methods both immediately
              following the intervention and a year later, and these children will compared
              to  development of fluency in children receiving a traditional reading
              instruction.  Effective methods will be implemented and disseminated.  Strand 2
              will examine remedial aspects of reading instruction designed to promote the
              development of fluent and automatic reading in struggling readers.  This strand
              will examine the effectiveness of both Phonological and Strategy Training,
              Speeded Word Retrieval, and Repeated Reading strategies, both singly and in
              combination.  The effectiveness of these will be compared to a traditional
              remedial instruction control.  Both immediate and long term follow-up measures,
              on both standardized achievement and experimental measures, will be conducted
              to follow the progress of these children.  Strand 3 will examine how the apects
              associated with automatic reading:  obligatoriness, speed, and resource
              availabilty change together during the development of fluent reading during the
              second grade.  Both a cross-sectional and two-year longitudinal study are
              planned.  By examining all of these aspects together in a single ongitudinal
              study, a richer description and theoretical based for the development of fluent
              reading skill will be obtained.  The strand will also develop the experiemtal
              measures of reading fluency to be used in other strands, The research conducted
              will add valuable knowledge regarding the ways to foster fluent automatic
              reading in young elementary school children.
