Title       : LivePhoto Physics: Digital Videos for Lectures and Assignments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0089380

Award Number: 0089380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $494893             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Teese teese@muskingum.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald K. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Muskingum College
	      
	      New Concord, OH  43762    614/826-8211

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The LivePhoto Physics project is developing a collection of digital
              video 
analysis materials for introductory physics courses, using
              research-based development
methods that were refined through projects such as
              Tools for Scientific Thinking
and Workshop Physics. These materials include
              videos, lecture demonstration
sequences, homework assignments, instructor
              notes, and software. In digital video
analysis, students use computers as
              laboratory instruments to make measurements
on video images of real events.
              These techniques are being used increasingly in
physics courses, and there is
              evidence that they are effective in teaching physics
concepts. In spite of the
              wealth of mass-media and educational videos available that
can be used in
              laboratories or student projects, very few existing videos are ideal
              for
analysis by students. The LivePhoto Physics project is
meeting this need
              by producing a collection of digital videos that span many of the
topics
              covered in a one-year physics course, including videos made with
              high-
speed/slow-motion equipment that is not available at most teaching
              facilities. An
innovative aspect of the project is that the topic selection is
              being guided by the
results of physics education research. Written curricular
              materials using the videos
in Interactive Lecture Demonstrations,
              distance-learning exercises and extended
homework problem sets are being
              produced and classroom tested in a three-year
research-based development
              cycle. Field testing is taking place at two-year colleges
and four-year
              colleges/universities with diverse student audiences. Computer
software that
              extends the display and visualization capabilities of digital video
analysis
              is being developed during the project. The final set of videos,
              curricular
materials and software will be published in the form of a CD. The
              LivePhoto
Physics project is addressing the need for faculty development and
              the integration of
technology in education by sponsoring six workshops on the
              use of digital video
analysis in physics teaching.




