Title       : Paracrine Control of Fish Gill Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0089943

Award Number: 0089943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Evans devans@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The endothelial cells that line fish blood vessels secrete a suite of signaling
              molecules (termed paracrines) that control the tension in underlying vascular
              smooth muscle cells.  Of these paracrines, endothelin (ET), nitric oxide (NO),
              and two prostanoids (PGI2 and PGE) are the best studied in fishes, as well as
              in mammals, where the same signaling systems are present.  The fish gill has a
              complex vasculature that has been shown to play a vital role in regulating such
              important processes as gas exchange, ion and acid-base balance, and excretion
              of nitrogen.  It has been demonstrated that ET can control the pattern of
              perfusion in the fish gill lamellae, suggesting that paracrines may play an
              important role in gill perfusion.  It also has been shown that ET, NO, and
              PGI2/PGE can control the movement of ions across epithelial cells in mammals
              via interactions with specific transport proteins that mediate active
              transport.  These proteins are also found in the fish gill epithelium and
              control the net extrusion of salt by various groups of marine fishes, including
              jawless fishes (lampreys and hagfish), sharks, and bony fishes.  Preliminary
              studies in this laboratory have demonstrated that ET, NO, and PGE inhibit salt
              transport across the killifish opercular skin, a standard model for the
              salt-transporting epithelium of the marine fish gill.  Thus, the principal
              investigator hypothesizes that ET, NO, and PGI2/PGE play a fundamental role in
              the control of fish gill function by regulating gill perfusion and ion
              transport.  To test this hypothesis, an integrated series of physiological,
              pharmacological, and molecular techniques will be used in four species of
              fishes, representing the major fish groups. The objective is to describe the
              evolution of these gill paracrine control systems in the early vertebrates. 
              Specifically, recordings will be made of blood flow changes in the gill during
              infusion of these paracrines in cannulated fishes, using videomicroscopy, and
              tests of their effects on gill ion transport will be performed, using the
              killifish opercular skin as a model system.  In conjunction, the principal
              investigator will determine if the gill tissue itself generates ET, NO, and
              PGI2/PGE by chemical and immunoassays and localize the cellular sites of
              synthesis by immunohistochemical (light and confocal microscopy) techniques.
              Immunological (Western blot) and pharmacological techniques (radio-receptor
              analyses) will be used to confirm the presence of and to characterize the
              receptors for ET and PGI2/PGE that are expressed in the gill. Localization of
              ET and PGI2/PGE receptors in specific gill cells will be accomplished using
              immunohistochemical techniques. To provide protein sequence for future
              production of homologous antibodies and information on the evolution of the
              specific gene structure, the genes encoding fish nitric oxide synthase and ET
              as well as receptors for ET, PGI2, and PGE will be cloned in collaboration with
              the Molecular Services Core of the University of Florida's Interdisciplinary
              Center for Biotechnology Research. This integrated approach will provide clear
              evidence for the presence, evolution, and roles of these paracrine signaling
              pathways in fish gill function.   


