Title       : A Workshop: An Exploration of the Challenges to Assemble the Tree of Life (Yale
               University Peabody Museum of Natural History/July 28-30, 2000)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0089975

Award Number: 0089975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39096              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel L. Cracraft jlc@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Donoghue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089975
Cracraft and Donoghue

Phylogenetic groupings of organisms are the
              basis for predictive classifications and biological information systems. 
              Organizing biological knowledge and their parallel hierarchies according to
              phylogenetic relationships has become increasingly important for many segments
              of science and society (i.e., genetic databases such as GenBank).  Yet, our
              understanding of the tree of life is still very incomplete at all taxonomic
              levels because phylogenetic hypotheses are typically characterized by
              inadequate taxon samples, and the data themselves are often variable across the
              included taxa with respect to kind, quantity, and quality.  In addition,
              methods of analysis vary in their appropriateness and applicability, thus
              making comparison of phylogenetic trees difficult.  These impediments need to
              be addressed if we are to have a tree of life for the major groups of organisms
              within a reasonable time frame.  Equally important will be to ensure that
              phylogenetic knowledge is accessible and useful to researchers, institutions,
              and the government agencies who need it.

This proposal seeks to bring
              together approximately 25-30 leading systematic biologists and nonsystematists
              interested in phylogenetic research and informatics (phyloinformatics).  The
              workshop will attempt to identify the research needed to assemble the tree of
              life and make that information available to the global user community within a
              reasonable time frame.  The workshop will formulate recommendations designed to
              promote institutional changes within the systematic research community to
              accelerate phylogenetic understanding, identify research efforts that will
              result in large-scale increases in phylogenetically informative data and
              improve data analysis, and specify research, technological advances, and
              infrastructural needs to store, retrieve, and manipulate large amounts of
              phylogenetic information and make it widely avail

