Title       : An NAGT Planning Workshop to Increase Participation and Leadership of Two-Year
               College Faculty in the Geoscience Education Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0089117

Award Number: 0089117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38666              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Heather Macdonald rhmacd@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven C. Semken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Tewksbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher G. DiLeonardo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The National Association of Geoscience Teachers (NAGT) will hold a two-day
              planning workshop to discuss strategies and develop an action plan for
              increasing the participation and leadership of two-year institution faculty in
              the geoscience education community. It is critically important to increase the
              participation of two-year institution faculty in efforts to reform geoscience
              education. Nearly half of all undergraduate students currently studying
              sciences and mathematics are enrolled at two-year institutions. Furthermore,
              two-year institutions are critically important in the science and mathematics
              preparation of future K-12 teachers, in the professional development of
              in-service teachers, and in increasing the participation of underrepresented
              minorities in the geosciences. Beyond this, the development of the Digital
              Library for Earth System Education (DLESE) presents many opportunities for the
              entire geoscience community and the larger integrative science community, and
              the two-year institutions need to 
be full partners in these efforts. However,
              participation of two-year institution faculty in the geoscience education
              community has been limited. Given the important role of two-year institution
              faculty in geoscience education, they must be better integrated into the
              geoscience education community, both in terms of participation and in terms of
              leadership.

The planning workshop will provide a forum for bridging two-year
              institution faculty and four-year institution faculty to discuss and develop
              strategies that will result in greater integration of two-year institution
              faculty in the geoscience education community. The workshop will provide an
              opportunity to share the challenges and opportunities of the professional life
              of two-year institution faculty members, identify specific strategies that
              would reduce the professional isolation felt by some two-year institution
              
geoscience faculty members, develop plans to increase the professional
              development and leadership opportunities of two-year institution faculty
              members in geoscience education, discuss successes (and failures) of
              collaborations with four-year institutions and universities/faculties, consider
              strategies for fostering communications to two-year institution faculty, and
              plan a leadership conference for two-year institution faculty that would be
              held in the following year. The workshop will also include brief
              
presentations by representatives from other professional societies regarding
              their approach to two-year faculty issues. Prior to the planning workshop, all
              participants will discuss electronically the major issues faced by two-year
              institution geoscience faculty, discuss strategies for increasing participation
              and leadership in the geoscience and geoscience education community, and
              respond to the workshop agenda. The participants in the planning workshop will
              leave the workshop with an action plan for increasing the involvement of
              two-year faculty in various activities of the larger geoscience education
              community.



