Title       : Surface Science and Optical Spectroscopy Studies of Oligothiophene Adsorption on
               Clean and Oxygen-Dosed Aluminum Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0089960

Award Number: 0089960
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291904             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Whitten James_Whitten@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Lowell Res Fdn
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  01854    978/934-4750

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to investigate the adsorption of thiophene oligomers
              on well-characterized aluminum surfaces are proposed.  X-ray and ultraviolet
              photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS and UPS) studies at a variety of temperatures
              will be performed to examine the organic layer/aluminum interface formed by
              exposing clean, single crystal and polycrystalline aluminum surfaces to gas
              phase, vacuum-sublimed, or x-ray-formed oligothiophenes.  XPS will provide
              information regarding chemistry that is occurring at the interface, and UPS
              will be used to determine the electronic valence structure of the metal and how
              it changes upon oligothiophene adsorption.  These results will be correlated
              with work function and optical spectroscopy measurements.  Adsorption of a
              variety of substituted thiophene oligomers will also be studied at different
              temperatures on single crystals of aluminum, and low energy electron
              diffraction (LEED) and photoluminescence will be performed to search for
              evidence of oligomer ordering.  Surface photovoltaic spectroscopy measurements
              will also be carried out to investigate changes in the position of the Fermi
              level that occur upon absorption of light.  Oligothiophene coadsorption on
              oxygen-dosed aluminum surfaces and on aluminum oxide will also be investigated
              to determine how adsorption on these surfaces differs from on clan aluminum. 
              Weaker chemical interaction is expected on the oxygen-expose surfaces, and
              possibilities should exist for oligothiophene alignment.  Thermal desorption
              spectroscopy and LEED will be used to assess adsorption/desorption behavior and
              ordering of the adsorbed oligomers.
%%%
Aluminum is commonly used as an
              electrode material for polymeric light-emitting diodes (LEDs), field-effect
              transistors and photovoltaics, and substituted thiophenes are an important
              class of polymers for these types of devices.  Device materials are of
              significant importance to industry, and students trained in these areas compete
              well in the job market.  This project is being jointly supported by The
              Solid-State Chemistry Program in The Division of Materials Research and The
              Advance Materials and Processing Program in the Chemistry Division.

