Title       : Data Research and Development Center (DRDC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a0089235

Award Number: 0089235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109708             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Schneider   (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry V. Hedges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Sallach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Zimmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Colm O'Muircheartaigh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      1155 E. 60th Street
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7180,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This proposal requests support to plan and develop a Data Research and
              Development Center (DRDC) at National Opinion Research Center (NORC) and the
              University of Chicago. The mission of this Center would be improving the
              research capacities of individuals engaged in the conduct of interdisciplinary
              work in the areas of learning, instruction, and achievement. 

Substantive
              and methodological changes over the past five years in conduct of research are
              challenging researchers as they design, analyze, and disseminate their results.
              Investigators must produce findings that are generalizable to populations
              beyond small purposive samples and that are replicated across other data sets.
              Investigators are often unaware of how their findings relate to work in other
              areas or how their findings are consistent or inconsistent with larger samples.
              Creating a center where investigators are provided with information on other
              data sets and opportunities to learn how to access and analyze such information
              accomplishes two important objectives. First, it would be possible to link
              results across several data sets to produce more robust compelling evidence
              than if we had to rely on the results of a single study. Second, it would
              increase the capacity of individual investigators to replicate their findings
              more systematically and efficiently using a variety of data sets and methods.
              To accomplish these goals, we envision our Center as having four main
              objectives: (1) training, (2) research, (3) dialogue, and (4) data archiving
              and dissemination. 

