Title       : Microbial and Hydrological Controls of Nitrogen Losses From Alpine and Chaparral
               Ecosystems During Seasonal Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0089839

Award Number: 0089839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $795190             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Melack melack@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Sickman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua P. Schimel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The project will examine biogeochemical and hydrological mechanisms that
              influence the extent of N limitation in alpine and chaparral ecosystems of the
              Sierra Nevada, California. These ecosystems exhibit large, episodic losses of
              nitrate and their future integrity is threatened by climate change and nearby
              human activities. The investigators hypothesize that a key factor controlling
              N-losses in these ecosystems is the effect of transitions between growing and
              non-growing seasons on microbial populations and biogeochemical processes in
              soils during non-growing seasons. Seasonal transitions in Mediterranean
              climates, like those of California, are characterized by abrupt shifts from dry
              to wet conditions, warm to cold temperatures and from low to high runoff
              periods. These transitions induce changes in soil moisture and temperature that
              mediate flushing of nitrate. Over the long-term, nitrate losses during seasonal
              transitions may be a primary mechanism by which N limitation is maintained in
              alpine and chaparral ecosystems. 
The project will take a watershed approach
              to studying N dynamics in alpine and chaparral ecosystems and will utilize a
              combination of innovative techniques, including plot-scale studies, isotopic
              and chemical tracers, watershed mass balances and ecosystem modeling.  Results
              from these investigations will help explain a major question in terrestrial
              ecology: Why are plant communities N limited?  Additionally, the work will
              provide an understanding of the connections between hydrology and
              biogeochemistry during seasonal transitions, which is needed to predict how
              California's montane ecosystems will respond to anticipated global change.


