Title       : Evolution of a Unique Ovipositional Syndrome in the Leafhopper Tribe Proconiini
               (Hemiptera: Cicadellidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0089671

Award Number: 0089671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher H. Dietrich dietrich@mail.inhs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0089671
Christopher H. Dietrich

Dr. Christopher Dietrich of the
              University of Illinois/Illinois Natural History Survey has been awarded a grant
              to study aspects of the evolution of reproductive behaviors in insects.   This
              research  should help explain the extraordinary success of this group of
              animals and may suggest improved methods for managing economically important
              species.   Modern phylogenetic methods have greatly improved understanding of
              evolutionary processes at the level of genes and individual traits, but the
              processes by which multiple coordinated traits, or adaptive syndromes, evolve
              remain poorly understood.  This project examines the evolution of several
              morphological, behavioral, and physiological traits related to the unique
              egg-laying (oviposition) syndrome of proconiine leafhoppers (Insecta:
              Hemiptera: Cicadellidae).  Unlike most leafhoppers, which insert their eggs
              into plant tissue without coating the egg scars, certain proconiine species
              coat their egg scars with specialized secretory particles called brochosomes. 
              In most leafhopper species, brochosomes are used primarily to provide a
              water-repellant coating on external surfaces of the body.  In proconiines,
              brochosomes have assumed a new function in the protection of egg masses. 
              Pregnant female proconiines store brochosomes in globs on their forewings and,
              after oviposition, scrape them off the wing and onto the egg scar using the
              hind legs.  The brochosomes of ovipositing females differ from those of males
              and non-ovipositing females and corresponding modifications are found in the
              legs and forewings.  By estimating the phylogenetic relationships among
              proconiine species using morphological and DNA sequence data, this project will
              address the question of whether the various traits related to the unique
              oviposition syndrome were acquired all at once or in a stepwise fashion.  The
              project will provide training for a Ph.D. student and post-doctoral fellow in
              field sampling, data collection, morphological and molecular genetic methods. 
              The project will also improve collaborative ties between U.S. and Brazilian
              researchers and will yield improved tools for identifying leafhopper species.

