Title       : Collaborative Research: Foraging to Farming on the Pacific Coast of Southern
               Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2001   
File        : a0089896

Award Number: 0089896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31201              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Voorhies voorhies@alishaw.sscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Douglas Kennett and Barbara
              Voorhies will conduct one season of archaeological excavation at sites located
              on and near the Pacific coast in southern Mexico. Previous work in this area
              has indicated the presence of sites which span the Archaic through Early
              Formative periods from ca. 7,500 to 2,700 years before the present. Shell
              middens located along the coast indicate that Archaic period hunters and
              gatherers made extensive use of fish and shell fish, and botanical evidence
              suggests that these groups may have had access to domestic maize. They also
              collected wild plant and animal resources from a variety of resource zones and
              probably foraged out from central base camps located on the forested coastal
              plain. By the beginning of the Middle Formative Period, ca 2,700 years ago
              these settlements were transformed into sedentary agricultural villages which
              dotted the landscape. Inhabitants depended primarily on maize agriculture. The
              goal of this research is to gain insight into this poorly understood and
              crucial transformation in human subsistence and settlement patterns, because
              this basic change, from reliance on wild to cultivated resources occurred
              independently in many parts of the world and set the stage for the development
              of complex societies. Tentative evidence suggests that early Archaic peoples
              had access to maize but it is unclear how this domesticate was incorporated
              into their diets and how this altered subsistence and settlement strategies.
              Previous research in the area on this crucial transformational time span has
              indicated the presence of abundant sites but has failed to define shifts in
              land use, changes in human interactions and regional variations in human
              behavior. 

Drs. Kennett and Voorhies believe that these changes may best be
              understood in the context of larger land use patterns. While many sites have
              been discovered along the Pacific coast much less is known about adjacent
              inland mountainous regions. Survey has indicated that a series of caves and
              rock shelters are present and quite likely were inhabited by Archaic peoples.
              Because of the shelter they offer from rain, such sites often provide excellent
              protection for plant remains and Dr. Kennett and Voorhies wish to conduct test
              excavations to recover archaeological and botanical materials. They will also
              excavate later coastal Formative agricultural sites to gain additional insight
              into subsistence practices. To reconstruct possible seasonal movements the
              investigators will carry out isotopic analysis of shells because variation in
              the ratio of oxygen isotopes provides insight into the season in which they
              were harvested. They will focus also on trace element studies of ceramics in an
              attempt to link finished products to clay sources and thus reconstruct the
              movements of goods and the corresponding economic links between groups of
              people over time. 

This research is important for several reasons. It will
              provide data on a poorly known archaeological region and this will be of
              interest to many archaeologists. The work will also increase understanding of
              the transition from foraging to farming in Mesoamerica and offer insight into
              the processes which led to the rise of an important New World civilization.

