Title       : Computational Enzymology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a0089864

Award Number: 0089864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98424              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Bruice tcbruice@bioorganic.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0089864
Bruice
The desire to understand the primary tenets, which provide the
              naturally occurring enzyme catalysts such high efficiency, has been pervasive
              for half a century.  Most attention has been paid to the proposals that: (i)
              the enzyme binds, and thereby stabilizes, the transition state (Pauling, 1946);
              (ii) that the binding of substrate and transition state by enzyme freezes out
              molecular motions and thereby increase the entropy of activation (Jencks,
              1970); and (iii) the enzyme holds the substrate in a conformation which closely
              resembles the transition state (Bruice, 1960).  Recent experimental and
              computational data remove tenet (ii) from contention. This project is to
              differentiate the importance of tenets (i) and (iii).  This is made feasible by
              recent advances in computational chemistry, the increased performance of
              current computers, and the advancements in determining the structural
              coordinates of enzyme substrate species (E S) by x-ray crystallography. By
              application of kinetic isotope effects and combinations of quantum mechanics
              along with molecular mechanics (QM/MM) one can obtain from E S the coordinates
              for the enzyme transition state complex (E TS).  Long term molecular dynamic
              simulations (MD) of the motions in E S and ETS provide all the structural
              variations in time for these two species.  For any given enzyme, data analysis
              allows a choice between preferential enzyme binding of the transition state (i)
              rather than the ground state and/or conformers of ES which resemble closely the
              structure of ETS.  This procedure has been used this laboratory for a number of
              enzymes.  Our project is to extend these investigations to the enzyme reactions
              chorismate to prephenate by chorismate mutase, the hydrolysis of NAD+ by
              diptheria toxin and nucleoside hydrolysis by Crithidia fasciculata nucleoside
              hydrolase.  These enzymes have been chosen on the basis of the simplicity of
              their catalytic reactions (first order processes without covalent
              intermediates) and availability of high resolution X-ray structures.  The
              establishment of any generalization requires many explorations.  
.

