Title       : SGER: A Self Assembled Spintronic Quantum Gate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a0089893

Award Number: 0089893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Supriyo Bandyopadhyay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A small grant is requested for exploratory research leading to the possible
              
demonstration of a critical element for a nanoscale  universal quantum
              gate.
A novel gate structure will be electrochemically self assembled by
              sequential 
electrodeposition of ferromagnetic and semiconducting layers
              inside the pores 
of a self-assembled porous film with ~ 10-nm sized pores. A
              qubit will be 
encoded by the spin polarization of a single electron injected
              into the 
depleted semiconductor layer from the ferromagnetic contact and
              
trapped there by Coulomb blockade. Single qubit rotations will be
              effected
by modulating the spin splitting energy in the semiconductor layer
              with an 
external electrostatic gate potential, utilizing the Rashba effect.
              
The uniqueness of this approach is that it utilizes a self-assembled
              structure 
(thereby obviating the need for complicated lithography; some
              lithography is 
needed for input/output connections and gate contacts) and it
              relies on 
electrical control of the qubit as opposed to magnetic field
              control envisaged 
in other comparable schemes. Since electrical switching is
              faster and more
convenient on a chip, this paradigm has distinct
              advantages.

The risk involved in the project is the uncertainty of coherent
              spin injection
across a ferromagnetic/semiconductor interface. The risk is
              however mitigated 
by the fact that spin injection is easier across small area
              interfaces 
and there exists experimental evidence of spin injection across
              the 
interface of carbon nanotubes and ferromagnetic metals which is of
a
              quality comparable to or worse than what we expect in our fabrication scheme.
              
If successful, this project will lead to the only self-assembled,
              
all-electric spintronic quantum gate.

A self assembled spintronic quantum
              gate will ultimately allow the creation of a self-assembled  quantum circuit
              with quantum connectors linking different gates,
as well as quantum memory
              elements. Since the self assembled 
structures are extremely dense,  it is 
              expect a qubit density of
more than 10E11/cmE2 that translates to a storage
              density equivalent to
that of 2**{10E9} classical bits in a 1-cmE2 area which
              exceeds the 
storage capacity of all the hard disks that could be made with
              all 
the material in the universe over the life of the universe.
