Title       : Systematics and Biogeography of Lampreys ("Agnatha":Petromyzontiformes) and the
               Evolution of Parasitic and Non-Parasitic Life Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a0089507

Award Number: 0089507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Mayden   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin J. Roe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089507
Mayden and Roe
	Based on the fossil record, the greatest diversity of
              jawless vertebrates (agnathans) occurred during the upper Silurian and Early
              and Middle Devonian geological periods, approximately 420 to 380 million years
              ago.  The majority of agnathans became extinct by the end of the Devonian (360
              million years ago) with one or more lineages surviving to give rise to modern
              jawless vertebrates.  Lampreys represent one of the two surviving groups of
              agnathans (hagfishes are the other group).  Living lampreys are classified in
              the order Petromyzontiformes, which includes 40 extant species.  The geographic
              distribution of lampreys is notable in that they are found in both Northern and
              Southern hemispheres, but are almost entirely absent from tropical regions.  It
              has been hypothesized that this distribution of lampreys is the result of the
              breakup of the supercontinent Pangea and the post-Pangean continents of
              Laurasia and Gondwana.  In addition to their interesting geographic
              distribution lampreys are also remarkable for several reasons: 1) they
              represent a transitional stage between invertebrate chordates and vertebrates
              that possess jaws, and as such allow the testing of hypotheses concerning the
              evolution of characters considered to be unique to vertebrates;  2) they
              possess a complex life history that involves metamorphosis from a sedentary,
              filter feeding larval form termed an ammocete, to a sexually reproducing adult;
              and 3) they can be divided into two groups based on whether the species are
              parasitic or non-parasitic.  Parasitic lampreys include both anadromous species
              and those restricted to streams and rivers.  Species with non-parasitic
              life-cycles are similar to those with a parasitic life-cycle except that the
              adults do not feed.  Historically, morphological similarities between parasitic
              and non-parasitic species have been interpreted as evidence that extant
              non-parasitic species evolved independently on several occasions from different
              parasitic species.  These hypothesized sibling species have been termed "paired
              species" or "satellite species."  Despite agreement among lamprey researchers
              as to the validity of the satellite species hypothesis, no explicit
              phylogenetic analysis has been conducted to support such relationships.  Drs.
              Richard Mayden and Kevin Roe at the University of Alabama are seeking to test
              these hypothesized relationships, and thereby test one of the most remarkable
              cases of multiple convergence ever suspected in vertebrates.  The study will
              produce phylogenetic hypotheses for all lamprey species using both
              morphological and molecular (DNA sequences) data sets.  Specific objectives are
              to test hypotheses concerning (1) the evolutionary origins of the parasitic and
              non-parasitic life histories, (2) the relationships between the various species
              and genera and families within Petromyzontiformes, (3) the biogeographic
              history of Petromyzontiformes with reference to the history of the earth and
              other taxa having similar distributions, and (4) the proposed relationship
              between lampreys and jawed vertebrates. 
The project is international in
              scope, and includes the collection of specimens on several continents (North
              America, South America, Europe and Australia), and involves collaboration with
              three acknowledged experts in lamprey biology and systematics: Drs. I. Potter
              and H. Gill of Murdoch University, Perth, Australia and Dr. C. Renaud from the
              Canadian Museum of Nature, Ottawa, Ontario, who have primary responsibility for
              the collection of additional specimens (important for morphological characters
              and molecular analyses) and the development of morphological data sets.  These
              data will be combined with the molecular data sets based upon the complete DNA
              sequences of several mitochondrial genes.

