Title       : Using GIS Technology for Earth Systems-level Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0089056

Award Number: 0089056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74761              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Smith smithj@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Earth Systems Science (40) According to the National Science Foundation's 1996
              report "Shaping the Future," the overarching goal for undergraduate students is
              to directly experience the methods and processes of inquiry. At present, at
              many colleges non-science majors tend to meet general education science
              requirements by taking lower division content-based science courses designed
              for majors. Students in these types of general education classes seldom have
              the opportunity to experience open-ended inquiry geared towards developing
              scientific reasoning or to investigate locally significant, scientifically
              relevant questions at the earth systems level. We need a curricular framework
              that can be used as the foundation for understanding and analyzing scientific
              concepts at the earth systems level which can be incorporated into the earliest
              stages undergraduate education. Our vision of a science curriculum for
              non-majors is one that synthesizes scientific concepts and reasoning using
              standard industry technology and computer programs within the context of earth
              system processes. This project focuses on bringing technology to the general
              education science classroom. An interdisciplinary technology-based curriculum
              is being designed and assessed, which engages undergraduate non-science majors
              in earth systems level inquiry and research. Recent work at Portland State
              University in their general education program (UNST) has shown that Geographic
              Information Systems can be an engaging and useful tool for teaching earth
              systems to undergraduate general education students. The problem encountered
              though is the lack of a unified database of coverages for watersheds that is
              tied to an easily understandable curriculum. Until now, instructors searched
              for then clipped individual coverages and worked the available information into
              classroom activities. Our objectives are to research, select and geo-reference
              appropriate environmental "coverages" within the Columbia River Basin and to
              produce and evaluate a curriculum to determine its ability to advance students
              towards a systematic understanding of watersheds and water quality. The outcome
              will be a CD ROM with appropriate coverages, data sets, modular instructions
              and a teacher's curriculum. The Columbia River Basin (CRB) was chosen because
              there are a series of general education courses within UNST that center around
              the CRB and a large target audience for testing the curriculum within PSU and
              region wide. Upon successful completion of this phase of the project, similar
              coverages and curriculum can be developed for national dissemination for
              additional large watersheds within North America through partnerships with
              other institutions.
