Title       : CRB: Endemic Tree Loss from Fragmentation of Disperser Assemblages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2001  
File        : a0089598

Award Number: 0089598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry F. Howe hfhowe@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norbert Cordeiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0090056.  Clay
Janzen and Connell described ecological mechanisms by which
              host-specific natural enemies promote community diversity by facilitating the
              proliferation of heterospecifics in the vicinity of the focal host species. 
              This "negative feedback" theory forms the conceptual framework of this
              investigation testing plant and soil-microbe interactions, which have been
              overlooked for years by ecologists.  Soil microbes have numerous negative and
              positive effects on plant fitness, and their fundamental importance to plant
              populations and community structure is now widely accepted but poorly
              understood.  This project is a continuation of research into the negative
              feedbacks of soil-borne fungal pathogens on black cherry recruitment and
              population dynamics.  Field surveys will be conducted to determine the survival
              of black cherry seedlings in early, mid, and late successional sites.  To
              assess the degree of host-specificity of the fungal pathogen (Pythium), seeds
              from black cherry and other plant species will be germinated in the laboratory
              in sterile and Pythium-inoculated agar.  Similarly, seeds from ten plant
              species will be germinated in sterile and inoculated soils under greenhouse
              conditions.  Results from the field, laboratory and greenhouse studies will be
              compared with data collected on natural plant distributions in the field.  The
              ultimate objective is to determine the role played by soil-borne pathogens in
              seedling establishment, spatial distributions, and successional change.  This
              research can substantially advance our limited knowledge about how these
              complex and long-overlooked interactions influence community diversity and
              succession. 


