Title       : Theory of Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0089492

Award Number: 0089492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip B. Allen philip.allen@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0089492
Allen
This grant supports theoretical research on models which mimic
              the behavior of real three-dimensional solids.  Recent developments in
              mesoscopic physics have provided powerful new computer algorithms for studying
              electrical or heat transport in strongly disordered systems.  The phenomenon of
              "resistivity saturation" will be studied, in order to test the hypothesis that
              "band-mixing" effects are involved and cause the excess conduction beyond the
              naive prediction of Boltzmann transport theory.  A series of models will be
              studied numerically with increasingly complex band structures.  An analog
              problem in lattice heat transport is the thermal conductivity of glasses.  A
              realistic atomistic model for amorphous silicon will be treated using the tools
              of mesoscopic physics.

There are many important oxide materials with the
              perovskite (ABO3) or related crystal structures, including ferroelectrics, high
              temperature superconductors, ionic conductor electrolytes, etc.  Although most
              perovskites are insulators, a few are metals, and quite a few have
              metal-to-insulator transitions as a function of doping or of temperature.  The
              systems Ba1-xKxBiO3 and La1-xCaxMnO3 are particularly nice examples.  The pure
              end-member (x=0) compounds are prototype examples of materials which are
              insulating because of a broken symmetry in the ground state, namely charge
              ordering in BaBiO3 , orbital ordering in LaMnO3 .  Both systems become
              interesting metals when the doping level x increases to a critical value
              0.2-0.4.  Good models exist for the electons which participate in this
              metal-to-insulator transition.  It is proposed to study self-trapped states in
              these materials.  In particular, the opposite end-member (x=1) CaMnO3 , when
              lightly doped with electrons (x=1-epsilon) will be chosen as a model system for
              study of the competition between spin-polaron effects and lattice-polaron
              effects.  The lowest electronic excitations of both BaBiO3 and LaMnO3 in this
              model are self-trapped excitons.  These will be studied and their novel optical
              properties (adsorption spectra, resonant Raman spectra, etc.) will be
              predicted.  When more heavily doped, holes should self-organize into planar
              anti-phase boundary charged defects (the three-dimensional version of
              "stripes").  These will be studied and the properties predicted.  The
              metal-insulator transition as a function of doping (polaron-glass collapse)
              will be modeled and carefully characterized.
%%% 
This grant supports
              theoretical research on the electrical and thermal properties of oxide
              materials which are of great fundamental interest due to their complex behavior
              as the temperature and/or concentration of additives is changed.  These
              materials exhibit a wealth of effects including ferroelectricity, high
              temperature superconductivity and ionic conduction which may lead to widespread
              applications.
***
 

