Title       : GOALI: Adsorption Competition in Soils and Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0089903

Award Number: 0089903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Axe axe@adm.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Dyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,1504,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
0089903  Axe  The objectives of this award are to understand the effect of
              competing ions on contaminant adsorption in model systems, develop mechanistic
              models for their interactions with mineral surfaces, determine transport and
              thermodynamic parameters to describe their behavior and test the ability of
              resulting models to  predict their behavior in soils and sediments.  Although a
              number of researchers have studied the adsorption of heavy metals on goethite
              and other hydrous oxides, only a limited number of studies have dealt with
              heavy metal adsorption competition on hydrous oxides macroscopically.  In
              contaminated systems, the presence of multiple contaminants is more frequent
              than the existence of only one contaminant; heavy metals and dissolved
              minerals, along with plant nutrients, exist in the subsurface environment. 
              Using molecular-scale and macroscopic sorption data, the overall goal of this
              collaborative research activity is to develop surface complexation models that
              can be applied and integrated into fate and transport models for predicting
              speciation and mobility of toxic trace metal ions in groundwater, soils and
              sediments when competing ions are present.  The heavy metals will include those
              most freequently found at Superfund and DOD sites, i.e., Ni, Pb and Zn.  By
              using macroscopic and spectroscopic measurements to evaluate the adsorption
              mechanisms, the types of sites of the goethite surface will be probed along
              with the adsorption capacity and competition for the different types of sites. 
              Mechanistic, microscopic models of metal interactions will be developed
              including competition at the goethite surface.  These models, along with
              tranport and thermodynmic parameters determined through the proposed
              collaborative research, will provide the ability to accurately model
              contaminant mobility and bioavailability.  Results of this work will be applied
              in actual treatment and remediation problems at DuPont; this will serve as a
              useful calibration mechanism for validating the relevance of the fundamental
              research and for designing future experiments.  This research project is
              awarded under the NSF GOALI (Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
              Industry) program and represents a collaborative effort with researchers from
              DuPont, which is providing support for one of the two graduate students
              supported by this grant. ***

