Title       : Molecular Phylogenetics and a Time Scale for Diversification of the Higher Flies
               (Diptera: Eremoneura)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a0089745

Award Number: 0089745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian M. Wiegmann bwiegman@unity.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey L. Thorne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1649,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0089745
Brian M. Wiegmann

Drs. Brian Wiegmann and Jeffrey L. Thorne of
              North Carolina State University have been awarded a grant to study phylogenetic
              relationships of an economically important instect group.  With nearly 60,000
              described species, the Eremoneura, or higher-flies  (Insecta: Diptera:
              Brachycera), are among the largest and most successful of Mesozoic-aged insect
              radiations.  Conflicting morphological interpretations have fueled a debate
              over the relationships of the major subgroups within Eremoneura. The basal
              lineages of the two major eremoneuran groups, Empidoidea and Cyclorrhapha, have
              been particularly controversial. Despite recent attention, no molecular studies
              have yet addressed eremoneuran classification. This collaborative project will
              synthesize morphological and molecular evidence to reconstruct the timing and
              pattern of basal eremoneuran evolution. Recently proposed methods for
              estimating divergence times from nucleotide sequence data do not require the
              biologically implausible assumption that rates of molecular evolution are
              constant over time.  Such methods for estimating divergence times are promising
              but have not yet received adequate evaluation or refinement.  Eremoneuran
              relationships that are elucidated within this project, and recent compilations
              of fossil evidence will serve as a test system for the ability of new methods
              to estimate divergence times.  Analyses will be carried out to: 1) test
              published hypotheses for the basal family-group relationships of Eremoneura, 2)
              test the monophyly of the Empidoidea and its position as proposed sister-group
              to the Cyclorrhapha, 3) reconstruct eremoneuran divergence times and test the
              robustness of divergence time estimation methods to differing genes and tree
              topologies, Molecular phylogenies and a reconstructed time scale for
              eremoneuran Diptera will be extremely valuable because Diptera are model
              systems for genetic, developmental, and evolutionary biology.  Integration of
              molecular and morphological evidence on brachyceran phylogeny will ultimately
              provide a framework for uncovering patterns and causes associated with major
              Mesozoic-aged insect radiations.


