Title       : East Antarctic glacial history through microfossil analyses of the Pagodroma
               Group
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0089899

Award Number: 0089899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65603              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Harwood dharwood1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jason M. Whitehead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0089899
Harwood

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a micropaleontological
              investigation of Pagodroma Group sediments to complement and enhance prior
              stratigraphic and paleoenvironmental studies of these Cenozoic glacial deposits
              of East Antarctica. Preliminary results indicate the presence of Oligocene (?),
              middle Miocene, upper Miocene and Pliocene-Pleistocene glaciomarine strata that
              have the potential to contribute significantly to our understanding of the past
              fluctuations in the extent and character of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet
              (EAIS). These strata were deposited in a glacial system involving EAIS drainage
              through the Lambert Glacier and repeated marine incursion and ice
              margin/grounding line retreat across a distance of more than 800 km.
              Paleontological and sedimentological information present within these strata
              have the potential to provide baseline climate information bearing on the
              history of the EAIS. The Pagodroma Group sequences will provide a Neogene
              record of glaciomarine deposition on the continental interior that will expand
              what is already known from drill cores and outcrops in the Dry Valley region
              and the Vestfold Hills. These deposits are dated biostratigraphically by the
              occurrence of in situ diatom and foraminifera assemblages that occur in
              laterally-continuous beds of diatomaceous marine mudstone within a sequence of
              diamictite. These fossils provide direct age correlation to Southern Ocean and
              Ross Sea biostratigraphic schemes. Open marine diatom production and in situ
              diatom sedimentation is noted in several deposits of the Pagodroma Group that
              are at least 300 km inland from the current coastline. This new research will
              focus on establishing the age of different deposits of the Pagodroma Group
              through the study of in situ and glacially reworked microfossil assemblages.
              This will aid in the reconstruction of a composite history of the EAIS-Lambert
              Glacier-Amery Basin-Prydz Bay system. Primary objectives of this proposal are:
              (1) to develop a temporal and spatial record of Neogene EAIS variability, and
              (2) to test hypotheses that predict future changes in the EAIS in response to
              elevated global temperatures with geologic data. In addition,
              biostratigraphical and paleoecological analyses can reveal sea-surface
              temperature, sea level and sea-ice conditions, among other environmental
              parameters at the time of deposition. The ability to date and interpret these
              paleoenvironmental conditions is improving steadily through continued study of
              Cenozoic Antarctic diatom-bearing deposits, yet much remains to be done.
              Analyses will be undertaken on 250 Pagodroma Group samples collected during the
              1997/98 field season. Currently 116 samples are available from deposits on the
              Amery Oasis, which is 250 km inland from the modern coast; 5 samples from Mt
              Stinear, 500 km inland; and 84 samples from Mt Menzies, which is 600 km inland.
              The bulk of this project will be conducted by a post-doctoral scientist, who
              will continue to improve the biostratigraphic and paleoecological use of
              diatoms and further extend his education and experience in Cenozoic Antarctic
              diatom paleontology. Future stratigraphic drilling programs that are planned
              for the Antarctic shelf and margin by numerous international Antarctic programs
              will require the skills of several experienced diatom paleontologists to
              provide age and environmental control for recovered materials. In summary, this
              project will provide further experience and training for a postdoctoral
              researcher on important materials that will help to answer current questions
              about Neogene variability of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet and the likely
              response to elevated global temperatures in the future.


