Title       : The Probability/Statistics Object Library
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2000   
File        : a0089377

Award Number: 0089377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158755             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyle Siegrist siegrist@math.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) 

The purpose of this project is to develop a
              virtual library of Java "objects" for use by teachers and students in
              probability and statistics. Applets are small, self-contained programs designed
              to illustrate important concepts and methods. An applet can be "dropped" into a
              web page by a teacher with no programming expertise and then surrounded by
              expository text, data sets, and other elements to create custom web-based
              course materials. Components are building blocks of applets, and are of three
              basic types: virtual versions of physical objects (such as coins and dice),
              virtual versions of mathematical objects (such as probability distributions and
              data structures), and custom interface objects (such as special graphs and data
              tables). The components are used by teachers and students with some programming
              experience to create new components and applets with relative ease.

The
              probability/statistics object library is available on a web site maintained by
              the University of Alabama in Huntsville. The objects are freely available under
              the General Public License, so that teachers and students can download the
              objects, modify them, use them in projects, and redistribute them. A
              significant part of the project is the construction of an object model that
              describes the hierarchy of objects and how they relate to each other, and
              specifies certain basic properties, methods, and exception handling for the
              objects. The object model helps ensure that the objects in the library are
              carefully documented, that they work well with a variety of platforms and
              browsers, and they have a consistent user interface. There are two levels of
              evaluation for the library. A top-level board will function like an editorial
              board, particularly in the design of the object model. A larger, less formal
              group of peer reviewers evaluates the objects in the library in terms of
              performance and pedagogical value. Special efforts are made to link the library
              to nationally known sites, particularly those that function as larger virtual
              libraries or mathematical "portals." An ongoing evaluation and dissemination
              program is fully integrated into the project.



