Title       : On-Line Undergraduate Laboratories in Signal and Image Processing,
               Communications, and Controls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0089075

Award Number: 0089075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424828             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas S. Spanias spanias@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lina Karam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tolga M. Duman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Konstantinos S. Tsakalis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antonia Papandreou-Suppappola  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Electrical (55)

Arizona State University is fully developing
              and evaluating a web-based undergraduate laboratory tool in the areas of
              undergraduate digital signal processing(DSP), communications, image processing
              and controls. We have already developed and successfully tested a prototype
              laboratory tool (J-DSP) for use in the undergraduate DSP class. This web-based
              prototype supports capabilities for online signal processing simulations and
              provides laboratory experiences to distance learning and on-campus
              undergraduate students. The tool is based on a collection of novel Java applets
              that support a user-friendly object oriented environment. This exemplary Java
              software supports a simulation environment that enables students to establish
              and execute experiments from any computer platform that is equipped with a web
              browser.

This work provides significant extensions of the laboratory
              prototype to the other areas (communications, image processing and controls),
              an assessment and dissemination strategy that includes test sites, and a plan
              to sustain development, dissemination, and evaluation after the CCLI project.
              The prototype lab and the proposed extensions represent perhaps the first
              comprehensive effort to provide on-line lab experiences in distance learning
              environments. We anticipate that this novel concept can be extended to
              different types of subjects at different levels of education, e.g., on-line
              experiments at levels and topics ranging from high-school physics to community
              college science labs and college-level engineering subjects. The prototype
              J-DSP along with its proposed extensions to "hot" systems topics such as
              communications, image processing, and advanced controls will enable new
              web-course developers to seamlessly integrate online experiments to their
              web-course content.

