Title       : Interactive Materials for the Science of Information Technology, An Innovative
               Physics Course for Non-Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2002    
File        : a0089399

Award Number: 0089399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Doris Wagner wagnerdj@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leo J. Schowalter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) A new, innovative physics course, The Science of Information
              Technology (ScIT). ScIT has been developed and piloted in the studio format in
              Rensselaer's physics department. ScIT is unusual because (a) it is an
              upper-level physics course with no prerequisites, (b) it is topically-based,
              combining discussions of fundamental physical principles with information
              system applications that interest students, (c) it brings world-class
              researchers with several different specialties into a classroom of non-majors
              to talk about the current state of research, and (d) it attracts students from
              diverse concentrations, with performance in the course essentially independent
              of physics background. 

The course does not have a suitable textbook, and
              supporting materials must be either newly created or drawn from a variety of
              non-traditional sources. This project supports for the creation, refinement,
              testing, and national distribution of materials for the course, such as text,
              multimedia guest lectures, and appropriate in-class activities. The Science of
              Information Technology covers several topics, such as atomic structure, fiber
              optics, semiconductor properties, and quantum physics, that are not covered in
              most traditional introductory courses yet are crucial to the working of
              information systems used daily by students. Furthermore, the course covers
              these topics without requiring advanced calculus or prior physics experience
              from the students, making the course accessible and attractive to the entire
              student body, as an elective should be. The contributed guest lectures by
              prominent researchers gives the students insight into the obstacles facing
              further development and some possible ways to overcome those challenges. This
              combination of features give ScIT the potential to increase the level of
              scientific literacy among the rapidly growing population of information
              technology consumers and users, fostering a greater appreciation for science in
              general, and physics in particular.

A variety of materials are being
              developed. These include (a) a textbook, which will provide a measure of
              uniformity to the course; (b) illustrations of the concepts covered within the
              course, best done with animated graphics, such as Java applets or Shockwave
              presentations; (c) interactive inquiry-based activities. Existing activities
              are being refined, and all activities are being evaluated for learning,
              relevance, and soundness. In addition, guest lectures by researchers are being
              videotaped, digitized, and integrated into the course materials. Activities and
              lessons are also being used in and tested for the enrichment of K-12 teachers.
              Once the course materials have been fully developed and evaluated by respected
              experts in the relevant fields, they will be distributed nationally through a
              publisher and an on-line distributor like WebCT. In this way, ScIT is being
              developed from a pilot offering of a novel science elective to a
              well-organized, pedagogically-sound learning experience bringing both
              technology and cutting-edge research into the classroom of non-science
              majors.



