Title       : Structure, Function, and Expression of Tubulins, Globins, and
               Microtubule-Dependent Motors from Cold-Adapted Antarctic Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0089451

Award Number: 0089451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $601286             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. William Detrich ICEMAN@NEU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-0089451
P.I. William Detrich

	As the Southern Ocean cooled
              during the past 25 million years, the fishes of Antarctic coastal waters
              evolved biochemical and physiological adaptations that maintain essential
              cellular processes such as cytoskeletal function and gene transcription.  Their
              microtubules, for example, assemble and function at body temperatures (-1.8 to
              +1 oC) well below those of homeotherms and temperate poikilotherms.  The long
              range goals of the proposed research are to determine, at the molecular level,
              the adaptations that enhance the assembly of microtubules, the function of
              kinesin motors, and the expression of globin and tubulin genes.  The specific
              objectives are three: 1) to determine the primary sequence changes and
              posttranslational modifications that contribute to the efficient polymerization
              of Antarctic fish tubulins at low temperatures; 2) to evaluate the biochemical
              adaptations required for efficient function of the brain kinesin motor of
              Antarctic fishes at low temperatures; and 3) to characterize the structure,
              organization, and promoter-driven expression of globin and tubulin genes from
              an Antarctic rockcod (Notothenia coriiceps) and a temperate congener (N.
              angustata).  Brain tubulins from Antarctic fishes differ from those of
              temperate and warm-blooded vertebrates both in unusual primary sequence
              substitutions (located primarily in lateral loops and the cores of tubulin
              monomers) and in posttranslational C-terminal glutamylation.  Potential primary
              sequence adaptations of the Antarctic fish tubulins will be tested directly by
              production of wild-type and site directed tubulin mutants for functional
              analysis in vitro.  The capacity of mutated and wild-type fish tubulins to form
              "cold-stable" microtubules will be determined by measurement of their critical
              concentrations for assembly and by analysis of their dynamics by video-enhanced
              microscopy.  Three unusual substitutions in the kinesin motor domain of
              Chionodraco rastrospinosus may enhance mechanochemical activity at low
              temperature by modifying the binding of ATP and/or the velocity of the motor. 
              To test the functional significance of these changes, the fish residues will be
              converted individually, and in concert, to those found in mammalian brain
              kinesin.  Reciprocal substitutions will be introduced into the framework of the
              mammalian kinesin motor domain.  After production in Escherichia coli and
              purification, the functional performance of the mutant motor domains will be
              evaluated by measurement of the temperature dependence of their ATPase and
              motility activities.  Molecular adaptation of gene expression in N. coriiceps
              will be analyzed using an a-globin/b-globin gene pair and an a-tubulin gene
              cluster.  Structural features of N. coriiceps globin and tubulin gene
              regulatory sequences (promoters and enhancers) that support efficient
              expression will be assessed by transient transfection assay of
              promoter/luciferase reporter plasmid constructs in inducible erythrocytic and
              neuronal model cell systems followed by assay of luciferase reporter activity. 
              Together, these studies should reveal the molecular adaptations of Antarctic
              fishes that maintain efficient cytoskeletal assembly, mechanochemical motor
              function, and gene expression at low temperatures.  In the broadest sense, this
              research program should advance the molecular understanding of the
              poikilothermic mode of life.

