Title       : Visual Signal Design, Perception and Mating Success in Bowerbirds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0089954

Award Number: 0089954
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305892             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Endler endler@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9198,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Visual Signal Design, Perception, and Mating Success in Bowerbirds


John A.
              Endler


Sexual Selection can result in males with remarkably complex
              secondary sexual traits, and may be important in speciation because mating
              preferences drives it.   Most studies of sexual selection have concentrated on
              the signal content rather than the design.  By analogy with radio or TV
              transmission, animal signals consist of a carrier (e.g. a color pattern) or
              signal design and the content (e.g. advertising direct or genetic benefits to
              the female or her offspring of mating with a particular male).  Although very
              general predictions about the evolution of signals can be made considering only
              signal content or genetics these models do not allow specific predictions about
              the details of the signals, nor do they predict how the carrier should evolve. 
              For visual signals (color patterns), a knowledge of microhabitat, time,
              weather, viewing conditions during signaling and eye properties allows specific
              predictions about which colors and patterns should be used under specific
              conditions.  This approach allows specific predictions about animal signals,
              regardless of signal content.
In most animals, the visual signaler has little
              or no control over the appearance of its signals.  In bowerbirds
              (Ptilonorhynchidae) males construct and decorate bowers, which are used
              visually to attract mate.  The fact that the bower is constructed rather than
              fixed means that the visual signal (bird + bower) is constrained only by what
              the birds can find, and makes it possible to examine the consequences of
              experimental manipulation of the signals in unrestrained animals in the field,
              and thus test hypotheses about visual contrast, perception, and fitness in
              natural populations.  This project will study the design of Bowerbird visual
              signals using current models of early visual processing. Experiments will
              investigate: (1) whether or not visual contrast is maximized by bower design
              and location relative to diurnal patterns of light, shade and ambient light
              spectra; (2) the choice of objects in relation to Passerine bird vision, and
              whether or not male bowerbirds select objects which maximize the visual
              contrast to female bowerbirds of the bower and bird visual signal; and (3)
              whether bower visual contrast perceived by the birds successfully predicts
              mating. These approaches will be integrated in order to understand the
              function, design and evolution of visual signals.  The study will also
              illuminate some aspects of the basis for color preferences.  This will be the
              first fully integrated study of visual contrast, microhabitat choice, and
              function of a visual signal and should provide new insights into the direction
              of evolution of visual signals.


