Title       : Cellular and Molecular Research Techniques in Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0089092

Award Number: 0089092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32194              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay A. Blundon blundon@rhodes.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rhodes College
	      2000 North Parkway
	      Memphis, TN  381121624    901/843-3850

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) As part of the college's plans to enhance the research
              experience in the natural sciences for our undergraduate students, we are
              expanding the educational opportunities for students interested in
              neuroscience. This project is establishing a senior level research course
              entitled "Molecular and Cellular Research in Neuroscience." For students
              interested in molecular and cellular neuroscience, this course represents the
              culminating experience of a new neuroscience major that is to be developed and
              offered at Rhodes. This new course provides students with more current
              state-of-the-art research opportunities and experiences, and the new
              neuroscience major program will stand out as a unique curriculum in the
              Mid-South region for new undergraduate students of neuroscience. This new
              research course follows an already successful research-based neuroscience
              course at Rhodes that employs the more traditional research techniques of cell
              culture and intracellular and extracellular microelectrode recordings. The new
              course is based around four fundamental research experiences that have already
              been developed and published in the neuroscience lab manual "Discovering
              Neurons: The Experimental Basis of Neuroscience" (Paul et al., 1997). The first
              laboratory focuses on neurons in development, and involves the measuring of
              newly expressed ion channel currents in wild type and transfected pheochromo-
              cytoma (PC12) and COS- 7 cells using whole cell voltage clamp technology. The
              second laboratory focuses on neurons in communication, and involves the
              identification of multiple neurotransmitter receptor sites in leech ganglia
              with dual in situ immunocytochemical labeling techniques. The next laboratory
              involves neurons forming connections, and incorporates techniques of tract
              tracing dye injection in the living brain as a method to learn about the
              afferent and efferent projections in the mammalian cerebrum. The last
              laboratory is centered on neurons and higher order cognition. In this lab,
              students research the cellular mechanisms of the synaptic plasticity long- term
              potentiation by studying synaptic communication in mammalian brain
              (hippocampal) slices. In this way, students learn how cellular phenomena can
              result in higher order cognitive process such as learning and memory. Each of
              the four laboratory experiences offer ample opportunity for further research
              that can be continued as individually designed independent research
              experiences.
