Title       : Restructuring Computer Programming Courses for IT-Enabled Variable Paced
               Multilevel Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2000   
File        : a0089009

Award Number: 0089009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74954              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Popyack JPopyack@CS.Drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce W. Char  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nira Herrmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31) 
We are developing a radical recombination and
              restructuring of introductory level computer science courses that pools
              resources, differentiates knowledge levels in each subject area to fit the
              needs of different students, allows variable paced learning (not "self-paced"),
              and uses IT both as a teaching tool and to handle course administration.

We
              are developing Web-based learning modules covering the course material at three
              Bloom's taxonomy levels of technical knowledge: a more minimal level suitable
              for the needs of information systems and digital media majors; a more technical
              level for computer engineering majors; and the highest technical level for
              computer scientists.
These modules engage students in active, participatory
              learning activities in a supervised
environment. Simultaneously we retain many
              traditional elements in course delivery, such as group problem-solving sessions
              and supervised labs, office hours, and weekly deadlines. Course management
              tools are used to organize on-line materials, track student work at varying
              levels and paces, and provide student feedback through automated quizzes,
              surveys, and data mining. Online submission of homework and return of graded
              homework minimizes the administrative efforts involved in administering large
              courses and allows faculty to focus more on the students and their learning.

