Title       : Online Statistics Education: An Interactive Multimedia Course of Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2001    
File        : a0089435

Award Number: 0089435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401990             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Lane lane@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rudy Guerra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michelle R. Hebl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Osherson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
 
The Rice Virtual Lab in Statistics (RVLS) is an
              integrated collection of simulations, case studies, routines for data analysis,
              and explanatory text and is designed to implement reforms in statistics
              education that were proposed in the early 1990's. These reforms include (a)
              placing less emphasis on mathematics and more emphasis on data analysis, (b)
              developing simulations to make abstract concepts more concrete and to allow
              students to discover important principles themselves, (c) increasing the use of
              real data, and (d) including hands-on activities or active learning tasks
              (learning by doing). Measured by its use over the internet, the RVLS has been
              successful in providing resources for classroom instructors. Its major
              limitation, however, is that it does not provide a complete and autonomous
              curriculum. Specifically, it does not contain stand alone teaching modules that
              allow students to learn autonomously without the guidance of the formal
              classroom setting. To remedy this, we developed an on-line multimedia textbook
              in statistics, incorporating and extending the materials in the RVLS. The
              textbook consists of modules that integrate lecture segments, simulations,
              self-testing exercises, and real data from case studies. Its lectures are
              available as audio overlays of "blackboard" presentations (in addition to a
              pure text option). Students' performances on exercises at the end of each
              chapter are recorded (optionally) as evidence of mastery of particular topics.
              The textbook is freely available on the internet. The project embodies a
              collaborative effort between Rice University and the University of
              Houston-Downtown Campus. This collaboration ensures that the materials are
              appropriate for students with varying degrees of mathematical background. It
              also serves to broaden the participation of under-represented groups since the
              University of Houston-Downtown Campus serves primarily minority students. 

