Title       : Editing of Homocysteine by Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0089984

Award Number: 0089984
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hieronim Jakubowski jakubows@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      New Jersey Medical School, MSB C
	      Newark, NJ  07103    973/972-7090

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0089984
Jakubowski
Living organisms possess error-correcting mechanisms which
              assure accurate synthesis of their proteins according to the genetic
              information contained in DNA. One such mechanism involves editing of the
              non-protein amino acid homocysteine . Homocysteine, an obligatory precursor of
              the protein amino acid methionine, is misactivated in the cell by some tRNA
              synthetases at a high frequency. Incorporation of homocysteine into cellular
              protein is prevented by an error-correcting mechanism of the synthetases which
              convert misactivated homocysteine into a thiolactone. Different cellular pools
              of homocysteine are not equally accessible to each synthetase, suggesting
              compartmentalization of homocysteine metabolism. The present project will
              determine the physical/biochemical basis for compartmentalization of
              homocysteine editing in the bacterium Escherichia coli. A role for the
              carboxy-terminal region of methionyl-tRNA synthetase in editing will be
              examined and component(s) of the methionine biosynthetic pathway which interact
              with methionyl-tRNA synthetase will be identified using biochemical and genetic
              approaches. Studies of molecular details of homocysteine editing are important.
              This project will elucidate a major aspect of the extraordinary accuracy in the
              flow of genetic information, i.e., the molecular basis of metabolite channeling
              in an amino acid biosynthetic pathway that limits the need for editing by tRNA
              synthetases
