Title       : Exploratory Search for Extrasolar Trojan Planets in Binary Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a0089248

Award Number: 0089248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98764              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Caton catondb@appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1215,9178,9229,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
              AST-0089248
Caton

In the last few years a number of planets have been
              discovered around other stars.  Most of these discoveries have been made using
              recently developed high precision spectroscopic techniques. Other methods,
              based on detecting eclipses of some of the light of the parent stars by
              transits of a planet, have been suggested in the literature.  Studies are under
              way to look at large groups of stars with the hope of observing an eclipse. 
              However, this depends on some of the planets having their orbital plane
              "pointed" at the Earth and the eclipse occurring when the system is being
              observed.

In this project, the search for planets will be optimized by
              choosing stars more likely to have planets with the Earth in their orbital
              plane and with eclipses that occur at times that we may be able to
              approximately predict.  The optimization of the orbital alignment will be
              achieved by looking at eclipsing binary system stars orbiting in pairs with the
              Earth close to the orbital plane, as indicated by our observations of periodic
              eclipses.
The risky, exploratory nature of this project is the supposition
              that the planets may have a tendency to form and stay at special points of
              stability in the actual stellar orbits where, if there are no other perturbing
              bodies, they may remain.  This leads to predictable planetary eclipse times
              with respect to the stellar eclipse times.  While the theory of the restricted
              three-body problem was verified with the remarkable discovery of the Trojan
              asteroids, no examples of this type in other star systems are yet known to
              exist.

A number of eclipsing binary stars will be systematically monitored
              to search for subtle eclipses of the light due to transits of "Trojan planets"
              in the system. Measurements will be obtained from observations of several
              passes across the same orbital phase for each system, and the data will be
              averaged from all the observations to reduce the observational noise.  Initial
              experiments have shown that it should be possible to detect millimagnitude
              changes in brightness caused by planets larger than Jupiter.  Early results in
              the data obtained by observing V442 Cassiopeia hint at the possibility of a
              detection.

The facilities and equipment to be used were obtained by previous
              funding from the National Science Foundation.  The project will involve
              undergraduate and graduate students in the acquisition, analysis, and
              publication of the data.  This is the first major NSF supported research
              project in the astronomy program at the Appalachian State University's Dark Sky
              Observatory.

This project is funded by the Division of Astronomical
              Sciences.

***

