Title       : Adsorption Studies on Carbon Nanotubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0089713

Award Number: 0089713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aldo D. Migone aldo@physics.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              DMR-0089713
Aldo Migone

This proposal describes several sets of adsorption
              isotherm measurements that will be performed to characterize the systems formed
              by gases physisorbed on carbon nanotubes and on carbon nanohorns: 1)  We will
              search for, and investigate the characteristics of, the one-dimensional (1-D)
              phases which can be present for gases adsorbed on bundles of single walled
              nanotubes (SWNTs). Our preliminary data indicate that 1-D phases are, indeed,
              present for Xe and CH4 on SWNT bundles. We will study further these two
              systems; 2) we will establish whether or not H2 can adsorb in the interstitial
              channels (ICs) of nanotube bundles, by comparing the area determined, on the
              same sample, using H2, and using a larger adsorbate. While this question
              remains open for H2, our results show that Ne, Xe and CH4 can not penetrate
              into the ICs; 3) we will determine the binding energies of H2, Ar, Kr and CF4
              on close-ended and on open-ended SWNT bundles, and on agglomerations of carbon
              nanohorns. Our results for Ne, CH4, and Xe indicate that the binding energies
              on close-ended SWNT bundles are approximately 1.75 times larger than on
              graphite, in excellent agreement with theory. However, we have very preliminary
              (and quite intriguing) evidence that suggests that the binding energy for H2
              may be considerably higher; and 4) we will investigate the adsorption of  Xe, 
              H2 and Ar on carbon nanohorns. We will determine the potential of carbon
              nanohorns for gas storage applications. All of the proposed experiments will be
              performed on high-sensitivity, in-house-built, computer-controlled setups,
              which have already been thoroughly tested in previous adsorption experiments.
              This work will be done with students who will be prepared to enter the
              scientific/technical work force of the next few decades.
%%%

This project
              deals with the characteristics of the systems formed by gases adsorbed on two
              new forms of carbon: nanotubes and nanohorns. Nanotubes have diameters which
              are ten thousand times smaller than a human hair. The walls of the nanotubes we
              will use in our studies are only one single atom thick (single-wall nanotubes).
              Gases adsorbed on nanotubes allow the physical realization, in the laboratory,
              of matter in one dimension. One-dimensional systems behave quite differently
              from three-dimensional matter; this makes these adsorbed systems interesting
              from a fundamental perspective. From a practical point of view, adsorption on
              nanotubes and on nanohorns (a related, form of carbon), has significant
              potential for applications in gas storage technology. This project consists of
              several parts: 1) An investigation of the different one-dimensional phases
              (i.e., the one-dimensional analogs of solids, liquids and gases) that are
              present in systems formed by gases adsorbed on nanotubes and nanohorns; 2) a
              determination of how tightly hydrogen, krypton, xenon, argon, and freon are
              bound to these two new forms of carbon; and 3) a determination of the effective
              area available for adsorption on carbon nanohorns for different gases. These
              quantities are determined by measuring, at several fixed temperatures,  the
              amount of gas adsorbed on the carbon substrates, as a function of the pressure
              of the surrounding vapor. These measurements will be conducted on fully
              automated, high-sensitivity, adsorption setups. These experiments will be
              performed with the aid of students who thereby gain valuable experience in an
              area of current technological importance and who will be prepared for
              employment by industry, academia, or government.
***
