Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Topological Methods in Nonlinear Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a0089631

Award Number: 0089631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantin M. Mischaikow   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tomas Gedeon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Ghrist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0089631
Mischaikow

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Konstantin Mischaikow of the Georgia Institute of
              Technology and Professor Hiroe Oka of Ryukoku University in Japan.  A perennial
              challenge in science and engineering is the determination and description of
              coherent behaviors in systems with large (perhaps infinite) numbers of degrees
              of freedom.  Given the ubiquity of dynamical systems as models for physical
              processes, it is perhaps not surprising that the primary obstacle to a
              coherent, effective program of dynamical systems applications is the deeply
              entangled manner in which low-dimensional phenomena are embedded within
              high-dimensional systems.  The goal is to extend and develop new and effective
              topological techniques for extracting coherent low-dimensional dynamical
              phenomena from potentially high-dimensional systems.  The investigators'
              primary tool is the index theory of Conley, which collates the topological
              features of the expanding portion of the dynamics into algebraic-topological
              data structures (e.g., homology and cohomology).  The three areas of
              cooperative research for the theory are:  1) construction of an effective
              topological singular perturbation theory for reducing the dynamics of a
              fast-slow system to the slow manifold;  2) adaptation of the index theory to
              the context of complicated flows with an emphasis on particle paths and
              embeddings; and  3) reconstruction of dynamical information from time-series
              data, particularly as a tool for rigorous numerical integration of systems with
              noise.

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
              complementary expertise and research capabilities.  Through the exchange of
              ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
              promote international understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to
              publish results of their research in scientific journals and report on the
              findings at scientific meetings.

