Title       : Genes for Phylogenies: Identifying Genes with Intrinsically Good Properties for
               Phylogenetic Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0089533

Award Number: 0089533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gavin J. P. Naylor gnaylor@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The study of phylogenetic relationships among species of vertebrate animals
              relies heavily at present on analyses of mitochondrial gene sequences, and less
              so on analyses of nuclear genes. Dr. Gavin Naylor of Iowa State University is
              exploring several candidate nuclear genes, presumed to be single-copy or from
              small families (duplications) of genes, in order to find sources of reliable
              characters for phylogenetic analysis of vertebrates. From initial surveys of
              over 7000 genes in gene-sequence databases, ten or so candidates will be
              selected, amplification primers constructed to extract and amplify the
              segments, and the genes then sequenced for several model taxa of fishes, birds,
              and mammals. In comparing mutational differences between gene sequences from
              different organisms, such properties as nucleotide base compositional evenness,
              the proportion of sites free to vary, the among-site rate variation, and codon
              usage will be evaluated in tests using a known phylogenetic tree for the model
              taxa. Not all genes are equally likely to yield informative results in
              phylogenetic analyses, but there has been little explicit testing of properties
              of candidate genes, to determine beforehand useful gene sources. The work to be
              carried out will identify genes with properties that predispose them to be
              phylogenetically useful and will provide empirical tests of their utility.
              
	As sequencing technology improves and as more genomes are sequenced in their
              entirety, bioinformatics will turn to comparative genomics to mine information
              that is buried in the comparison of whle-genomes.  This endeavor will be
              greatly enhanced with an accurate understanding of the phylogenetic
              relationships among the genomes being compared, and in turn robust, reliable
              phylogenies will depend upon data drawn from several nuclear as well as
              mitochondrial genes.


