Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: African Rice Domestication and the
               Transition to Agriculture in the Middle Niger Delta, Mali
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a0089599

Award Number: 0089599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Douglas Price, MS Shawn Murray will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will continue her participation in
              archaeological excavation at Dia, located in the Middle Niger Delta in Mali.
              The site includes a series of mounds with rise above the Niger floodplain and
              evidence indicates that the earliest levels date to ca. 900-500 BC. The site is
              particularly significant because plant remains are extremely well preserved and
              rice is abundant in the earliest occupations. This may well represent a
              domesticated African species (Oryza glaberrima) and constitute the earliest
              known examples but because visual distinction between  grains of wild and
              domestic rice is difficult, other means must be employed. To this end, lipid
              and DNA analyses will be conducted. If lipid analysis is successful it may
              provide a less costly alternative to DNA analysis for species identification. A
              preliminary study has successfully shown the presence of DNA in the Dia grains.
              

The domestication of plants and animals occurred independently within the
              last 10,000 years in many parts of the world and this change from hunting and
              gathering to a more productive resource base set the stage for the rise of
              civilization. Because different crops were involved in widely differing areas,
              this transformation or "Neolithic Revolution" was not due to historical
              happenstance but rather results from a single underlying process. To understand
              this fundamental change, archaeologists employ a multi-case method: individual
              regional sequences are reconstructed and then compared and in this way
              fundamental similarities can be determined. Although Africa has not normally be
              considered such a center, in fact many plants were domesticated in the broad
              band which lies immediately South of the Sahara desert. While Southeast Asia
              served as one center for rice domestication, Africa served as another and wild
              progenitors grow in the region today. MS Murray's research will contribute to
              understanding of the evolution of African rice. It will likely document the
              earliest occurrence of domestic rice in the continent and shed light on the
              social and subsistence context within which domestication occurred. 

This
              research is also important because it will help to develop a less costly
              alternative to DNA analysis in this range of species and, if successful, lipid
              analysis will be widely used. MS Murray's research will also record rapidly
              vanishing agricultural practices in the Middle Niger Delta region, such as
              traditional crop harvesting and processing and will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.

