Title       : Population Dynamics in a Heterogenous Environment: The Effect of Variance in
               Plant Quality on Herbivore Populations in Time and Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0089570

Award Number: 0089570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179969             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nora C. Underwood nunderwood@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089570.  Nora Underwood.  

Considerable ecological research has documented
              the way in which herbivores respond to mean characteristics of their food;
              however, little is known about the way in which variability in food quality
              affects individual herbivores or populations of herbivores.  The proposed
              research will quantify the way in which variance in quality among plants
              affects the movement of individuals, as well as the population dynamics of
              insect herbivores.  A spatially explicit model will be used to examine how
              herbivore movement influences the interaction between the variance in plant
              quality and population dynamics in time and space.   This model will then
              provide a framework for understanding how variance in quality among phenotypes,
              genotypes, or species of plants affects insect demographics.

Field
              experiments will examine how variability in the genetically based quality of
              strawberry populations affects the movements and population dynamics of the
              strawberry aphid.  Short-term experiments will quantify the way in which the
              movement of individual aphids is related to population-level variance in forage
              quality.  Longer-term experiments will relate the dynamical response of aphid
              populations to different kinds of variance in food quality, ranging from that
              characteristic of plant monocultures to that characteristic of mixed cultures
              of two to six different genotypes.  This approach will facilitate a critical
              examination of the hypothesis that agricultural mixtures of plant varieties
              (genotypes) support lower population densities of pests than will monocultures.
               Finally, linking the genetic variance in plant quality to the demographics of
              herbivores provides a critical synthesis of ecological and evolutionary
              perspectives in understanding plant-herbivore dynamics.



