Title       : EMSI: Role of Environmental Molecular Interfaces on the Chemical and Biological
               Reactivity of Pollutants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0089147

Award Number: 0089147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert L. Kuczkowski                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5800135            (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick G. Hatcher hatcher@chemistry.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel J. Traina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9156,9178,9179,9198,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Environmental Molecular Science Institute (EMSI) Award to Ohio State
              University is supported by the Special Projects Office in the Chemistry
              Division, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences Directorate. Patrick G. Hatcher and Samuel J. Traina
              supported by this award will study the role of environmental molecular
              interfaces on the chemical and biological activity of atmospheric, water and
              soil processes. This multidisciplinary program also supports sixteen other
              faculty members from different departments of Ohio State University.  In
              addition, support is also provided to Paul Davidovits (Boston College), Satish
              Myneni (Princeton University) and Elizabeth Guthrie (Univ. of Tennessee)
              through subawards. Two major technical thrusts will be studied, 1) atmospheric
              processes at air/water/organic interfaces and ice interfaces, and 2)
              interactions of pollutants with water/solid interfacial processes in soils,
              sediments and aquatic media. Ice core studies at molecular level will provide
              an understanding of past and future chemical processes. These studies will have
              broad impact on issues related to ecosystem impairment and degradation, and
              long term deleterious impact on human and natural biota. In support of the
              technical thrusts, is a sizable effort in the use and development of advanced
              analytical methods. Staff from Argonne National Laboratory will provide
              expertise in laser desorption mass spectrometry, x-ray absorption spectrometry,
              solid state and spatially-resolved Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometry, and
              isotopic labeling studies. Industrial collaborations with Aerodyne Research on
              aerosol and cloud chamber chemistry, and Exxon and Ciba Specialty Chemicals on
              targeted contaminated sites have been established and expanded.  Outreach
              training programs proposed involved undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate
              students to attract young people to careers in environmental molecular
              sciences.  In addition, the outreach program at Ohio State University will be
              coordinated with Argonne National Laboratory.
   
This fundamental
              multidisciplinary research will advance our understanding of the role of
              environmental molecular interfaces on the chemical and biological activity of
              atmospheric, water and soil processes. The studies will also provide
              information at molecular level, the interactions of pollutants with water/solid
              interfacial processes in soils, sediments and aquatic media. The outreach
              programs including the web site proposed will provide training in and
              information about environmental molecular sciences.
