Title       : Studies of Entangled Polymers Under Strong Flow Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  2002    
File        : a0089124

Award Number: 0089124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Gary Leal lgl20@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott T. Milner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at understanding the behavior of polymeric solutions in
              strong flows beyond the linear viscoelastic limit, and for concentrations and
              molecular weights at which the polymers are sufficiently entangled that
              reptation-based theories are expected to be applicable.  The project is based
              upon the use of transient shear and other homogeneous flows ranging from
              near-shear to a planar extensional flow, under conditions in which the
              conformation of polymer chains is far from the equilibrium state.  This
              includes cases at sufficiently high shear rates that there can be significant
              chain stretch.  This general class of problems is intresting because it
              provides a basis for testing the predictions of theoretical models, and also
              because an understanding of the relationship between flow and polymer
              configuration is an essential component in the dsign of processing systems that
              can lead to optimization of marcroscopic materal properties.  The research
              proposed is dominantly experimental in nature, and is based on the use of novl
              flow cells that are coupled with transient optical measurement systems.  These
              include both two-color and phase-modulated birefringence, as well as dynamic
              light scattering and Piv.  This combination of experimental tools provides data
              on the transient configuration of polymer segments between entanglement points,
              as well as a complete characterization of the flow.  Standard rheological tests
              (primarily linear viscoelasticity) are also used to characterize the fluids. 
              The fluids to be studied are solutions with a bimodal moleclar weight
              distribution, and solutions of star polymers.  These two studies represent a
              first step toward the consideration of polydispersity and polymer branching. 
              Finally, recent extensions of the basic Doi-Edwards theory will be evaluated,
              and where possile improved, including particularly recent proposals for the
              incorporation of convective constraint release(CCR).                           
                                                                                             
                         %%%                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                   This research is aimed at achieving the fundamental
              understanding that is necessary for the design and development of processing
              strategies for the production of precision polymeric parts for structural and
              other applications, and for optimizatiton of the material properties by
              manipulation of molecular structure during processing.  The ability to control
              design and optimize polymer processing is essential to the development of
              products with a high added value above the raw materials costs.
