Title       : The Formation and Influence of Spatially Structured Trophic Interactions in
               Primary Succession at Mount St. Helens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0089843

Award Number: 0089843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297762             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Bishop bishop@vancouver.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan H. Titus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Research will examine on how trophic interactions (i.e., feeding relationships)
              influence succession using a natural biological invasion in which a native
              plant (lupine) and its associated specialist herbivores are recolonizing Mount
              St. Helens.  Efforts will quantify the extent to which spatial variation in the
              dynamics of trophic interactions influences the pace and pattern of primary
              succession.  This will afford a unique opportunity to unravel complex
              connections between consumer-resource interactions over a large landscape. 
              Indeed, the Mount St. Helens landscape provides a unique but fleeting
              opportunity to study an herbivore-mediated transition between successional
              phases.  Three questions will be answered in detail.  First, do resource or
              consumer gradients associated with patches of lupine drive spatially structured
              herbivore dynamics during primary succession?  Second, do lupines and lupine
              herbivory affect the community dynamics of plants?  Third, how is this complex
              tritrophic reinvasion progressing and influencing primary succession?  The
              detailed investigations will constitute a key case study of how sequential
              spatial advance of components of a parasitoid-herbivore-plant system can
              influence the dynamics of species change at the landscape scale of analysis.
