Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Classical and Quantum Dynamics of Glassy
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2001   
File        : a0089835

Award Number: 0089835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon M. Balents balents@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5918,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0089835
Balents

This three-year award for U.S.-France cooperative research
              in condensed matter theory involves Leon M. Balents and his group at the
              University of California, Santa Barbara and Pierre Le Doussal and his group at
              the Ecole Normale Superieure in Paris, France.  The investigators propose to
              extend and apply elastic models of materials that describe: vortex lattices in
              type II superconductors; pinned charge density waves and Wigner crystals;
              domain walls in ferromagnets; and quantum Hall bilayers.  Functional
              normalization group methods, quantum transport methods and inclusion of
              topological defects will be utilized.  The objective is to develop more
              realistic descriptions of coarsening and aging of experimentally relevant
              systems and use the models to explore transport, dissipation, non-linear and
              glassy dynamics in the quantum region.  The US group brings to this
              collaboration expertise in disordered systems. They will focus on quantum
              transport and applications of low-dimensional conductors and other effects.  
              This is complemented by expertise of the French group in disordered systems and
              their new techniques to describe topological defects. 

This award represents
              the US side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for
              Scientific Research (CNRS).  NSF's Division of International Programs and
              Division of Materials Research will cover travel funds and living expenses for
              the US investigator, postdoctoral researcher and/or graduate student.  The CNRS
              will support the visits of French researchers to the United States. The
              collaboration will advance fundamental understanding of interactions and
              disorder in modern materials and the coarsening and aging process of materials.
              

