Title       : Statistical applications for the mathematics curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2000  
File        : a0089004

Award Number: 0089004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149927             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Cobb gcobb@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) 

This project is developing or fundamentally
              restructuring courses in probability and statistics, and producing textbooks
              and other written materials suitable for national distribution. The aim of the
              project is to offer students experience with authentic, contemporary
              applications of statistics, and to do this in a way that retains an emphasis on
              what elevates mathematical thinking above its use as a mere tool. The project
              is providing opportunities for students to experience the power and beauty of
              abstraction as a process that reveals unexpected connections between objects
              that are quite dissimilar on a concrete level. The project is strengthening the
              preparation offered to students, increasing their appreciation of mathematics,
              and increasing course enrollments and numbers of majors.

In particular, the
              project is producing textbooks and other materials that can either be used for
              courses at other institutions, or used as models there for the development of
              new courses in the same spirit. The project makes explicit connections to the
              crosscutting themes of diversity, technology, and teachers. The institution is
              a women's college with an outstanding record of involving women in the
              sciences. All of the courses make essential use of the computer by
              incorporating numerical methods and probability simulations as the most direct
              path to applications and concepts that would otherwise not be accessible to our
              students via paper-and-pencil exercises. Those who teach mathematics in schools
              should know how mathematics is currently used, have experience with computer
              solution of problems that are analytically out of reach, and, above all, have
              the uniquely compelling experience of making unexpected connections by
              discovering common abstract structure.



