Title       : A Phylogenetic Study of Apiaceae Tribe Oenantheae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0089452

Award Number: 0089452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210151             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Downie sdownie@life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089452
Downie
	Dr. Stephen Downie of the University of Illinois will lead an
              international collaborative effort to study the evolution and classification of
              the Apiaceae (carrot family) tribe Oenantheae, a group of plants not recognized
              in any traditional classification of the family but clearly showing close
              relationship among themselves from DNA sequence comparisons. Many of these
              plants have tuberous roots, spongy thickened fruits, and often highly
              simplified leaves in association with their semi-aquatic growth. Some are
              economically and ecologically important, including the genus Cicuta, water
              hemlock, reputedly the source of the poison used by Socrates. The overall goal
              of the project is to produce a comprehensive phylogenetic tree for all 120 or
              so species in the group, using new DNA sequence data and traditional fruit
              anatomical and morphological characters. Molecular data will be obtained from
              the nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer region and from five
              chloroplast introns, the latter not yet fully exploited for their ability to
              help resolve genealogical relationships. In collaboration with specialists
              Krzysztof Spalik in Poland and Mark Watson in Scotland, and with colleague
              James Affolter at University of Georgia, detailed anatomical and morphological
              investigations will be made of fruit and leaf structures, to assess features
              reliable for classification and to chart likely trends of evolutionary change
              in association with the plants' adaptation to aquatic habitats. 
	Tribe
              Oenantheae contains many edible, medicinal, or highly toxic members, exhibits a
              complex and diverse natural-products chemistry, includes three species that are
              federally listed as endangered, and can serve as a model system for the study
              of plant-insect interactions. A phylogenetic framework for the group will serve
              further studies of phenotypic character evolution, ecological associations,
              conservation biology, and historical biogeography. The results will also
              provide an independent evaluation of the utility of traditional taxonomic
              characters of fruit and seed in the family, long considered of importance in
              classification.


