Title       : CRAEMS: Environmental Redox-Mediated Dehalogenation Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0089168

Award Number: 0089168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2710000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald J. Meyer meyer@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth D. Karlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Lynn Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Fairbrother  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9156,9179,9198,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Collaborative Research Activities in Environmental Molecular Science
              (CRAEMS) Award to Johns Hopkins University is supported by the Special Projects
              Office of the Chemistry Division. The award supports studies by Gerald Meyer,
              Howard Fairbrother, David Goldberg, Kenneth Karlin and A. Lynn Roberts of
              dehalogenation chemistry by combining their expertise in synthesis, homogeneous
              and heterogeneous catalysis, biomimetic and bioinorganic chemistry,
              electrochemistry, surface science, and environmental chemistry.  Specific goals
              of this multidisciplinary program are: 1) the development of new reductive and
              oxidative dehalogenation chemistries and the elucidation of their fundamental
              mechanisms; 2) application of these new findings to the sensing, remediation,
              and determination of the environmental fate of organohalide pollutants; and 3)
              provide a pedagogical platform that informs and educates the next generation of
              environmental chemists. The fundamental studies will emphasize oxidative and
              reductive cleavage of organohalides by copper (I) and metalloporphyrin
              complexes.  Both stoichiometric and electrocatalytic processes will be studied.
               Photo-triggered and electrochemical dehalogenation will also be examined.
              Dehalogenation by bimetallic reductants and metal sulfide minerals will be
              explored.  Finally, electron-beam-induced chlorocarbon reductive cleavage will
              be examined in water and ice media.  Collaborations include those with two
              National Laboratories (Oak Ridge National Laboratory and Pacific Northwest
              National Laboratory) and with two industries (KDF Fluid Treatment Inc., and
              Environmental Technologies Group Inc.).  To develop an understanding of
              environmental principles and processes at the molecular level, a new graduate
              course will be developed and taught.  An outreach program involving
              underrepresented undergraduate researchers from nearby universities (Howard
              University and Morgan State University) will be implemented.

Seventeen of
              the top twenty-five organic pollutants in the U.S. are organohalides. Volatile
              organohalides also deplete ozone and change global climate. This
              interdisciplinary work aims at a molecular-level understanding of
              redox-mediated dehalogenation, from which "greener" chemical processes can be
              developed and pollution problems due to organic halides can be obviated.  The
              educational aspects of this multidisciplinary program, in collaboration with
              government laboratories and industries, is designed to increase the awareness
              of students concerning real-world environmental problems and to provide
              hands-on experience.
   






