Title       : RUI: Modeling Spatially-Structured Dynamics for Benthic Predation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a0089842

Award Number: 0089842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557428             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Desharnais   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlos D. Robles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    323/343-4970

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9169,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is a growing realization that spatially- structured dynamics are an
              important consideration for many ecological systems. This is particularly true
              when local interactions among individuals of a sedentary species are intense.
              Intertidal communities often display intense local interactions among
              individuals, and the dense populations, small spatial scale, and striking
              distribution patterns of the communities suggest that this system is especially
              apt for investigations of spatially-structured dynamics. Despite this fact,
              little work has been done to develop a spatially-explicit theory for intertidal
              benthic communities. This area of ecology is ripe for the development and
              testing of mechanistic spatially-explicit dynamic models.
The first objective
              of this study is to develop a spatially-explicit "multi-model" approach to the
              study of predation in benthic communities. Research will focus on populations
              of the intertidal mussel Mytilus califonianus, an important dominant competitor
              along rocky shores of the Pacific coast, and its predators, the sea star
              Pisaster ochraceus in the Northwest and the spiny lobster, Panulirus
              interruptus, in Southern California. Three classes of spatially-explicit models
              will be developed and analyzed: (1) cellular automata, (2) analytical models
              consisting of partial and ordinary differential equations, and (3) individual
              -based models. Comparison and cross-validation will occur among models in order
              to take advantage of the strengths and that each has to offer. Whenever
              possible, model parameter values will estimated from field and laboratory data,
              model predictions will be compared to fine-scaled distributional data being
              collected in the field, and the model simulations will be used to suggest novel
              field experiments.
The second objective is to provide a rich interdisciplinary
              training experience for master's students who are interested in applying the
              tools and techniques of mathematics and computer science to ecological
              problems. Project funds will be used to provide full-time support to three
              graduate students who will be recruited from the ethnically-diverse student
              body at Cal State LA and neighboring institutions. A postdoctoral research
              associate will be hired to develop the individual-based models and assist with
              student mentoring. Interdisciplinary programs of study will be designed for
              each student and training will include participation in an NCEAS workgroup and
              a summer field experience.
This project will advance our knowledge of how
              nearshore marine benthic communities develop and are maintained and will
              contribute to the training of the next generation of ecologists.

