Title       : Host Specificity and Distribution of Avian Blood Parasites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0089226

Award Number: 0089226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Ricklefs ricklefs@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eldredge Bermingham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089226.  Ricklefs.

The proposed research uses molecular and genetic
              techniques (DNA sequencing and PCR-based RFLP assays) to characterize the
              distribution of blood parasites (Plasmodium and Haemoproteus) in species of
              birds on islands in the Lesser Antilles.  Isolated island populations of birds
              and other animals are vulnerable to infection by introduced pathogens, which
              may influence population size and the habitat distribution of their hosts. 
              Indeed, the extinction of a number of endemic species of birds in the Hawaiian
              Islands has been attributed to the introduction of malaria and pox viruses. 
              The extent to which exotic host species can influence native species, and the
              composition of local communities, in part depends on the likelihood of
              host-switching.  Although host-switching has been examined in the medical
              literature for some diseases, it has not been addressed from a community
              perspective across a broad region, such as the Caribbean. 

This project
              builds on massive collections of blood smears and buffered blood samples
              obtained from almost 2,000 birds representing 37 species, and the complete
              phylogenetic appraisals of island populations of each avian host species. 
              Research will correlate community relationships and geographic distributions of
              both host and parasite in a contemporaneous fashion.   Fieldwork will
              substantially increase the sampling of host individuals in the West Indies to
              determine seasonal, habitat, and annual variation in parasite infections. 
              Laboratory determination of parasite gene sequences will allow an accurate
              description of host- and parasite-sharing within island communities of
              Antillean birds.  In addition, it will facilitate an understanding of patterns
              of colonization and endemism in a regional parasite fauna, as well as a
              quantification of the association between phylogenetic patterns in hosts and
              parasites.  This history may reveal generalizations about potential emerging
              diseases in wildlife species.















