Title       : Origins of New Zealand Cicadas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0089946

Award Number: 0089946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine M. Simon csimon@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey K. Chambers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB 00-89946
Christine M. Simon

Dr. Chris Simon and colleagues at the
              University of Connecticut have been awarded a grant to test classical
              hypotheses concerning the influence of landscape and climate changes on
              speciation using cicadas.  In addition to creating an evolutionary tree
              (genealogy) for related New Zealand (NZ) Australian (AU) and New Caledonian
              (NC) cicada genera, this project will:  1) Describe unknown species and enlarge
              our sound library for species identification; 2) Use new Bayesian statistics to
              estimate molecular clock dates of speciation events; 3) Create an "electronic
              field guide" to the cicadas of NZ, and related AU & NC species, and 4) Train a
              Postdoctoral Research Associate.  The 40 species (5 genera) of NZ cicadas are
              ideal for this work because their natural history and distributions are well
              studied, they inhabit almost all NZ ecosystems, and they are hypothesized to
              have diversified in concert with well-documented geological/ climatological
              events. This research will test biogeographic hypotheses by adding a crucial
              time dimension.

This work will enhance knowledge of a newly described and
              highly diverse fauna and contribute to the understanding of the biogeography of
              the Austral-Pacific region.  It will resurrect valuable unpublished field notes
              and taxonomic sketches by C. A. Fleming and J. S. Dugdale who studied NZ
              cicadas for nearly twenty years. All results will appear on Dr. Simon's
              website, Cicada Central, including species distribution maps, lists of world
              researchers, web-searchable specimen databases, photographs of species and
              habitats, phylogenetic trees of relationships, and species descriptions.  This
              site will link to other systematics databases and will comprise an electronic
              field guide to the cicadas of NZ, AU, and NC The grant will train a
              postdoctoral associate in all aspects of systematics from tree building to
              species description.  Finally, this research will create a foundation for
              future work including: combined analysis of morphology and molecules in
              collaboration with AUS and NC researchers; revision of the NZ cicada genera; a
              deep-level evolutionary tree of cicada tribes and of the insect order
              Hemiptera; and an analysis of the role of sexual signal evolution in
              speciation.

