Title       : Systematics and Molecular Evolution of Perennial Soybean Polyploid Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  2002  
File        : a0089483

Award Number: 0089483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342428             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Doyle jjd5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony H. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1329,9169,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089483
Doyle and Brown
With his CSIRO-Australia colleague Tony Brown, Jeff
              Doyle at Cornell University is continuing his highly rated studies on gene
              markers and genetic consequences of polyploid evolution in the perennial
              species of soybean, Glycine, related to the cultivated annual G. max.
              Polyploidy, or whole-chromosome duplication, is common in plants, and
              especially prevalent among the major crop plants of the world. The 17 named
              diploid perennial soybeans and their numerous polyploid derivatives are
              distributed in Australasia and the southeastern Pacific islands, and are
              extensively represented in the CSIRO soybean germplasm collection. One major
              goal is to explore in wild species, with genomic tools, ideas about gene
              silencing and nucleolar dominance formulated from studies on wheat and cabbage
              polyploids, and to extend such studies to several single- or low-copy nuclear
              genes, using species complexes where the parent diploids have been identified
              (and parent tetraploids for hexaploid and octoploid derivatives) and where
              multiple origins of the "same" polyploid can be documented with molecular
              markers from both nuclear and chloroplast genomes. Studies of the fate of
              duplicated (homoeologous) loci will be pursued through cloning of the PCR
              products, but the investigators are also exploring use of denaturing
              chromatographic methods to screen numerous polyploid samples for the presence
              of novel alleles (heteroduplexes from annealing of alleles that differ in
              length or sequence separate, producing diagnostic elution profiles).
              Preliminary data are in hand for a nuclear histone gene (H3-D), for nuclear
              glutamine synthetase, for cox2 (transposed from the mitochondrion in many
              legumes), and the ribosomal RNA genes. In collaboration with Julie Vogel at
              DuPont, with access to DuPont's 200,000 soybean cDNA clones, the investigators
              also plan to screen for candidate nuclear genes showing silencing (through
              differential hybridization with diploid and polyploid DNAs), and concentrate on
              those that function in the chloroplast or mitochondrion (and hence where the
              paternal homoeologue is thought likely to be silenced). 


