Title       : The Molluscan Mitochondrial Genomic Project: Phylogenetic Analysis, Evaluation
               and Enrichment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0089624

Award Number: 0089624
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285900             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Lindberg drl@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0089624
David R. Lindberg

Dr. David R. Lindberg at the University of
              California at Berkeley has received funding to sequence complete mitochondrial
              genomes of 50 species of gastropod mollusks.  Although the evolutionary history
              of gastropods has been long studied and the group has an excellent fossil
              record, the branching patterns at the base of the gastropod tree are poorly
              understood because of morphological convergence and the uninformative nature of
              the genes that have been previously analyzed.  This project will examine
              mitochondrial gene order, a promising new data set for mollusks, and use these
              data to reconstruct the relationships within the Gastropoda and between
              gastropods and other mollusks.  In the past complete sequencing of
              mitochondrial genomes has been so time consuming that few mollusks have been
              studied.  However, with the completion of several major sequencing initiatives,
              high-throughput sequencing facilities are becoming available.  This project
              will use the high-throughput Drosophila Genome Sequencing Center at Lawrence
              Berkeley National Laboratory, and the data analyzed by a collaboration of
              researchers in the USA, Germany and Australia.  Specific aims of this project
              include the identification, analysis and evaluation of gene, rRNA, and tRNA
              placement within the mitochondrial genome, secondary structures, and sequences
              for reconstructing relationships.  The fossil record will also be used to
              correlate first appearance data and evaluate the resolution potential of each
              gene in different gastropod groups, and provide important insights into
              macroevolutionary patterns that are currently suggestive, but limited by our
              current lack of understanding of the relationships among the earliest gastropod
              molluscs.  It will also provide preliminary and exploratory data for countless
              invertebrate zoologists, molecular biologists, bioinformaticists, and molecular
              evolutionists, and will serve as a pilot project for the evaluation of
              partnerships with high-throughput sequencing centers such as those housed at
              Lawrence Berkeley and other National Laboratories, and explores their potential
              role in reconstructing the Tree of Life.


