Title       : Physiological and Molecular Diversity of Atmospheric Methane (CH4) Oxidizers in
               Soil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0089738

Award Number: 0089738
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1091612            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Steudler steudler@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay Gulledge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Colleen M. Cavanaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Atmospheric methane contributes substantially to the greenhouse effect and has
              increased dramatically in the past century because of expanding agriculture and
              industry. Bacterial consumption of methane in soils is an important regulator
              of atmospheric methane concentration. The significance of the soil sink lies in
              its potential to mediate long-term, anthropogenic effects on atmospheric
              methane through its response to disturbances such as agriculture, forest
              clearcutting, drought, and soil warming. Because the amount of atmospheric
              methane consumed annually in soils is comparable to the annual increase in
              atmospheric methane, the cumulative effects of disturbance on the soil methane
              sink over time could contribute significantly to methane accumulation in the
              atmosphere. However, the biology of the soil sink is poorly understood because
              researchers have yet to identify and fully describe the soil bacteria that
              actually oxidize atmospheric methane in situ. In this project, Dr. Steudler and
              colleagues will investigate the physiology and molecular ecology of atmospheric
              methane oxidizers in five temperate and taiga forest ecosystems where
              disturbance effects on atmospheric methane consumption are well characterized.
              Their goal is to assess the role of cross-site diversity among the methane
              oxidizing organisms in controlling the soil methane consumption response to
              disturbances, including N fertilization, drought and soil warming. This
              research will provide an estimate of microbial diversity among soil atmospheric
              methane oxidizers across geographically distant and ecologically distinct
              forest ecosystems, examine how this diversity is distributed in nature relative
              to biogeochemical process dynamics and ecological gradients, and assess how
              important this diversity is in controlling the ecosystem-level response of soil
              methane consumption to disturbance and climate change. 
