Title       : 'Collaborative Research - PhylogeneticAanalysis of a Model Insect Group for
               Ecological and Study: Neotropical Ithomiine Butterflies (Lepidoptera:
               Nymphalidae)'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0089870

Award Number: 0089870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61194              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Emmel tcemmel@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith R. Willmott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-89870
Thomas C. Emmel
Keith R. Wilmotte

A collaborative grant has been
              awarded to Dr. Andrew Brower at Oregon State University and Drs. Thomas Emmel
              and Keith Willmott at the University of Florida to conduct an integrated
              phylogenetic analysis of relationships among the ithomiine butterflies.  These
              tropical butterflies have been of interest to evolutionary biologists and
              biogeographers for more than a century, because they participate in complex,
              geographically varying mimicry rings.  Different species of ithomiines, along
              with representatives of various other butterfly groups, have evolved
              similar-looking, brightly-colored wing patterns that make them memorable to
              predators.  Because the butterflies are poisonous, the bright color pattern
              serves as a warning to avoid similar looking individuals, and thus there is a
              great benefit to sharing in the common signaling system.  The result of this
              complex adaptation is that unrelated species may look virtually identical,
              complicating efforts to understand the relationships among species and genera
              in the group.  Willmott and Emmel will conduct cladistic analyses of adult
              morphology and chromosome variation.   Brower will complement that effort with
              study of additional characters from DNA sequences.  

The goal is to produce
              a robust phylogenetic hypothesis for relationships among the 50 or so genera
              based upon combined analysis of morphology, chromosomal structure, and
              molecular data.  This will provide a model system for addressing similar
              complex situations among many other groups of animals and plants, and will
              allow a better understanding of how biodiversity on our planet has developed.

