Title       : Virtual Biochemistry - An Interactive 3D Laboratory Course Using Java
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0089423

Award Number: 0089423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Grisham grisham@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) 
The Virtual Biochemistry Laboratory is a
              comprehensive, fully
interactive, three-dimensional laboratory course (on
              CD-ROM) in biological chemistry for college undergraduate students. This
              virtual laboratory provides the opportunity for students to conduct virtual
              experiments, thus it acquaints students with laboratory techniques and
              procedures enabling them to perform the same or similar experiments in an
              actual laboratory. Secondary benefits include precautionary training in the
              handling of dangerous and/or expensive reagents. More than this, however, the
              virtual laboratory offers a "warehouse of parts" within which students can work
              independently to explore essential questions about biological systems and seek
              answers to these questions by means of experiments they design and conduct. The
              Virtual Biochemistry Laboratory uses the programming language Java, including
              Java 3D and JavaBeans and is based on the component model of software design.
              The design of the Virtual Laboratory provides total independence to the student
              user for the planning and execution of experiments and the analysis of the
              resulting data. The software is sufficiently general that it can be adaptable
              to any typical biochemistry laboratory experiment. This generality and
              flexibility permits students to ask essential questions about biological
              systems, to define subsidiary questions that elaborate on the essential
              questions, and then to use the "warehouse of parts" in the virtual laboratory
              to design experiments that will provide answers to those questions. In this
              way, under guidance from the instructor and via collaboration with peers,
              students learn to problem-solve, not only via the application of the scientific
              method, but also via the processes of self-reflection, trial and error, and the
              construction of a body of knowledge that emerges as students link practice and
              theory while integrating lectures, labs and readings in the process of doing
              virtual experiments.





