Title       : SGER Proposal: Iceberg drift in the near-shelf environment, Ross Ice Shelf,
               Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a0089902

Award Number: 0089902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86898              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. MacAyeal drm7@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Stearns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0089902
MacAyeal

The recent calving of a large iceberg (B15) from the Ross
              Ice Shelf presents a unique opportunity to measure the processes which control
              the drift of large tabular icebergs including, wind-driven and thermohaline
              currents, tides, sea ice, and winds. The calving of such an extraordinarily
              large iceberg within the logistics reach of the US Antarctic Program, is rare.
              Thus the calving of B15 offers an exciting opportunity to study iceberg drift,
              and all of the other aspects of iceberg behavior which are associated with the
              long-term stability of the Antarctic environment.
The extraordinary freshwater
              volume of large tabular icebergs has in the past been identified as a natural
              resource of human economic value (e.g., for water poor regions of the earth). 
              Feasibility studies of iceberg towing to water-poor regions have largely been
              poo-pooed as science fiction. Nevertheless, tabular icebergs commonly travel
              thousands of miles as a result of natural processes which, if understood, could
              perhaps be harnessed for human economic and social value.  We propose to make
              direct measurements of the drift of icebergs B15a, B15b and a
smaller iceberg
              (either B16, B17 or B18, depending on circumstances) to:
1. observationally
              constrain parameters that will improve the models of iceberg drift, e.g., by
              determining drag coefficients appropriate to atmospheric and oceanic
              interactions, including drag induced by sea ice,
2. improve our ability to
              predict calving events and the subsequent iceberg drift trajectory,
3.
              compliment ongoing remote sensing study of the iceberg and its behavior
4.
              measure the progress of the berg(s) toward logistically sensitive areas.
The
              last point reflects the fact that interest in B15's drift over the next year(s)
              is not restricted to the realm of basic science. It is conceivable that B15 and
              its progeny (it is now in two pieces and has caused smaller bergs to calve from
              the Ross Ice Shelf) poses a complication to normal shipping to and from the
              US's main research and logistics station in Antarctica.  While this proposal
              represents the broad scientific interests of several investigators at several
              institutions, its focus is narrow. Support is requested for assembly and
              deployment of instruments to observe the weather conditions and the drift of
              B15.


