Title       : Phylogeny and Coevolution of Actinorhizal Rosaceae and their Nitrogen-Fixing
               Symbionts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0089662

Award Number: 0089662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Potter dpotter@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Species in eight families of flowering plants form symbiotic relationships with
              nitrogen-fixing bacteria of the actinomycete genus Frankia, in which the
              prokaryotic symbionts inhabit nodules on the plants' roots. Phylogenetic
              analyses have suggested that such symbiotic relationships, known as
              actinorhizal associations, have evolved and/or been lost numerous times over
              the course of evolution, both within Frankia and among the plant families
              involved. One of these plant families is the rose family, Rosaceae, a large
              group with considerable economic importance and evolutionary interest. Within
              Rosaceae, members of five genera (Cercocarpus, Chamaebatia, Cowania, Dryas, and
              Purshia) are known to form actinorhizal associations. Recent molecular evidence
              has shown that these five genera, although traditionally classified in
              different tribes or subfamilies, instead form a monophyletic group within the
              family. Nucleotide sequence data from the actinomcyete strains infecting
              several of these species have shown that they all belong to one of the three
              known monophyletic groups of infective Frankia. Neither the actinorhizal
              Rosaceae nor their Frankia symbionts, however, have been the subject of
              thorough phylogenetic study. The relatively small number of plant species
              (total of about 30) in this group makes it an ideal system in which to study
              patterns of coevolution between the two participants in the actinorhizal
              symbiosis. 
Dr. Daniel Potter of the University of California-Davis and his
              colleague at University of Connecticut, Dr. David Benson, and their associates
              will use macromolecular data to evaluate genetic diversity and generate
              hypotheses of phylogenetic relationship within and among taxa of actinorhizal
              Rosaceae and their Frankia symbionts. Fieldwork in the western U.S. and by
              colleagues in Mexico will be devoted to the collection of leaves and root
              nodules from all species of the five actinorhizal genera of Rosaceae and leaf
              material from several outgroups. Wherever possible, multiple populations, and
              multiple individuals per population, will be sampled from throughout the
              geographic range of each species. Nodules from non-rosaceous actinorhizal plant
              species occurring at the same localities will also be collected. Nucleotide
              sequence data will be obtained from appropriately variable regions of the
              genomes (both chloroplast and nuclear in the case of the plants) of the host
              plants (from DNA extracted from leaf material) and their symbionts (from DNA
              extracted from nodules). Broad geographical sampling of multiple populations
              will enable investigation of host specificity of Frankia strains and
              promiscuity of the plant species with respect to their symbionts. The data will
              be analyzed phylogenetically and the resulting phylogenetic trees will be
              compared in order to examine the extent and patterns of coevolution and to
              address the question of the taxonomic level at which coevolution has occurred.
              What are the relative contributions of geography and phylogeny in determining
              the symbiont strain(s) infecting a particular host at a particular locality?
              The data from the plant genomes will also be used to evaluate taxonomic
              delimitation of species and genera in this group. The primary significance of
              this study will be in improving our understanding of the evolution of symbiosis
              in general and of ecologically important nitrogen-fixing symbioses in
              particular. The study will also extend our knowledge of the taxonomic and
              geographic distributions of actinorhizal associations and will contribute to
              clarifying the classification of this group of plants, most of which occur in
              western North America. 


