Title       : Analysis of Control and Regulation of an Insect by its Parasitoid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a0089515

Award Number: 0089515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Murdoch murdoch@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1649,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089515.  William Murdoch
A central objective of contemporary ecology is to
              understand the highly complex interactions between plants, plant-feeding
              insects, and their natural enemies.  These direct and indirect interactions
              have profound impacts on natural and managed populations and communities. 
              William Murdoch and his colleagues at the University of California-Santa
              Barbara are conducting long-term investigations to understand how parasitic
              wasps maintain populations of citrus-feeding California red scale insects at
              low population densities.  Understanding how this biological population control
              occurred so quickly, while remaining stabile, is the primary objective of the
              project.  Several hypotheses will be tested empirically, such as a
              corresponding increase in parasitism rates, and parasitoid interference, as
              scale densities rise.  This research is considered by many ecologists to be one
              of the best studies of insect population dynamics and biological control.  The
              project has strong theoretical and empirical components and blends modeling
              with hypothesis testing at multiple temporal and spatial scales.  Although this
              work is focused on a specific plant-insect-enemy model, the principles
              underlying the ecological interactions and population dynamics are broadly
              relevant for other natural and agricultural systems.  This basic ecological
              research has direct applications for agronomy, as well as the quality of human
              life.  Knowledge gained from this project can help reduce pesticide use and
              establish more environmentally friendly methods of controlling major crop and
              orchard pests. 




