Title       : An Integrative Statistical Framework for Assessing and Minimizing Errors in
               Ancient, Non-invasive and Forensic Genetic Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a0089756

Award Number: 0089756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisette P. Waits lwaits@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Joyce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1649,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Molecular advances have made it possible to study wildlife populations by
              extracting and analyzing DNA from shed material such as hair or scat and from
              museum specimens.  The familiar forensic practice of DNA fingerprinting can be
              used on samples of hair or scat to 'capture,' count and track individuals
              without ever handling or observing them.  Unfortunately, these materials
              contain low quantities of DNA that introduce sporadic errors and inaccuracies
              into genetic data.  Errors also occur when multiple individuals share the same
              DNA fingerprint or when one clump of hair, in fact, contains hair from two
              individuals.  In this project, a set of statistical methods will be developed
              to assess the probability that a given sample contains each of the different
              possible errors.  This leads to an efficient strategy for finding and removing
              errors by focusing further data acquisition on the most unreliable samples. 
              Finally, the statistical framework will be packaged into a computer program and
              be made available to all researchers via the internet.

Forensic,
              non-invasive and historical genetic information on wild populations can be used
              to address questions that are impractical or impossible to address by
              non-genetic methods.  This research project will make a major contribution to
              accessing this type of information because it directly addresses two issues of
              paramount importance, accuracy and efficiency.  But just as with forensic DNA
              evidence in a court of law, this information must be reliable for the
              conclusions to be accurate.  Because collecting genetic information is also
              expensive, its acquisition must be efficient.  

