Title       : Best Practices - Teacher Preparation - Technology: Connections that Enhance
               Children's Literacy Acquisition and Reading Achievement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2000  
File        : a0089221

Award Number: 0089221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5551059            (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda D. Labbo llabbo@coe.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Leu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Teale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles K. Kinzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 7180,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will use knowledge about best practices of early literacy education
              to target teacher education, and by using case-based, anchored instruction. We
              will provide multimedia, case-based materials on CD/DVD-ROM and over the
              Internet, making visible the richness and complexity of best practice
              instruction to teacher educators, pre-service teachers, and classroom teachers.
              An extensive set of studies will use the digital, multimedia resources
              available at our site to study the use of a case-based approach to pre-service
              teacher education. We plan to accomplish three central objectives: (a) raise
              pre-service teachers' understanding of best practices of early literacy
              education; (b) increase pre-service teachers' use of best practices in the
              classroom when they first begin teaching; and (c) significantly raise young
              children's reading achievement. 

The project is based on two main
              assumptions: first, that sufficient research is available about "best
              practices" to teach reading and writing effectively; and, second, that
              technology can play a key role in improving reading achievement. Specifically,
              this project identifies instructional practices which are supported by
              scientific research and which have "stood the test of time" in exemplary
              teachers' classrooms.  These best practices will be used to enhance pre-service
              teacher education through cases-based, anchored instruction, and establish
              guidelines and best practices for use of technology for K-3 classroom reading
              instruction. This pre-service delivery system and subsequent classroom
              instruction will be tested through a broad-based research program that assesses
              effects on teacher candidates as well as on children's literacy achievement,
              and disseminated through a "Best Practices in Literacy Web Site" and other
              means. Years 3 - 5 involve widespread experimental intervention studies with
              collaborating Southeast Literacy Consortium members (70 researcher/teacher
              educators at institutions in the southeastern U.S.) at 25-30 sites. 

