Title       : Development of Educational Materials for use in Undergraduate Hydraulics Course
               which Address Multiple Learning Styles to Increase Student Achievement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0089051

Award Number: 0089051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nirmal N. Khandan nkhandan@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig I. Ricketts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Hynes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith McShannon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Civil (54) 

It is well-known that knowledge is acquired
              through diverse learning styles, with each student usually having certain
              preferred styles. These styles are typically grouped into four scales: sensory
              to intuitive; visual to verbal; inductive to deductive; active to reflective;
              and sequential to global. 

The objective of this project is to develop a
              repertoire of educational materials that cater to a mix of learning styles of
              undergraduate engineering students. The repertoire includes computer-based
              lecture support notes, tutoring modules, simulation models, and assessment
              tools; physical demonstration devices; and, a compilation of unique riddles,
              fallacies, and problems. Some materials are for in-class use, some for
              out-of-class use, and some for a combination of the two; some are for small
              group use; while others are for individual use. The materials target
              undergraduates at the junior/senior level in the fields of civil, mechanical,
              and chemical engineering, pursuing engineering or technology degrees. The
              subject area of hydraulics/fluid mechanics was chosen for this project, because
              it is an area common to many different engineering disciplines. It is
              anticipated that these tools will optimize teaching efforts and improve student
              achievement by: increasing student-faculty and student-student interactions;
              enhancing the learning experience; stimulating critical thinking; and
              cultivating problem solving skills. 

