Title       : XYZ-On-a-Chip: Micromachined Magnetically Reconfigurable Frequency Selective
               Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0089095

Award Number: 0089095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $506524             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Judy jjudy@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ken Nobe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yahya Rahmat-Samii  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1468,1480,1602,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the research and development of reconfigurable
              Frequency Selective Surfaces (FSSs).  FFSs are periodic structures that can
              provide frequency filtering to electromagnetic signals from wireless and
              satellite communication systems.  With the proper design of the size and
              spacing of an array of conductive dipole elements, one is able to select the
              overall frequency response and bandwidth of the structure.  Although FSSs have
              been studied rigorously over the years, FSSs have experienced tremendous growth
              in the last ten years with new applications emerging.  The primary utilization
              of they has been as frequency filters (diplexers) in high-performance
              reflector-antenna systems, advanced radome designs, and smart surfaces for
              stealth applications.  In many of these applications it is highly desirable to
              be able to adaptively reconfigure the frequency and bandwidth response of the
              FSS.  However, a fundamental challenge has been to develop methods of achieving
              significant high-speed reconfigurability without compromising filtering
              performance.

Although FSSs are typically made with static in-plane elements,
              it has been observed that rotating the dipole elements out of the plane of the
              surface strongly alters the frequency response of the surface.  In addition,
              recent advances and developments in micromachining and MEMS technologies
              provide a new approach to this problem.  The reconfigurability of the FSS
              proposed here, is enabled by the integration of novel magnetic microactuator
              arrays positioned in the x-y plane of the surface and capable of large
              out-of-plane rotations (0 degrees to 90 degrees) that tune its frequency
              bandwidth response.  To maximize magnetic microactuator performance, permanent
              magnetic materials will be integrated into the array by newly developed
              electrodeposition processes.  The goal of this project is to design, fabricate,
              and test micromachined reconfigurable FSSs for signals at K-band (26-40 GHz),
              Q-band (40 GHz), W-band (60 GHz), and higher frequencies.
