Title       : Solid-State Reactions of Molecular Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0089257

Award Number: 0089257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337361             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce M. Foxman foxman1@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of the proposed research focus on the design, discovery and
              characterization of new solid-state reactions.  First, expansion of an initial
              set of target molecules to include groups with terminal double bonds as well as
              cationic metal complexes with neutral unsaturated ligands will both (a) promote
              the discovery of new processes, and (b) aid in the efficient selection of those
              materials likely to produce stereoregular products.  Crystallographic studies,
              as well as full product characterization, will develop understanding of the
              geometrical and chemical mechanism associated with each process.  Second, when
              single crystals are not available, structures will be determined by powder
              diffraction techniques.  In addition to studies of new materials, powder X-ray
              structure determination of extant solid-state polymerization systems, such as
              potassium acrylate, will provide significant new information for a
              structure-reactivity database.  Third, analysis of the diffuse X-ray scattering
              observed during the course of a solid-state reaction will provide new
              information on the disorder observed to occur at intermediate stages of
              solid-state reactions.  Fourth, a series of molecular solids ranging from
              cinnamic acids to metal complexes will be irradiated in the low-energy "tail"
              of the absorption band of the corresponding chromophore.  This avenue of
              research promises to produce single crystals of dimers, oligomers and polymers.
               Finally, newly-synthesized metal salts of acetylenedicarboxylic acid promise
              to be excellent prospects for new applications involving radiation
              dosimetry.
%%%
Solid state reactions offer exceptional opportunities for
              chemospecific and stereo specific synthesis leading to the production of new
              oligomers and polymers, and the discovery of novel applications for new
              materials in technological areas such as dosimetry and solid phase peptide
              synthesis are viewed as high priorities in industry.

