Title       : Molecular Environmental Chemistry of Mn Oxide Biomineralization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0089208

Award Number: 0089208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2540000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley M. Tebo btebo@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9156,9178,9198,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Collaborative Research Activities in Environmental Molecular Science 
              (CRAEMS) Award to the University of California-San Diego Scripps Institute of
              Oceanography is supported by the Special Projects Office in the Chemistry
              Division.  In addition to the support to Bradley Tebo at the Institute, the
              award also supports Thomas Spiro at Princeton University, John Bargar at the
              Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory and Garrison Sposito at UC-Berkeley,
              through subawards. The award will address the issues of how bacteria oxidize
              manganese, how the resulting manganese oxides influence the chemistry of other
              metals in both terrestrial and marine environments and how they affect chemical
              and biochemical degradation of natural and xenobiotic organic molecules. The
              project will encompass (1) cloning and expressing the gene products associated
              with the Mn (II)-oxidation system of bacteria and characterizing these proteins
              using biochemical and spectroscopic methods in order to elucidate the
              mechanisms of manganese oxide formation; (2) investigating cross-reactivity
              with other metal ions and with organic molecules, in order to evaluate the
              environmental influence of Mn (II) oxidation systems; (3) exploring how metal
              ion co-contaminants are sequestered during manganese oxide biogenesis by whole
              cells; and (4) characterizing the reactivity of biogenic manganese oxide
              surfaces with respect to metal ion sorption and dissolution, and the alteration
              of organic substrates for microbial metabolism. A variety of microbiological,
              chemical, and spectroscopic techniques such as x-ray absorption spectroscopy,
              resonance Raman and FTIR will be utilized.  

Microbially produced manganese
              oxides are ubiquitous in the environment and have high capacities to transform
              organic and inorganic pollutants including aromatic hydrocarbons and hydrogen
              sulfide. Understanding the steps along the environmental trajectory of
              manganese oxides, from biochemical mechanisms, to cross-reactivity with metals
              and organics, to the influence of the oxides on metals immobilization and on
              biodegradation pathways, will be useful in elucidating biogeochemical cycles
              and designing remediation strategies for metal and organic pollution.



