Title       : A Series of Workshops in the Chemical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0089417

Award Number: 0089417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1853807            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry C. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Collard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Emelita D. Breyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence J. Kaplan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
A consortium consisting of institutions including Georgia State
              University, the Georgia Institute of Technology, the University of Georgia,
              Emory University, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta,
              Williams College, James Madison University, Millersville University, the
              University of California at Riverside, the University of Illinois at Chicago,
              Utah State University, and Washington State University is offering five-day
              intensive workshops in the following areas: Chemical Education, Chemistry of
              Art, Chemometrics, Combinatorial Chemistry, Computational Chemistry,
              Environmental Chemistry, Forensic Science, Laser Technology, Metals in Biology,
              Molecular Genetics, Multidimensional Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, Organometallic
              Chemistry, Phototchemistry, and Polymer Chemistry. These workshops include
              extensive "hands-on" experience for the participants. Materials that can be
              readily incorporated into participant instructional activities are being
              provided. The target audience for these activities is primarily faculty from
              undergraduate institutions, plus conservators and forensic, biomedical and
              public health scientists with significant educational responsibilities. The
              goals of the workshop program include: (1) augmentation and upgrading of
              participants' knowledge in selected areas; (2) the integration of chemistry and
              biochemistry into other fields; (3) exposure of participants to new or emerging
              scientific fields derived from current research activity; and (4) development
              of new approaches for the implementation of workshop materials into the
              vocational mission of the participants. The program consists of twelve yearly
              workshops and two annual reunions over a three-year period. Approximately 850
              participants will be served by the program; a total of 3,600 participant-days
              of instruction will be generated. Some workshops are being scheduled in
              conjunction with national or regional American Chemical Society meetings. A key
              goal is the rotation of those workshops that are mobile among the consortium
              sites in order to serve a geographically dispersed pool of participants.

