Title       : Testing a research/technology-based delivery system to improve student
               performance in mathematics and science in middle schools in rural, high-poverty
               communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0089244

Award Number: 0089244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Basom rbasom@serve.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 7180,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
While hundreds of schools are implementing reform models through the
              Comprehensive School Reform Demonstration (CSRD) program, most implementations
              they do not meet all nine CSRD criteria. There is growing concern that the
              models being delivered through the CSRD program have not adequately reached
              isolated, rural schools in poor communities. The purpose of this planning grant
              is to develop a rigorous, research study proposal that will test the
              effectiveness of a prototype model (the Promising Futures Model-PFM) that meets
              the criteria for comprehensiveness and is designed to target middle schools
              located in isolated rural, high-poverty communities. The planning award will
              allow, the partners and collaborators to set the stage for a three-phase,
              five-year study to test the effects of a fully implemented PFM on teaching and
              learning in rural, high-poverty middle schools. 

As part of this proposal
              planning effort, an Interdisciplinary Research Team (IRT) will be formed. This
              team will include scientists and scholars representing diverse disciplines and
              perspectives, including economists and rural sociologists. A Delivery Team (DT)
              will be formed to refine the model to be tested and to ensure that the study
              proposal adequately addresses the complexity of implementing comprehensive
              school reform in diverse contexts. In addition to the IRT and the DT, an
              Advisory Committee will be formed to bring additional expertise (e.g.,
              practitioners, national organizations, and stakeholders) to bear on the study
              proposal. 

The objective of the one-year planning grant is to fully develop
              a study proposal that incorporates a three-phase, five-year study to answer the
              following research questions: How does the PFM differ in implementation in
              diverse contexts with different kinds of teachers? Can the PFM be implemented
              in any rural community with fidelity? What does it cost? Is it affordable in
              the rural context? Does the PFM significantly raise student achievement in
              mathematics and science?
