Title       : Moving Biofilm Research into Teaching: A Prototype Interactive Web-Based
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a0089397

Award Number: 0089397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74942              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred B. Cunningham al_c@erc.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rockford J. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
This is a "proof-of-concept" project which is
              demonstrating the feasibility of using the Web to deliver next-generation,
              inquiry-based, active learning educational resources for biofilm engineering
              and science. A prototype "hypertextbook" blending standard text, graphics,
              interactive animations of key concepts, voice, and sound into a seamless whole
              is being developed and formally evaluated. Standard Web-site creation
              technologies is being applied to ensure that the prototype can be used with any
              of the usual Web browsers on all platforms, making it accessible to anyone in
              the world without the need to purchase special software or hardware. The
              prototype will serve as a general model for the development of hypertextbooks,
              inspiring the creation of similar resources in other engineering and science
              disciplines. Such hypertextbooks will be made available on CD-ROM or DVD media,
              obviating the need for excessive download time over the Internet.

Biofilm
              engineering and science has been the subject of intense research efforts by a
              growing number of professionals over the past decade, led by the NSF-supported
              Engineering Research Center at Montana State University. Biofilms are of great
              concern to many industries, as the cost of dealing with them involves billions
              of dollars each year. Yet educational opportunities in biofims are currently
              nonexistent. The Center (now called the Center for Biofilm Engineering, or CBE)
              is beginning a focus on education in parallel with its continuing mission of
              biofilm research. Web-based educational tools-represented by the prototype of
              this project-will allow students in traditional settings to learn better and at
              their own paces, will support distance or self-taught learners, and will allow
              institutions with no resident experts in the subjects to provide the
              opportunity to learn important, new concepts. 

