Title       : CRAEMS: Fundamental Studies of Nanoparticle Formation in Air Pollution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0089136

Award Number: 0089136
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2669437            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara E. Wyslouzil barbaraw@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9156,9179,9198,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Collaborative Research Activities in Environmental Molecular Science
              (CRAEMS) Award to Worcester Polytechnic Institute is supported by the Special
              Projects Office in the Chemistry Division.  Barbara Wyslouzil is supported by
              this award for the fundamental study of nanoparticle formation in air
              pollution.  Support is also provided to Doug Doren, Murray Johnston, Hai Wang,
              and Anthony Wexler at the University of Delaware through subawards. An
              integrated experimental and theoretical program will be carried out to
              understand, at a molecular level, the processes of nanoparticle formation that
              are relevant to air pollution. The topics that will be addressed are (1)
              nucleation in aqueous systems, (2) soot inception, and (3) the interaction
              between soot and metals during combustion. Water, water/alcohol and
              water/nitric acid aerosols will be generated in a supersonic nozzle and
              characterized by small angle neutron scattering and FTIR.  Molecular simulation
              techniques will be applied to calculate nucleation rates and to address
              important non-equilibrium effects. Soot particles will be generated in a flat
              flame burner and characterized by sampling with a scanning mobility particle
              sizer.  Size distributions will be compared to those derived from small angle
              neutron and x-ray scattering experiments. Molecular composition of the
              particles will be determined by mass spectrometry. The reaction between metals
              and soot will be studied by generating particles from ethylene-oxygen flames,
              seeded with ferrocene.  Mathematical models will be developed that incorporate
              molecular mechanisms of metal oxide particle formation and carbon
              deposition.

Particle nucleation is a key step in many environmental and
              industrial processes.  Refractory particles are formed in combustion and
              metallurgical processes, while acid-water droplets are produced in stack gases,
              volcanic plumes and in photochemical reactions in the atmosphere. This research
              will help define the mechanisms by which they are formed and the role they play
              in air pollution.
