Title       : A Systematic Investigation of the South African Holoparasitic Genus Hyobanche L.
               (Orobanchaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0089640

Award Number: 0089640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea D. Wolfe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089640
Wolfe
	Parasitic plants, ones which have lost all photosynthetic
              ability and exist by absorbing nutrients through haustorial (usually root)
              connections from other nearby plants, are known in several lineages of
              angiosperms. Hyobanche (in the family Orobanchaceae) is one such group, a small
              genus of eight or so species native to southern Africa, and thought to be
              related to the photosynthetic genus Harveya. There is considerable confusion
              regarding species delimitation, abundance, host associations, and pollination
              for Hyobanche, which has not been studied in the field in any detail. Dr.
              Andrea Wolfe of Ohio State University is studying the systematics, evolution,
              and biology of this group of plants, by combining field collecting and
              observation with laboratory work on morphology and DNA sequencing to acquire
              new characters for phylogenetic and population-genetic analyses. Because the
              genus is small and is restricted in distribution to a narrow geographic region,
              a thorough sampling of many individuals from populations of all the species is
              planned. Nuclear and chloroplast gene markers are expected to provide
              sufficient characters for robust phylogenetic resolution of the species, in
              combination with morphological features. A taxonomic monograph of the genus is
              projected as one product of the investigation, which will include detailed
              geographical distributions to aid in conservation efforts. 
	A valuable
              component of the project is a detailed molecular investigation of the DNA
              sequences and flanking regions for the chloroplast photosynthetic gene rbcL,
              which preliminary data suggest to be mutated into a nonfunctional "pseudogene"
              in these plants. Hyobanche offers an excellent system for examining in a
              phylogenetic context the pattern and rate of pseudogene formation following the
              loss of photosynthesis.


