Title       : Viviparity and Speciation: Testing the Alternatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0089945

Award Number: 0089945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne A. Zeh jaz@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Zeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              New species arise when populations diverge sufficiently to become reproductively
              isolated. Is this isolation initiated by barriers to mating and fertilization
              or by post-fertilization genetic incompatibility?  Recent theory suggests that
              reproductive mode may be a critical factor, with the intimate mother/fetus
              relationship characteristic of live-bearing (viviparous) species making them
              far more vulnerable to post-fertilization genetic incompatibility than species
              that lay eggs. This study will exploit unique reproductive features of a model
              viviparous invertebrate, the false scorpion Cordylochernes scorpioides, to
              investigate the role of reproductive mode in speciation. Using population pairs
              spanning a range of genetic divergence, the research will encompass
              interpopulation crosses, behavioral experiments, and molecular analyses
              designed to partition reproductive isolation into mating, gametic, and
              post-fertilization components to determine the precise sequence through which
              the various forms of reproductive isolation evolve. 

This research will
              represent the first comprehensive study of speciation mechanisms in a
              viviparous animal and will shed light on one of the most striking but poorly
              understood patterns in speciation, namely that lineages differ profoundly in
              the relative rates at which pre- and post-fertilization isolation evolve. An
              increased understanding of the evolutionary and mechanistic causes of
              reproductive isolation in live-bearing species promises to contribute not only
              to speciation theory but also to studies aimed at identifying and preserving
              biological diversity. 

