Title       : Molecular Isotopic Tools for Environmental Research (MITER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0089172

Award Number: 0089172
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2990000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy I. Eglinton teglinton@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Hayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher M. Reddy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9156,9178,9198,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Collaborative Research Activities in Environmental Molecular Science
              (CRAEMS) Award to Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution is supported by the
              Special Projects Office in the Chemistry Division.  This award supports the
              studies Timothy Eglinton, John Hayes, and Christopher Reddy at the Institute to
              determine natural and introduced isotopic labels carried by specific
              contaminants such as hydrocarbons and chlorinated organics, and to trace their
              passage into macromolecular environmental organic matrices, such as humic and
              fulvic substances.  In addition, they examine the bioavailability of
              organically bound contaminants and determine the long-term fate of these
              compounds compared with their free, unbound counterparts. Carbon-14
              measurements, in tandem with 13C-, 2H-, and 15N- labeling techniques, are used
              to detect pollutants and their metabolites in impacted sediments and soils and
              to follow the carbon into biological pools. Isotopic labels are tracked by both
              NMR and mass spectrometric techniques in both laboratory incubation and field
              studies of contaminated sites. In addition to providing new insights into
              molecular-level processes, this work aims  to develop new molecular-isotopic
              tools to study environmental problems. Support is also provided for Michael
              Freitas at Ohio State University through a subaward.

Understanding the
              mechanisms that control binding and release of contaminants into the
              environment is of critical importance to human health. These studies are
              designed to develop a quantitative understanding of the fate of a range of
              semi-volatile pollutants sequestered in complex environmental matrices.
              




