Title       : Creating Laboratory Access for Science Students with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0089396

Award Number: 0089396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele G. Wheatly michele.wheatly@wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Tomlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy S. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roderic Brame  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Vernooy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1545,7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Multidisciplinary (99) Although the National Science Education Standards
              recommend that science instruction should be universally accessible,
              individuals with disabilities are seriously underrepresented in science and
              have poor scientific literacy due to inadequate preparation/accommodations at
              all educational levels. This project aims to address the needs of persons with
              disabilities for adequate education in the sciences through faculty
              development, better preparation of pre-service teachers, and adaptive
              technology. The current effort is an expansion of a project previously funded
              by NSF that pilot-tested the concept and focused on biology. This project,
              Creating Laboratory Access for Science Students (the "CLASS" Project), which
              was titled "Making biology laboratories effective learning environments for
              students with disabilities: a national model for undergraduate instructors and
              grades 7-12 school teachers," is a collaboration at Wright State University
              (WSU) between the Department of Biological Sciences (College of Science) and
              the Teacher Education Department (College of Education) and the Office of
              Disability Services (ODS, Student Services). WSU was constructed in 1967 to be
              architecturally barrier free and has gained a national reputation for
              curricular programming for students with disabilities. The CLASS project has
              developed five disseminable products: (i) a Sourcebook (printed and electronic)
              to assist science teachers in designing and implementing universally accessible
              lab and field exercises, (ii) an accessible and interactive website
              (http://biology.wright.edu/labgrant/index.html) where workshop applications can
              be completed on line and where prior workshop participants can discuss issues
              or access the PowerPoint presentation, (iii) human resource development for
              educators via a two week residential workshop at WSU where they acquire
              necessary skills, (iv) human resource development for high school students with
              severe disabilities via a one week residential science camp where they work
              one-on-one with educator participants in experiential science activities, and
              (v) published scholarly articles and presentations at professional
              meetings.

The CLASS project is now extending these proven educational
              materials and strategies across all natural and physical sciences, helping to
              systemically reform the science education of students with disabilities.
              Objectives of the project are:
1. To develop a broader external audience. This
              is being accomplished through production of media as follows: (a) a Leadership
              Series of 5-minute discussion-generating videos that will be used at national
              and regional professional meetings of educators (college/university science
              faculty and educators in science and math) to train cadres of educators (300
              per year) in dealing with disability issues in their laboratories through
              problem based learning (b) a Tutorial Series of short videoclips in analog and
              electronic (QuickTime) format that will be available on the web for use in
              pre-service teacher training (regular classroom and distance learning) as well
              as by individuals working at their computers (potentially impacting over 1000
              educators per year) and (c) a promotional video for the CLASS summer
              residential workshop for recruitment purposes. Expanded website capabilities
              support these initiatives, including a bulletin board with topical forums.
2.
              To develop more comprehensive programs on site. The scope of the residential
              CLASS summer workshop at WSU is being broadened to include other natural and
              physical sciences and mathematics. 
3. To become a model for excellence in
              accessible science education. This is being accomplished through integration of
              CLASS goals and disseminable products into the science education curriculum at
              WSU (pre-service teachers; pedagogy and content courses). 

Through
              interdisciplinary approaches (broadly encompassing lab/field issues common to
              basic physical, natural and mathematical sciences) aimed at targeting multiple
              levels in the educational pipeline (college and university faculty, training of
              pre-service teachers) the CLASS project aims to significantly increase access
              to laboratory science education of students with disabilities. 


