Title       : Effects of Local Interfacial and Flow Dynamics on Foam Drainage and Coarsening
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0089162

Award Number: 0089162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hsueh-Chia Chang chang.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Glazier  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a realistic model, based on extensive experiments with
              2-dimensional and 3-dimensional foams, to describe liquid foam coarsening and
              draining.  Optimal industrial application of foam can only be achieved wen
              these two phenomena are properly understood.  Current theories, developed for
              unrealistic motionless and/or ideal dry foams, omit the important
              interdependence of coarsening and drainage and local dynamic effects, like
              interfacial elasticity, viscous dissipation, surfactant transport, film
              rupture, bulk bubble motion/rearrangements, etc.  The Magnetic Resonance
              Imaging (MRI) facility at the University of Notre Dame offers a non-invasive,
              high-resolution imaging technique for large (>200 bubbles) domain of 3D foam. 
              MRI will provide complete information about global changes in foam structure in
              experiments on drained/stabilized foam coarsening and wetting front
              propagation.  Experiments on flowing 2D, bi-disperse foam and drainage from a
              single soap film will capture local film and vertex dynamics.  Acquired data
              will be integrated into a dynamic foam model that will be used to correlate 3D
              coarsening and wetting front dynamics imaged by MRI.  Graduate students
              involved in the project will receive training in physics and fluid mechanics
              and will get hands-on experience with MRI.  Due to MRI's broad medical,
              scientific and engineering applicability, this training will prepare them for a
              range of careers in academia or industry.
%%%
Many technological processes,
              like secondary oil recovery, control of polluted ground water, industrial
              filtration, separation, etc. exploit foam stability and mechanical/transport
              properties which are strong functions of foam spatial patterns.  As a result,
              optima industrial application can only be achieved when texture coarsening and
              drainage of liquid foams, which fundamentally changes their spatial patterns,
              are properly understood.  Current theories, developed for unrealistic
              motionless and/or ideal dry foams, omit the interdependence of these phenomena.
               The aim of this project is to develop a realistic model, based on extensive
              experiments with 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional foams, that captures local
              film dynamic effects on global coarsening and drainage.  The Magnetic Resonance
              Imaging (MRI) facility at the University of Notre Dame offers a non-invasive
              imagin technique sfor a large domain of 3D foams.  Upon successful completion
              of the research project, the foam models will be disseminated to the scientific
              community and to the chemical/petroleum industry via the principal
              investigators websites and through a workshop/conference at the University of
              Notre Dame.  Graduate students involved in the project will receive training in
              physics and fluid mechanics and will get hands-on experience with MRI.  Due to
              MRI's broad medical, scientific and engineering applicability, this training
              will prepare them for a range of careers in academia or industry.


