Title       : Phylogenetic and Biological Species in the Fusarium solani Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a0089474

Award Number: 0089474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249997             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Geiser dgeiser@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Samuels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089474
Geiser 
	Fungi in the genus Fusarium are extremely important as agents
              of disease in plants and animals, as producers of toxins that poison food and
              animal feeds, as creative producers of chemicals with potential pharmaceutical
              uses, and even as food for human consumption.  Despite their importance,
              identifying fusaria is very difficult,  because they offer relatively few
              morphological characters that are useful for discrimination.  This has led to a
              taxonomic system where extremely diverse sets of evolutionarily distinct
              lineages (judged on the basis of their inability to mate and form spores) are
              lumped together. 
	This project by Dr. David Geiser at Pennsylvania State
              University and his USDA colleague Dr. Gary Samuels focuses on the Fusarium
              solani species complex, a cosmopolitan group of approximately 50 diverse
              evolutionary lineages that has most often been considered a single species.
              These lineages include asexual lineages, lineages that are capable of
              self-fertilization, and lineages that can only cross-fertilize. Also
              represented are seven known mating populations, groups of isolates that can
              potentially interbreed, each of which may represent a distinct evolutionary
              lineage. This diversity includes groups of isolates that are known to cause a
              wide variety of diseases of plants and animals. In this project, DNA sequences
              from four different nuclear genes will be gathered and analyzed, to identify
              evolutionary lineages based on shared mutations, and the lineages so recognized
              will be compared with the groups defined by mating compatibility and
              morphological distinctness. Field work in Asia and South America with foreign
              colleagues will provide new collections to augment the cultures and laboratory
              stocks maintained at the Fusarium Stock Center by Dr. Geiser. The result of the
              work will be a detailed phylogenetic tree for this species complex, which can
              be used to find taxonomically reliable characters and to predict the likelihood
              of biologically interesting traits such as asexuality and pathogenicity on
              different hosts. 


