Title       : Integrating Mathematics and Biology: A Case Studies Approach to Linear Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0089021

Award Number: 0089021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71175              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet L. Andersen jandersen@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              K. Gregory Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) Biological Sciences (61)

This "Proof of Concept"
              project is developing an integrated mathematics and biology course that teaches
              linear algebra concepts in the context of biological case studies. This course
              is being team-taught to a mixture of junior biology students and sophomore
              mathematics students and is intended to supplement, not replace, current
              courses in linear algebra for the mathematics majors and current courses in
              ecology for the biology majors. The course is designed to strengthen the
              mathematical skills of biology students, expose mathematics students to
              mathematical models used in biology, teach students how to collaborate with
              people trained in different scientific disciplines, and teach students how to
              critically read research papers. Biology and mathematics students working
              together on case studies, group projects, and presentations form an extensive
              part of the course. The case studies, based on accessible biological research
              papers that incorporate mathematical models, are being written jointly by
              mathematics and biology faculty. Homework assignments and supplemental reading
              material for the course are also being created. The mathematical topics in the
              course include matrix algebra, bases, eigenvectors, eigenvalues, systems of
              linear difference and differential equations, and ill-conditioned matrices. The
              biological topics include population matrices, elasticity and sensitivity,
              nutrient flow in aquatic systems, spread of infectious diseases, and genetics.
              These materials are being modified for dissemination to disciplinary faculty
              who wish to supplement existing courses in ecology, conservation biology, or
              linear algebra and for institutions who wish to design a similar integrated
              course. 

