Title       : Collaborative Research: Landscape Patterns of Pollen Movement in Declining
               Populations of California Valley Oak, Quercus Lobata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0089238

Award Number: 0089238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter E. Smouse smouse@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Smouse
0089238

Fragmentation and population declines jeopardize the survival
              of many species.  Excessive reproductive isolation can cause a loss of valuable
              alleles, decrease genetic variation, induce inbreeding depression, reduce
              demographic fitness, and lead to reproductive failure. When tree populations
              are reduced to scattered and clustered individuals, pollen movement is critical
              to connectivity. This project develops a novel approach that can cover
              landscape-scale areas and can be integrated into spatially explicit simulation
              modeling of landscape changes. These new tools are deployed to investigate a
              threatened tree species, California Valley oak (Quercus lobata). Using allozyme
              and microsatellite genotypes, the investigators examine three objectives: (1)
              They will characterize reproductive isolation of individual trees in landscapes
              with variable conspecific density. (2) They will examine the impact of adult
              genetic structure and temporal heterogeneity of pollen pools on estimates of
              pollen movement. (3) They will incorporate estimated parameters into geographic
              models to simulate the impact of historical and future population
              decline.

This project represents an excellent case study of the evolutionary
              dynamics of gene flow and its landscape scale conservation/restoration
              consequences. It will be applied to a critical California tree species
              experiencing habitat loss and degradation from residential and agricultural
              development, a situation in need of information for future management and
              policy decisions.  This research will dovetail issues from evolutionary
              biology, conservation biology, geography, and public policy of the threatened
              species.

