Title       : Phosphorus Regulation of Decomposition, Microbial Dynamics, and Foliar Chemistry
               in Moist Tropical Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0089447

Award Number: 0089447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. Townsend Alan.Townsend@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5926,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Despite a widespread belief that low phosphorus (P) availability is a strong
              constraint on ecosystem dynamics in many tropical forests, direct tests of this
              belief are rare, and understanding of tropical forest biogeochemistry remains
              relatively poor. To test this assumption, a phosphorus fertilization experiment
              will be conducted in lowland moist tropical rainforests located on extremely
              old soils in southwest Costa Rica. Preliminary work has shown that P
              availability is poor in these systems, and that low P availability appears to
              limit the activity of soil microorganisms. This research will follow up on
              these preliminary data through the use of long-term P fertilization plots which
              span gradients in soil age and which include at least 3 different dominant
              canopy trees in these forests. Each individual plot will contain a mature
              canopy tree at its center, and the trees will contain permanent climbing ropes
              to provide access to live canopy leaves. In addition to the effects of
              fertilization on canopy chemistry, the research will monitor processes within
              the soil and on the forest floor, including soil respiration, litter
              decomposition, analyses of microbial function and composition, and a suite of
              soil biogeochemical analyses. This work will advance understanding of how P
              availability regulates ecosystem processes in lowland tropical forests, with an
              emphasis on the poorly understood microbial communities. In addition, the
              investigators seek to maintain these fertilization plots for the long term, and
              to facilitate collaboration from other scientists interested in using them.


