Title       : Finding New Crystalline Phases by Electronic Theory and Electron Diffraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a0089274

Award Number: 0089274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252254             (Estimated)
Investigator: Franco P. Jona franco@ccvm.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns the study of phases of condensed matter systems and their
              stability and metastability with respect to applied stresses. The goals of the
              present project are: (1) to identify metastable phases by calculation; and (2)
              to stabilize them at room temperature in the laboratory. The theoretical search
              for new phases has become possible within the last few years by modern
              electronic-structure computer programs that can calculate total energies for
              any configuration of atoms in the unit cell of a crystal.  Hence the programs
              can search for configurations that minimize the energy.  Moreover, the
              calculations are made from first principles, i.e., require no empirically
              determined quantities, and are equally reliable for all configurations. The
              metastable phases thus found will be stabilized by coherent  (pseudomorphic)
              epitaxy on suitable substrates. Each phase will be made as an ultrathin film
              with nanoscale thicknesses of perhaps 10 to 20 atomic layers.  Usually the film
              will be strained away from its equilibrium state, since the much thicker
              substrate strains the surface mesh of the film to the surface mesh of the
              substrate.  If ten or more layers can be grown, inner layers are strained bulk
              layers independent of surface effects, and are examples of the new metastable
              bulk phase.  The crystal structure of these bulk layers will then be determined
              by quantitative low-energy electron diffraction and compared with the
              theoretical predictions.  Probably there are many more metastable than stable
              phases, since even for pure elements all minima in a many-dimensional space are
              being sought. This research will be conducted with graduate students who will
              be trained for future employement in an active area of materials science
              
%%%
 many materials the atoms are arranged in regular, periodic arrays which
              form a crystal. Crystals occur in nature with a particular atomic structure
              which is stable with respect to impressed forces. A given material may have
              different atomic structures, which have limited stability and which may have
              very different properties; such structures are said to be metastable.  The word
              ``metastable'' means that if we only disturb it gently (for example, slightly
              deform it) the structure persists, but if we apply large enough deformations
              then the structure collapses.  Some materials are found in nature both in a
              stable form (e.g., graphite) and in a metastable form (e.g, diamond), but most
              materials exhibit naturally only the stable form.  Their metastable structures
              are mostly unknown, and, if known, can be fabricated only by special processes
              which stabilize them.  Stabilization can be achieved, for example,  by forcing
              the material to grow in the form of an ultra-thin film on top of another,
              stable, crystal (called the substrate). Metastable structures are far more
              numerous than stable ones, and their properties can be potentially very useful.
               The goals of the present project are: (1) to find metastable forms of several
              metals and alloys by calculation; and (2) to try to make and stabilize them
              experimentally in the laboratory.  The former goal is made possible by modern
              electronic-structure computer programs, which can test any possible structure
              of a given material; the latter goal will be reached by growing nanoscale films
              with thicknesses of 10 to 20 atomic layers on suitable substrates in specially
              evacuated chambers.  The structure of the films will be determined by
              well-tested electron-diffraction techniques and compared to the calculated
              structures.  This combined experimental-theoretical project involves graduate
              and undergraduate students. They will receive training in an advanced area of
              contemporary materials science and are thereby prepared to enter
              scientific/technological workforce of the next few decades.
***

