Title       : Ecological and Evolutionary Impacts of Pesticides on Non-target Organisms: A
               Focus on Amphibians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0089459

Award Number: 0089459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256396             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick A. Relyea relyea+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1182,9169,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the role that ecological context plays in determining
              the impact of pesticides on non-target organisms in nature. The overall goal of
              this proposal is to determine the ecological and evolutionary effects of
              long-term exposure to a pesticide on amphibians, a group of global conservation
              concern.  The first objective of the research is to examine effects of exposure
              time on lethality of pesticide exposure.  For this preliminary objective, eight
              species of larval amphibians will be subjected to carbaryl, a common pesticide,
              for varying lengths of time.  The second objective of this study is to
              determine how the biotic and abiotic ecological environment interacts with
              pesticide exposure to affect fitness traits. Laboratory studies suggest that
              changes in pH and the presence of predator cues can make pesticides much more
              deadly, but it is unknown if these dramatic effects occur under natural
              conditions. Additionally, the toxicological focus has been on lethal effects
              with less of a focus on nonlethal effects such as changes in individual traits.
              However, we know from ecological studies that trait changes can have dramatic
              effects on how an individual interacts with other species. To achieve the
              second objective, the investigator will rear larval amphibians in pond
              mesocosms and examine the interacting impacts of pesticides, pH, and predator
              cues on individual survival and individual traits.  It is predicted that the
              inclusion of natural differences in ecological conditions will have a
              substantial impact on the pesticide-induced traits and pesticide-caused
              mortality.  The third objective of this study is to examine the evolution of
              pesticide resistance in amphibians. There is a vast literature on evolved
              resistance in many pest species, but investigations of evolved resistance in
              non-target species are noticeably lacking and studies of evolved resistance in
              amphibians appear to be nonexistent. To investigate the process of evolved
              resistance in amphibians, the investigator will take a three-pronged approach
              that examines differences in resistance among populations that differ in
              historical pesticide exposure, the heritability of pesticide resistance, and a
              multi-generation selection experiment to determine if amphibians exposed to
              pesticides can eventually evolve resistance to pesticides. The expectation is
              that there is genetic variation in pesticide resistance in natural populations
              and exposure to pesticides will favor the evolution of resistance in
              amphibians. Collectively, this research is expected to show that ecological
              context is critical for understanding the ecological and evolutionary impacts
              of pesticides in non-target organisms.   
