Title       : Promoting Active Reading Strategies to Improve Students' Understanding of
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a0089271

Award Number: 0089271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3196913            (Estimated)
Investigator: Danielle S. McNamara dmcnamar@odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond F. Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Irwin B. Levinstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7180,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The problem addressed by this project regards high-school students'
              understanding of and ability to learn from difficult science texts.  The first
              purpose of this project is to examine high school students' and teachers'
              knowledge about metacognitive reading strategies to better ascertain the need
              for strategy interventions, as well as teachers' ability to provide such
              training to students.  The second purpose is to compare the effectiveness of
              three reading interventions and to thereby identify more effective methods for
              improving students' comprehension skills.  The third purpose is to determine
              whether the benefits of reading interventions depend on students' skills,
              knowledge, or cultural environment.  The fourth purpose is to develop a
              computerized training program that adaptively assigns a student to an
              appropriate training regime, and interactively provides reading training. 
              Hence, this project bridges the two focus areas of the IERI initiative
              concerning reading skill acquisition and students' understanding of
              increasingly complex scientific ideas.  Within these areas, this project will
              address issues regarding instructional practices in reading, the role of
              teacher learning and performance on student learning, optimal interventions for
              students at-risk of reading or academic failure, the development of better
              assessment techniques of knowledge and skill, and the use of technology to
              improve assessment and learning.
