Title       : Ultrahigh Resolution Magnetic Resonance Imaging -On-A-Chip
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2000 
File        : a0089061

Award Number: 0089061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $509838             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Roukes roukes@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              P. Chris Hammel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In 1991 it was proposed that nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometry with
              sensitivity at the level of a single proton might be achievable through
              mechanical detection using scanned probe techniques similar to AFM. Achieving
              this degree of sensitivity would constitute a truly revolutionary advance; it
              would permit three-dimensional atomic-scale imaging, with chemical specificity.
              Mechanically-detected MRI, often called Magnetic Resonance Force Microscopy
              (MRFM) is now many orders of magnitude more sensitive than conventional MRI.
              The mechanical detection technique has clearly provided staggering advances,
              and it is clear that significant additional gains are on the horizon for MRFM. 
              We project that MRI with atomic resolution will be attained in just a few
              years.
The PI and co-PI propose as an ultimate goal MRI instruments with
              single-nucleus resolution, will require a radically new approach, one that
              involves single-chip integration of hybrid electro/magneto/opto/mechanical
              devices.  Realizing such devices would be an important departure from the path
              being taken by all current workers, worldwide, in this new field of MRFM. This
              new research direction is what has been proposed in this submission. This
              grant, if awarded, will allow the PI to leverage his current efforts in, and
              facilities for, Nano Electro Mechanical Systems (NEMS) toward making important
              headway on the engineering and science of novel integrated systems (nanochips)
              for MRFM. When fully implemented, the magnetic resonance force microscope will
              become a unique scanned probe instrument offering the high spatial resolution
              of atomic force microscopy (AFM), while simultaneously offering three
              dimensional visualization capabilities of MRI within the engineering sciences
              it will enable new, high resolution studies of the microscopic subsurface
              properties for a broad range of new materials and electronic devices based upon
              buried interfaces. It is a technique that is both non-destructive and
              chemically specific.

