Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Impact of Introduced Lady Beetles on Prey and
               Other Predators in Both the Old and New World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a0089374

Award Number: 0089374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Evans ewevans@biology.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0089374
Evans

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Edward Evans of the Utah State University and
              Professor Hironori Yasuda of Yamagata University in Japan.  The researchers
              will undertake a study of the impact of introduced lady beetles on prey and
              other predators in both the old and new world. Species invasions around the
              globe are accelerating, in part from purposeful introductions by humans as in
              the practice of biological control.  Through effects on biodiversity of invaded
              communities species invasions may have fundamental consequences for ecosystem
              functioning.  Diversity often provides an important stabilizing measure of
              species redundancy within ecosystems, wherein reduced activity by a single
              species is counterbalanced by compensatory responses by other species. 
              Predators introduced to enhance biological control may compromise the capacity
              for species redundancy in prey suppression if pre-existing predators are driven
              to low numbers or extinction.  The researchers will study two invasive lady
              beetles in particular (Coccinella septempunctata and Harmonia axyridis) both in
              their native Japan where they have coevolved with other predators attacking
              aphids, and in Utah, where they now interact with native North American lady
              beetles and other aphid predators.  They will attempt to determine the degree
              to which assemblages of predators (either longstanding and coevolved, or newly
              created are characterized by species redundancy in their capacity to reduce
              prey.  They will also assess the root causes and consequences in habitats such
              as alfalfa of declining diversity of native lady beetles in North American
              associated with the establishment of Old World lady beetles.  

The project
              brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
              expertise and research capabilities. Results of this research should enable the
              researchers to address whether and how invasive insect predators may alter
              basic predator-prey relationships in invaded communities.  This research
              advances international human resources through the participation of graduate
              students.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of their research in
              scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific meetings.

