Title       : Effects of Recruitment and Post-recruitment Processes on Abundance of Stream
               Insects: a Comparative Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a0089863

Award Number: 0089863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Peckarsky blp1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      PO 519
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1649,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
DEB 0089863
PI:  Barbara L. Peckarsky

Effects of recruitment and
              post-recruitment processes on abundance of stream insects: a comparative
              approach


This study will help us understand how multiple factors interact
              to affect the abundance of plants and animals in nature.  The goal of this
              proposal is to explain patterns of abundance of stream insect populations by
              conducting observations and experiments under realistic field conditions. 
              Experiments in natural streams will test whether the abundance of larvae of two
              mayfly species is determined by the number of eggs laid by adults or the amount
              of food or predators in the larval habitat. The two mayfly species differ in
              egg-laying behavior, vulnerability to trout predation and behavior when faced
              with the risk predation and low levels of food (algae).  First, in
              collaboration with Dr. Stephen Ellner we will use simulation models to predict
              how recruitment (egg-laying), presence of predators, and amount of food should
              affect the relative abundance of each mayfly species.  Second, we will measure
              egg-laying, larval dispersal behavior (drift) and mayfly abundance in natural
              fish and fishless streams with different levels of food (algae).   Third, in
              large-scale field experiments we will add or remove rocks and logs used by one
              of the mayfly species for egg-laying to test directly whether abundance of
              larvae is a function of recruitment.  Fourth, we will drip water from
              containers with trout into fishless streams to determine whether drift of
              mayflies in response to trout chemicals can explain patterns of abundance in
              fish and fishless streams.  Finally, we will manipulate multiple factors in
              experiments carried out in stream-side, flow-through chambers to determine
              whether drift of mayflies in response food and predators can explain larval
              abundance.  Specifically, we hope to determine whether interactions with
              predators and resources override recruitment to explain the abundance of mayfly
              larvae in streams.  This research can be generalized to apply to populations of
              other organisms that live in open systems and have one or more highly mobile
              life stages.


