Title       : A Novel Fur Protein in Bradyrhizobium japonicum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0089928

Award Number: 0089928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. O'Brian mrobrian@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Iron is an essential nutrient in almost all living organisms. However, iron can
              also be toxic to cells in high concentrations, and therefore organisms must
              maintain the proper balance of this nutrient. This project aims to understand
              how cells sense the availability of iron in the environment and regulate its
              concentration in cells. The research focuses on iron homeostasis in
              Bradyrhizobium japonicum, a bacterium important to agriculture and a good model
              for studying the metabolic regulation of gene expression. Most bacteria contain
              a protein called Fur, which senses and binds to iron, and regulates genes
              involved in iron metabolism. The model for Fur function is that binding to iron
              confers on the protein the ability to negatively regulate genes by recognizing
              specific target DNA sequences. However, the Fur protein from B. japonicum
              (BjFur) has unique properties that indicate novel cellular roles. In
              particular, BjFur binds to DNA sequences recognized by other Fur proteins, but
              also binds specifically to a DNA element not recognized by Fur from other
              bacteria. In addition, recent evidence strongly suggests that BjFur can
              function under iron limitation, which has not been reported in other organisms.
              These observations lead to the hypothesis that Fur is functionally more diverse
              in its activities and roles than is generally assumed. Experiments will be
              carried out that address the novel features of the B. japonicum Fur protein.
              This work will involve the training of graduate and undergraduate students, and
              will strongly encourage participation by women and underrepresented minority
              trainees.


