Title       : Dissertation Research: State Interventionism in the Late Classic Maya Palenque
               polity: Excavations at El Lacandon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a0089595

Award Number: 0089595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7216               (Estimated)
Investigator: Olivier De Montmollin olly@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Olivier De Montmollin, Mr. Roberto Lopez Bravo will
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological
              excavation at the site of El Lacandon located in Mexico's Peten Peninsula. This
              site dates to the Classic Period when Mayan polities reached their greatest
              areal extent and, while not a major center itself, is important because of it's
              ties with Palenque located 18 km away. Epigraphic and archaeological data
              indicate that during Classic times Palenque expanded and established control
              over a large region which included El Lacandon. Because the latter existed as
              an independent entity before Palenque's expansion it is possible to determine
              how social, political and economic organization was altered after incorporation
              into Palenque's sphere and to reconstruct the method of governance. While many
              large Mayan kingdoms have been studied, archaeologists do not agree on the
              means of political integration employed. Some believe that outlying areas such
              as El Lacandon were controlled through direct intervention and that tight
              centralized authority was exercised. Under this scenario such regions were
              tightly integrated into a broader economic system. Other archaeologists however
              postulate a much looser arrangement in which pre-existing local elites, if they
              recognized their secondary status, were allowed to remain in power and that,
              other than the payment of tribute, pre-existing systems remained essentially
              unchanged. To examine this question, Mr. Bravo will excavate a series of both
              "commoner" and "elite" habitation areas which incorporate both pre and post
              Palenque periods. He will also excavate in central ceremonial areas to
              determine whether a period of new construction coincides with the power
              structure change. The patterns he observes will provide insight into the
              structure of El Lacandon - Palenque relations.

This research is important
              for several reasons. It will shed new light on the functioning of one of the
              largest Mayan prehistoric kingdoms and provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists. It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.

