Title       : Limonene Hydroxylases as a Model for Cytochrome P450 Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a0089472

Award Number: 0089472
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432262             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney Croteau croteau@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Terpenoids constitute the largest family of natural products and are extremely
              diverse in structure and biological function.  Most terpenoids are formed by a
              common core pathway in which an initial cyclization reaction defines the basic
              structural type and subsequent cytochrome P450-mediated hydroxylation reactions
              determine the oxygenation pattern(s) of the derived family of metabolites.  The
              oxygenation reactions play primary roles in the diversification to terpenoid
              end products and it is the oxygenated terpenoids, rather than their hydrocarbon
              precursors, that most often possess the relevant biological properties.  The
              P450 heme-thiolate enzymes represent a very large class of catalysts important
              in both biosynthetic and catabolic processes, as well as in detoxification
              reactions.  Eukaryotic forms of these enzymes have proven difficult to
              characterize, and the physical definition of active site structure has been
              precluded by a size too large for NMR-based approaches and by the recalcitrance
              of the solubilized membranous enzymes to yield suitable crystals for X-ray
              diffraction.  A uniquely informative model system, that exploits a set of regio
              and stereospecific monoterpene hydroxylases from very closely related mint
              species, has been developed under the prior NSF grant, and these recombinant
              enzymes provide the foundation for the next phase of the research which
              involves synthetic, biochemical, molecular, modeling and spectrometric tools to
              address fundamental questions concerning active site structure-function
              relationships of this important enzyme class.  The objectives of this project
              are:  1. to develop a functional overexpression system for the wild-type and
              mutant hydroxylases; 2. to optimize the preparation of the recombinant
              hydroxylases for spectrometric evaluation; 3. to determine substrate binding
              geometry at the active sites of the different hydroxylases using spatially
              defined fluorinated and deuterated substrate analogs and electron-nuclear
              double resonance (ENDOR) spectrometry; and 4. to employ model-guided
              mutagenesis, coupled with the use of kinetic probes, to determine the minimum
              change in active site structure required to alter hydroxylation regio and
              stereochemistry.  Completion of these experimental objectives will test the
              hypothesis that subtle differences in active site topography underlie
              alterations in the regiochemistry and stereochemistry of production formation,
              and will provide a detailed level of structural understanding that has not been
              possible with other types of P450 enzymes.  Additionally, the ability to
              exploit and redesign these important biosynthetic enzymes will permit their use
              in 'green' chemistry for difficult synthetic transformations and will provide
              an unprecedented opportunity to engineer terpene metabolic pathways in plants. 
              The latter has broad implications for the manipulation of economic factors in
              plant performance, ranging from the generation of novel products, such as
              pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals and synthetic intermediates, to disease, insect
              and herbicide resistance.


