Title       : Co-evolution of Shade Avoidance and Response to Photoperiod in Arabidopsis
               Thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  2002   
File        : a0089493

Award Number: 0089493
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330005             (Estimated)
Investigator: Massimo Pigliucci pigliucci@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mitchell B. Cruzan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1131,1141,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Pigliucci
0089493

This project aims at studying the evolution of plants'
              responses to two environmental factors, daylength and spectral light quality,
              using the weedy species Arabidopsis thaliana. The problem is to understand how
              plants integrate different environmental signals and if they "respond"
              appropriately by adjusting their life history to maximize their fitness.
              Daylength and light quality were chosen because they are important cues the
              plant uses to assess environmental conditions. Daylength is an indicator of
              seasonal changes, and can be used by plants to determine the optimal period of
              flowering during the spring or summer (depending on the latitude). Light
              quality (measured as the ratio between red and far red light) has been
              demonstrated to be an indicator of the density of the surrounding vegetation,
              and presumably the intensity of competition for light. This research will
              include a field component during which plants will be studied and collected
              from their natural environment along a latitudinal gradient from southern to
              northern Europe (the natural habitat for Arabidopsis). A molecular analysis
              will then be carried out to estimate how closely related the collected
              populations are to each other. Finally, a series of greenhouse experiments will
              be conducted to measure how the plants react to different combinations of
              daylength and light quality.

This kind of study is important to understand
              if and how natural selection can match a plant's appearance and life history to
              the challenges posed by the environment. Because Arabidopsis has been
              intensively studied from a molecular perspective, knowledge of its ecology and
              evolution can be integrated with already published studies to achieve a better
              comprehension of the biology of the whole organism. Since this plant is also a
              close relative of economically important species such as broccoli, cauliflower
              and mustard, the knowledge gained by studying Arabidopsis may have direct
              applications for crop improvement.

