Title       : Dynamic Aggregation Behavior of Surfactant Mixtures in Solutions and at
               Solid/liquid Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0089530

Award Number: 0089530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398619             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ponisseril Somasundaran ps24@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0089530
Columbia University

The goal of the proposed research
              is to investigate the formation of surfactant aggregates in mixed systems and
              particularly the dynamics involved.  As the experimental system is complex the
              strategy involves use of multi-pronged approach, combining several techniques
              such as ultra-filtration, analytical, centrifuge, micro-calorimetry and AFM,
              with advanced spectroscopic techniques including Surface Plasmon Resonance
              Spectroscopy, fluorescence and ESR.  The goal is to determine the relationship
              between structures of surfactants and their properties as determined by the
              shape, composition and structure of mixed micelles and hemimicelles.  Based on
              these results a recent theoretical model will be refined to enable prediction
              of the formation of surfactant aggregates in their mixtures and changes in
              them.

Surfactants to be studied in this proposal will include
              environmentally benign sugar-based and pyrrolidone-type surfactants.  The
              investigators have seen that these surfactants do show unusual selectivity in
              their adsorption on solids, but the reasons for the selectivity are not known. 
              Similarly, another important example is the synergy observed between the thiol
              surfactants in flotation, which is not well understood.  Study of their synergy
              will be a collaborative effort between us and the University of Cape Town,
              South Africa group which has been studying the issue from a thermodynamic point
              of view.  The proposed research will enable the investigators to advance the
              frontiers of surfactant colloidal chemistry by acquiring new information on the
              formation of surfactant aggregates in their mixtures.  Such information will
              make it possible to develop opportunities to fully utilize the unique
              nano-environment provided by mixed surfactant aggregates for particle
              processing, ultra-purification, reactions in nano-domains as well as controlled
              release from such domains.     

