Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Nuclei Far From Stability with Exotic Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2001   
File        : a0089581

Award Number: 0089581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Glasmacher glasmacher@nscl.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              B. Alex Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley M. Sherrill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0089581
Glasmacher

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Thomas Glasmacher of Michigan State University and
              Professor Hiroyushi Sakurai of the University of Tokyo in Japan.  The
              researchers will be undertaking a study of nuclei far from stability with
              exotic structure.  The research proposed will be the largest systematic study
              of neutron-rich nuclei with complementary methods to date.  They will combine
              the experimental methods and techniques developed at the National
              Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State and by their
              Japanese collaborators to make efficient use of the world-class exotic
              ion-beams available at RIKEN in Japan and at the NSCL.  They will study the
              changes in the structure of neutron-rich nuclei as they become less and less
              bound when approaching the neutron-dripline.  The experiments will measure
              theoretically relevant and calculable quantities such as excitation energies,
              reduced transition matrix elements, and spectroscopic factors.  These results
              will then be used in the theoretical models. 

The project brings together
              the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
              capabilities.  Combining the Japanese quantum Monte Carlo codes, which
              currently allow the largest-scale shell model calculations in the world, with
              the effective nuclear forces developed at the NSCL will greatly enhance the
              theoretical perspective in the proposed collaboration.  It is expected that the
              research will significantly advance our understanding of the evolution of
              nuclear structure from stability to the most neutron-rich nuclei with charge
              Z=28.  This research advances international human resources through the
              participation of postdocs, graduate students and undergraduate students. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of the research in
              scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific meetings.

