Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Theory of Heavy Flavor Decays in the Era of
               Beauty Factories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a0089550

Award Number: 0089550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ikaros Bigi bigi@undhep.hep.nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0089550
Bigi

This award supports a three-year collaborative research project
              between Professor Ikaros Bigi of the University of Notre Dame and Professor
              Ichirou Sanda of Nagoya University in Japan.  The researchers will be
              researching the theory of heavy flavor decays in the era of beauty factories. 
              CP (Charge/Particle) violation constitutes one of the central mysteries of the
              successful Standard Model of high-energy physics.  CP is the violation of the
              combined conservation laws associated with charge conjugation (C) and parity
              (P) by the weak nuclear force, which is responsible for reactions such as the
              decay of atomic nuclei.  Parity, or space inversion, is the reflection in the
              origin of the space coordinates of a particle or particle system (in three
              dimension).  Parity conservation means that left and right and up and down are
              indistinguishable in the sense that an atomic nucleus throws off decay products
              up as often as down and left as often as right.  For years it was assumed that
              charge conjugation and parity were exact symmetries of elementary processes,
              namely those involving electromagnetic, strong, and weak interactions. 
              Thirty-six years after it was discovered that parity was violated in the weak
              interaction beta decay, it has not yet been established in any other system. 
              At the same time it is of great cosmological significance as essential for
              generating the baryon number of the universe.  Since theory predicts large CP
              asymmetries in the decays of beauty hadrons, dedicated experiments are starting
              to collect data in both the U.S. and Japan.  New theoretical technologies have
              been developed to deal quantitatively with the weak decays of beauty hadrons. 
              One crucial element in this progress has been maintaining close contact with
              experiments.  The promise of this strategy has grown even stronger with huge
              amounts of new data. 

The project brings together the efforts of two
              laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
              researchers' goal is to gain a better understanding of the phenomenon of
              matter-antimatter asymmetry, so obvious in nature, but not quite understood. 
              Results of the research could impact on some discovery in the field of B-hadron
              physics.  This research advances international human resources through the
              participation of graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas and
              technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote
              international understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish
              results of the research in scientific journals and report on the findings at
              scientific meetings.

