Title       : Event Driven Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  2000  
File        : a0089406

Award Number: 0089406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy V. Fossum fossum@cs.uwp.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin-Parkside
	      900 Wood Road
	      Kenosha, WI  53141    /   -

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31) 
 
This project produces curricular materials for a
              course in event driven programming. The materials include two standard course
              modules and two case studies. These are pilot tested at the developing
              institution and at a number of other institutions over a two year period. A
              prospectus is developed for a textbook that treats event driven programming
              from a computer science perspective and helps to provide computer science
              graduates with a better understanding of the event driven paradigm and its
              application.

Event driven programming is becoming a significant factor in
              the design of new information and industrial systems and in integrating legacy
              systems with interactive technologies. Future graduates of computer science
              programs need to have a strong technical and conceptual background in event
              driven programming, and computer science faculty need to be able to teach these
              techniques and concepts effectively. The project includes professional
              development for computer science faculty, through tutorials at national and
              international conferences and through dissemination on the Web, to gain
              familiarity with event driven programming and its importance in the CS
              curriculum. 


