Title       : Instructional Intervention to Promote Science and Literacy for Linguistically
               Diverse Elementary Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0089231

Award Number: 0089231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Okhee Lee olee@umiami.ir.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Eugene E. Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 7180,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The goal of this research is promoting science learning, particularly focusing
              on science inquiry, and literacy development for linguistically diverse as well
              as mainstream students. The research addresses the following questions: What
              are developmental trajectories in conducting science inquiry by linguistically
              diverse elementary students? What is the process of instructional intervention
              as teachers provide effective scaffolding on the nature of science and literacy
              with students' language and cultural experiences and the teacher explicit to
              student exploratory continuum? What is the impact of the instructional
              intervention on teacher change and student achievement over time that can be
              sustainable and scalable across diverse groups of students and teachers? How do
              state and district policies influence the implementation of the intervention?
              What are similarities and differences in the process and impact between two
              intervention conditions: (a) design experiments and (b) focused
              intervention?

This 4-year research will be conducted at two sites,
              Miami-Dade County Public Schools in Florida, the nation's fourth largest school
              district and San Francisco Unified School District in California. The research
              will involve grades 3, 4, and 5 elementary students at 6 elementary schools
              representing diverse ethnolinguistic backgrounds in each district. The research
              will include a total of 12 elementary schools, about 150 teachers, and about
              4,500 students each year. Teachers will receive support for professional
              development in science and literacy instruction as well as diversity in
              language and culture. Instruction will focus on two units at each grade level,
              including the topics of measurement, states of matter, the water cycle,
              weather, the solar system, and heat energy. A key aspect is a longitudinal
              design with cohorts of teachers and students. Data collection will involve
              multiple sources across schools, teachers, and students. Patterns of change in
              teachers' knowledge, beliefs, and practices, as well as student achievement,
              will be analyzed.
