Title       : Molecular Level Analysis of Macromolecule-Surface Interactions in Bacterial
               Adhesion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2001  
File        : a0089156

Award Number: 0089156
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2550000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Logan blogan@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon D. Chorover  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Kubicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darrell Velegol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9156,9178,9198,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Special Projects Office in the Chemistry Division supports this
              Collaborative Research Activities in Environmental Molecular Science (CRAEMS)
              Award to Penn State University. This award supports Bruce Logan, Darrel
              Velegol, Jon Chorover and James Kubicki to study macromolecule-surface
              interactions in bacterial adhesion in natural and engineered aquatic systems at
              the molecular level. In addition, the award supports Menachem Elimelech at Yale
              University through a subaward to study theoretical and experimental aspects of
              bacterial cell motion and adhesion near interfaces. The underlying hypothesis
              is that cell-surface interactions are dominated by the interaction of
              cell-surface polymers (exopolymers), and natural organic matter, such as humic
              and fulvic acids, with the surface. Atomic Force Spectroscopy, FTIR,
              electro-hydrodynamic techniques, and molecular modeling will be employed to
              probe polymer size, strength, and conformation as a function of solution
              chemistry, surface charge, and surface composition. The goal is improved
              methods and models that describe interactions between particles and surfaces
              that are irregularly shaped at atomic levels in the presence of bonded and
              soluble macromolecules.

This research is designed to improve our
              understanding of bacterial adhesion in natural systems and in engineered
              environments. It has important implications for restoration of contaminated
              groundwater, water treatment, and wastewater reclamation, which will become
              increasingly important as availability of fresh water becomes a global
              environmental and human health concern.  Outreach programs educate students of
              the local school system in environmental problems and approaches.





