Title       : Distributed Computation, Numerical Methods, and Scientific Computing for
               Mathematics and Science Students in an Undergraduate Mathematics Department
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a0089045

Award Number: 0089045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74112              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis M. Schneider dschneid@knox.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew S. Leahy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Knox College
	      2 E South St
	      Galesburg, IL  61401    309/341-7000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21) 

This project tests the educational feasibility of
              introducing mathematics and science students to mathematical problems whose
              numerical solution is made possible through the use of distributed computation.
              Distributed computation, one form of parallel computation, is the process of
              finding numerical solutions to mathematical problems by distributing the
              computation over a cluster of processors connected together via an inexpensive
              network such as a high-speed ethernet network. Recent developments in low-cost
              computer networking technology have for the first time made the capabilities of
              distributed computation an economic possibility for mathematics departments at
              undergraduate institutions. The promise of parallel computing power at an
              inexpensive price has also led to distributed computation being used
              increasingly in many fields which have traditionally been clients of the
              mathematical sciences. 

The project develops a prototype consisting of
              educational materials for two new
courses in the current curriculum. The
              courses introduce students to the fundamentals of distributed computation with
              as few prerequisites as possible. The first course provides an introduction to
              numerical analysis and uses the native programming language of Mathematica. The
              second course introduces students to the mathematical problems that are
              solvable by means of distributed computation. It uses the native distributed
              computing capabilities of Mathematica and distributed computing libraries
              accessible through higher-level programming languages. The project includes
              development of a computing laboratory to support distributed computation
              projects.




