Title       : Collaborative Research: Using phylogeny to Investigate the History of
               Morphological Evolution in Heterosporous Ferns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a0089909

Award Number: 0089909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen M. Pryer pryer@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harald Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Throughout the evolutionary history of land plants there have been repeated
              invasions of aquatic environments by terrestrial plants from distantly related
              lineages. In order to survive these very different physical conditions, these
              plants have been selected to modify their vegetative, reproductive, and
              dispersal systems. Few living ferns are aquatic; most are terrestrial and
              homosporous (bearing a single spore type). The exceptions are the heterosporous
              ferns, the semi-aquatic Marsileaceae and aquatic Salviniaceae, which belong to
              a single evolutionary lineage. The five extant genera of heterosporous ferns
              have been little studied, but the fossil record of their ornamented spores is
              relatively good for these ferns, showing a Cretaceous diversification
              contemporary with the rise of the flowering plants. In a collaboration between
              fern specialists Kathleen Pryer and Harald Schneider at Duke University and
              paleobotanist Richard Lupia at University of Oklahoma, the researchers will
              integrate morphological and molecular studies on the rates and sequences of
              evolution of all the known species of water ferns, to understand the history of
              adaptations to the aquatic environment. A comprehensive phylogeny of all the
              species will be constructed from DNA sequence comparisons, integrated with
              morphological studies. Spore ultrastructural characters will be studied with
              the electron microscope to investigate developmental features of spore wall
              construction and ornamentation, in order to interpret and integrate fossil
              spores known for the group. Numerous morphological trends have been proposed on
              the basis of the relative order of appearance in the fossil record, and the
              explicit phylogeny constructed for the group will allow testing of these ideas
              about character evolution in water ferns.
	The investigators bring
              complementary skills to the study from fields of morphology, DNA sequence
              analysis, phylogenetic methods, paleobotany, and quantitative analyses. The
              study provides an ideal opportunity to test hypotheses about the adaptive
              radiation of the modern fern flora from the Cretaceous to the Recent, the
              colonization of aquatic habitats, and genetic models of developmental change.
              


