Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: New Insights to Borate Glasses Including
               Structural Changes Induced Under High Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2001   
File        : a0089510

Award Number: 0089510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Feller sfeller@coe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mario Affatigato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coe College
	      1220 First Avenue NE
	      Cedar Rapids, IA  524025008    319/399-8000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5921,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0089510
Feller

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Steven Feller, Coe College and Professor Sejji Kojima
              of the University of Tsukuba, Professor Kodama of Sojo University and Professor
              Tsutomu Mashimo of Kumamoto University.   The researchers will be undertaking a
              study of new insights to borate glasses: structural changes induced under high
              pressure; and short range and intermediate range order deduced from
              spectroscopy and properties.  The objective of the study is to systematically
              characterize the physical properties and atomic arrangements in these glass
              systems.  Density, thermal properties, optical transmission, time of flight
              mass spectroscopy, infrared, Raman, NMR, NQR, and neutron scattering
              measurements have been performed on glasses to learn about the atomic
              arrangements present and the quantitative relationships of the physical
              properties to the structure.  The understanding of the novel processing
              technique (solution chemistry, rapid cooling, and shock compression) on the
              values of the intrinsic physical properties contributes to revealing the
              structure of the glass network.  This combined with looking at the intermediate
              range order by spectroscopic observation has a potential of good insight into
              the glass structure.  Undergraduate students in both the U.S. and Japan will be
              involved in the joint research. The project brings together the efforts of four
              laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of the research in
              scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific meetings.

