Title       : Planning for a System of Principled Assessment Designs of Inquiry (PADI)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0089122

Award Number: 0089122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Means barbara.means@sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail P. Baxter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edys S. Quellmalz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geneva D. Haertel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Mislevy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7180,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will support the development of a conceptual framework and a
              collection of development resources for Web-based assessments of science
              inquiry, Principled Assessment Designs for Inquiry (PADI. PADI seeks to provide
              a practical, theory-based approach to developing high-quality assessments of
              science inquiry by combining developments in cognitive psychology and research
              on science inquiry with advances in measurement theory and technology. The
              interdisciplinary PADI research team combines the expertise of two major
              nonprofit research organizations-SRI's Center for Technology in Learning and
              the Educational Testing Service's Research Division. 

Application of this
              framework and statistical model has the potential to address many of the issues
              arising from the situation-specific science inquiry assessment of our work of
              SRI and that of others. The long-term objectives of PADI are to provide a
              systematic process for developing assessment tasks; an organized set of
              assessment development resources, reusable task templates and generally stated
              rubrics, and a statistical model supporting more rigorous analyses of student
              learning. The planning grant will support the intensive interactions and
              collaborative design activities that will produce a rapprochement in our team's
              ideas, strategies, and methods. We will accomplish this goal through
              co-developing (1) a narrative description of the PADI assessment development
              framework, (2) one or more prototype assessment tasks conforming to the
              framework, and (3) the conceptual design of the PADI assessment development
              support system. 

