Title       : Distribution Patterns and Scale Sizes for Transient Events at Geosynchronous
               Orbit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0089718

Award Number: 0089718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff Sanny jsanny@lmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Marymount Univ
	      One LMU Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  90045    213/642-2700

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The interaction between the solar wind and Earth's magnetosphere is often
              manifested by transient variations in magnetic field, plasma and energetic
              particle parameters.  Such transient events are commonly observed by spacecraft
              in the vicinity of the dayside magnetopause.  The proposed study is an
              investigation of the distribution patterns and the scale sizes of these events
              using spacecraft at geosynchronous orbit.  The results will provide a
              connecting path from the solar wind through the magnetosphere to Earth's
              ionosphere as well as information on the decay and evolution of these
              events.

The project has two primary objectives.  The first objective is to
              obtain a better understanding of the relationship between transient magnetic
              signatures in the dayside magnetosphere and in the ionosphere.  The second
              objective is an investigation of magnetospheric transient events using
              simultaneous observations by two GOES spacecraft and the AMPTE CCE during late
              1984.  Since this project is complementary to earlier work on the motion and
              distribution of transient events, the overall result will be a comprehensive
              survey of the properties of magnetospheric transient events.

As with
              previous projects performed by the principal investigator, this study will
              involve the active participation of undergraduate students.  A strong emphasis
              will be placed on learning and independent thinking.  The importance of
              research in the educational process will be stressed.
