Title       : Effects of Resource Availability and Community Composition on the Outcome of
               Multiple Species Interactions with Ipomopsis Aggregata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0089643

Award Number: 0089643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott L. Collins                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244571             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca Irwin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison K. Brody  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      PO 519
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089643
Irwin
Ecologists and evolutionary biologists are fundamentally
              interested in the ways in which organisms interact to shape their abundance and
              design. Although the complexity of interactions within a community has long
              been recognized, our understanding of how a multitude of organisms ultimately
              shape the ecology of plant communities and the evolution of floral traits is
              still in its infancy. Pollination biologists have demonstrated the importance
              of pollinators in governing floral design, while recognizing that antagonistic
              organisms also play a role in the ecology and evolution of flowering traits.
              However, the effects of antagonists, such as herbivores, nectar robbers, and
              seed predators, on plant-pollinator mutualisms have often been considered in
              isolation. To fully understand the interplay and outcome of multiple species
              with their host plants, we must account for the complexity of interspecific
              interactions, and do so across communities that differ in resource availability
              and plant composition. The integration of simultaneous direct and indirect
              selection pressures from abiotic and abiotic factors will ultimately shape
              plant reproduction and plant traits over ecological, microevolutionary, and
              macroevolutionary scales. The aim of this research is to understand the
              simultaneous importance of interactions among several antagonists with their
              host plants and mutualist pollinators, and how resource availability and
              community composition affect the outcome of such interactions. Experiments will
              examine the combined effects of a nectar-robbing bumblebee, a pre-dispersal
              seed predator, an ungulate herbivore, and plant community composition on the
              reproductive success of the subalpine plant, Ipomopsis aggregata. This work is
              novel in integrating the effects of multiple antagonists on the outcome of
              plant-pollinator mutualisms under different environmental conditions.
              Understanding the complexity of plant-pollinator-antagonist interactions will
              provide a deeper knowledge of how species are ecologically and evolutionarily
              linked in biological communities.

