Title       : Chemical and Microbial Interactions at Environmental Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0089215

Award Number: 0089215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2710000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon E. Brown gordon@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott E. Fendorf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred M. Spormann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9156,9178,9198,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Collaborative Research Activities in Environmental Molecular Science
              (CRAEMS) Award to Stanford University is supported by the Special Projects
              Office in the Chemistry Division. Gordon Brown, Scott Fendorf, and Alfred
              Spormann supported by this award will study the chemical and microbial
              interactions at environmental interfaces among solids, aqueous solutions,
              natural organic and plant matter, microorganisms and atmospheric gases. Support
              is also provided to Satish Myneni at Princeton University through a subaward.
              Model systems of increasing complexity will be studied with molecular-level
              probes to explore (1) geometric and electronic surface structures of
              environmentally relevant hydrated solids; (2) the structure of water at
              solid-aqueous interfaces and in the vicinity of nonpolar organic molecules
              absorbed on solid surfaces; (3) the mode of interaction of metal ion cations
              and oxoanions with these surfaces and with organic ligands and microbial
              organisms; (4) the structure and bonding of aqueous and surface complexes of 
              these ions; (5) the rates of abiotic and biotic reaction pathways of
              redox-sensitive metalloids such as arsenic, selenium and uranium; (6) the
              hydrophobic interactions of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons with environmental
              solids at the molecular level; (7) the effects of microbial biofilm coatings on
              solids on the adsorption and transformation reactions of heavy metal and
              organic pollutants; and, (8) genomic-level interactions of microorganisms with
              mineral surfaces and organic and inorganic pollutants. Model studies will be
              coupled with laboratory studies of natural contaminated systems. Advanced
              spectroscopic methods, particularly those based on tunable synchrotron
              radiation, computational chemistry and molecular genomic technologies will be
              utilized.

This fundamental interdisciplinary research will advance our
              understanding of the role of sorption/precipitation/transformation at
              environmental interfaces in sequestering heavy metal and organic pollutants and
              will lead to the development of new remediation methodology. The affiliation
              with the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory will also introduce
              environmental scientists and students to synchrotron-based studies in
              environmental chemistry.

