Title       : Vertical Integral of the Research and Educational Activities in Mathematics at
               the University of Georgia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a0089927

Award Number: 0089927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2408335            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Granville andrew@math.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Benson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valery Alexeev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clinton G. McCrory  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth D. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: DMS 0089927
Project Title: Vertical Integration of the
              Research and Educational
Activities in Mathematics at the University of
              Georgia

Abstract
	This project will capitalize on the traditional strengths
              of the
University of Georgia's Mathematics Department and take advantage of
              recent
improvements and innovations to vertically integrate the activities
              of
faculty, postdoctoral fellows, graduate students and undergraduates.
              These
groups will meet in teams centered around specially designed VIGRE
              seminars
and programs. The half-a-dozen disciplinary VIGRE seminars will
              be
complemented by a broadly focused "Mathematics of Computation"
              seminar
which will expose participants to many areas of mathematics from
              a
computational focus. 
	The 4 postdoctoral fellows will be given time to
              enhance and broaden their
research programs working with an appropriate
              faculty member, while
upgrading their teaching and communication skills. The
              10 graduate
traineeships are designed to produce, in five years,
              well-qualified new
doctorates, with significant experience in the classroom,
              and a broad view
of available career options. Appropriate undergraduates will
              get a first
exposure of research by participating in a VIGRE seminar, while
              selected
freshmen and sophomores will be encouraged by a summer research
              experience
to major in mathematics. The department's traditions of dedication
              to
undergraduates, careful stewardship of graduate students and mentoring
              of
postdoctoral fellows, provide a natural environment for VIGRE activity.

