Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Early Events of Protein Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a0089286

Award Number: 0089286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34175              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Gruebele gruebele@scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0089286
Gruebele

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Martin Gruebele of the University of Illinois,
              Urbana-Champaign and Professor Hiroshi Kihara of the Kansai Medical University
              in Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study of the early event of
              protein folding.  The research will bring together experimentalists and
              theorists from both countries to study early events during the folding of three
              proteins: apomyoglobin, a ubiquitin mutant, and beta-lactoglobulin.  Their
              efforts will be combined to extend the folding phase diagram to low temperature
              and high viscosity conditions.  The theorists will be fully involved in the
              project beginning with the earliest experimental stages.  The research will
              broaden our knowledge of folding by exploring the energy landscape under a wide
              range of external conditions.  At very low temperatures and high viscosity very
              fast folding events will be slowed down considerably and the dependence of the
              kinetics on external conditions will be studied.  Recently developed
              theoretical models will be used to simulate these conditions, and the
              experimental data will allow parameters in the theory to be constrained.  The
              proteins to be studied sample a wide class of alpha, alpha/beta and mostly beta
              proteins.  
 
The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories
              that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The U.S.
              researchers provide T-jump/fluorescence expertise, while the Japanese provide
              expertise in X-ray scattering at the Tsukuba Photon Factory.  This research
              advances international human resources through the participation of a graduate
              student.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of the research in
              scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific meetings.

