Title       : Contemporary College Algebra in Tribal Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2000  
File        : a0089263

Award Number: 0089263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71088              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell Lundgren rlundgren@dkmc.cc.nt.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald B. Small  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dull Knife Memorial Col
	      P.O.Box 98
	      Lame Deer, MT  590430098    406/477-6215

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)

This project is adapting and implementing the
              Contemporary College Algebra (CCA) program by incorporating problems dealing
              with Native American culture. CCA was originally developed by a consortium of
              10 Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) led by Texas Southern
              University. In this effort five tribal colleges (Dull Knife Memorial College,
              Stone Child College, Ft. Peck Community College, Little Big Horn College, and
              Salish Kootenai College) are joining together to adapt the CCA materials,
              conduct faculty development workshops and retreats, and disseminate the program
              to other colleges. 

The college algebra course is the first mathematics
              course that carries college credit; however, large drop-out rates often
              characterize such courses. This project is designed to improve course retention
              and attitude in this course by assuring that students understand the relevance
              of the materials to the Native American culture. The first goal of the project
              is to adapt and design materials that prepare students to contribute in an
              information rich, technological society. The course incorporates small group
              projects; a strong technology component; communication skills such as reading,
              writing, and presenting; and actvities to develop students' mathematical
              self-esteem and confidence as problem solvers. The second goal is to change the
              culture of the college algebra course by incorporating native American culture
              in the examples, developing a sense of ownership by the teaching faculty in the
              college algebra program, energizing faculty to develop modes of instruction
              that engage students in their own learning, and developing a sense of
              involvement by faculty in other disciplines which require college algebra.
