Title       : Representing and Learning from Classroom Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a0089293

Award Number: 0089293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1824224            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin F. Miller kevinmil@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Brady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Stigler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michelle Perry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7180      EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH INITIATIV
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 7180,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Innovative video-based techniques are opening new windows on the processes
              involved in teaching and learning. Yet experiences with using video examples as
              a method of providing instruction about teaching suggests that there are
              important obstacles to be overcome before this technology can serve as the
              basis for improving education. This proposal will address the problems involved
              in developing effective ways to use video records of classroom processes as a
              means to help teachers reflect on the processes of teaching and learning. The
              research has two major related goals: 1) studying the cognitive processes
              involved in learning from video and developing effective combinations of
              materials and tasks that promote teacher understanding of classroom processes,
              and 2) developing new methods for producing and disseminating video records of
              classroom processes that overcome some of the major limitations of current
              techniques. 

The proposed studies will describe the problem space of video
              materials and viewer tasks to find an optimal set of procedures for effectively
              using vignettes taken from classroom video as an educational technique. To
              promote generalization of results, the proposed studies will include children
              at two grade levels (1 & 4) and focus on two central topics in elementary
              school mathematics  (learning about number representation and place value in
              grade 1, and learning about fraction representation and equivalence in grade
              4). The system will be tested for its impact on teacher understanding, teaching
              practices, and student learning. The system will use the Internet to develop
              and implement teacher learning communities. Experience in developing and
              testing these materials will also facilitate extending the approach to other
              grades and domains.
