Title       : Testing Multiple Mechanisms of Species Coexistence in a Guild of African
               Acacia-ants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0089706

Award Number: 0089706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen L. Stanton mlstanton@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Truman P. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 1649,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0089706.  Maureen Stanton.  

Understanding the mechanisms, which facilitate
              the coexistence of species, is a focal area of contemporary ecology.  The
              proposed project addresses such issues by examining the factors that allow four
              species of ants, which are obligately associated with swollen thorn acacias in
              Kenya, to co-exist on a single species of acacia, Acacia drepanolobium.  A
              series of alternative hypotheses will be examined using observational,
              manipulative, and modeling approaches.  The first hypothesis is that the
              likelihood of coexistence is enhanced to the extent that a trade off exists
              between colonization and competitive ability.  Preliminary data suggest that
              the two competitively dominant species of ants are limited colonizers that
              principally extend into new areas via colony expansion, whereas colonization by
              the two competitively inferior species is accomplished by foundress queens. 
              Proposed research will elucidate the differential role of colonization and
              local competition in determining coexistence.  The second hypothesis is that
              coexistence is enhanced if subordinate ant species have an advantage conferred
              by temporal priority.  Planned experiments will determine the benefit derived
              from persistence, which is associated with host tree modification by
              subordinate ant species.  The third hypothesis is that coexistence is
              facilitated because competitively dominant species are at greater risk from
              natural enemies than are less abundant subordinate species.  Preliminary data
              suggest that this is less likely because rates of parasitism and predation are
              generally low for all four species of ant.  The fourth hypothesis is that
              differential exploitation of patchy resources in a heterogeneous environment
              increases the likelihood of coexistence.  Preliminary data suggest that
              dominant species replace subordinant species in high quality patches, whereas
              subordinant species are more common in low quality patches.  Planned
              experiments will assess whether the outcome of competitive interactions is
              dependent on patch quality.   Results from these experiments will be integrated
              into a matrix projection model, which will assess the stability of ant
              communities and the role of spatio-temporal variation in long-term community
              dynamics.















