Title       : Virtual Voyage - A WWW-based Expedition in Ocean Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a0089071

Award Number: 0089071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Reed   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Oceanography (43) The WWW provides exciting, new opportunities in distributed
              learning in higher education. This project is building on our previous work in
              technology-mediated learning by bringing the excitement of sea-going research
              into a college-level oceanography course through the construction of a virtual
              oceanographic voyage. The virtual voyage of courseware aims to combine elements
              of experiential learning with the anytime, anywhere access of the WWW to
              stimulate inquiry-based learning in the ocean sciences. The voyage is
              synthesized from the vast catalog of recent ocean research supported by major
              initiatives of NSF, NOAA and the USGS waters of the eastern Pacific, and along
              the coasts of California and Oregon over the past decade. We are simulating the
              sea-going experience (sans seasickness of course) by compiling photographs and
              video of sea-going expeditions from within our community of research colleagues
              in academia, the USGS and NOAA. Virtual shipboard experiments are patterned
              after actual cruises and include the technologies of data acquisition and data
              analysis as well as providing insight into the thought process of scientists
              through short (8 minutes of less) streaming audio/video interview segments. We
              are also including subsequent shore-based analyses as part of the "voyage." The
              WWW-based courseware contains 2-D and 3-D graphics, animations, text and
              streaming audio/video. Real-time data for monitoring the marine environment is
              embedded in each module as are methods of learning assessment and self-testing
              for the students. The project takes advantage of the natural interest through a
              geographic focus of California and the eastern Pacific, since more students are
              enrolled in college-level oceanography courses in that state than in any other
              state in the union (private institutions, UC, CSU system, community colleges
              and high school). Once fully developed, the virtual voyage will be used as the
              basis for entire oceanography courses, both through WWW-based modules and
              online discussions, especially in the growing number of online courses offered
              through distributed learning. The modules will have a uniform interface,
              internal mechanisms of learning assessment and span the breadth of
              oceanography, in addition to showing the linkages between the scientific
              disciplines of oceanography. In this project we are developing four out of the
              planned 12 modules of the virtual voyage with testing/assessment at two
              campuses of the CSU systems (SJSU and SFSU), as well as at least two community
              colleges (College of Marin and one other to be selected, probably San Jose City
              College or Ohlone College).

