Title       : Web-based Interactive Learning Modules to Facilitate Watershed/Environmental
               Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a0089039

Award Number: 0089039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74877              (Estimated)
Investigator: U. Sunday Tim tim@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Earth Systems Science (40) 
Industrial development, urbanization, and
              population growth continue to put increased strain on environmental and natural
              resource systems. Engineers and scientists trained in environmental science
              disciplines such as hydrology, watershed management, and soil and water quality
              are needed to address critical environmental issues that
              involve
interconnections between the Earth's water, energy, and biogeochemical
              cycles, as well as the interrelationship between these cycles and human
              activities. The purpose of this proof-of-concept project is to create, develop,
              evaluate, and disseminate student-centered and inquiry-based online learning
              modules that involve students in meaningful explorations in earth and
              environmental science disciplines, with a focus on watersheds. The project
              addresses the national call for inquiry-based instructional/learning materials
              in environmental science and engineering at the undergraduate level that are
              adaptable to a variety of instructional approaches and learning modalities.
              Within the learning modules, there are interactive learner-centered materials
              (e.g., lecture notes), Java-based simulation and three-dimensional
              visualization tools, a digital data library for five major U.S. watersheds,
              problem-solving exercises, and case studies related to watersheds and
              environmental management. These components are being created and adapted from
              advanced scientific modeling and visualization capabilities that utilize
              rapidly evolving desktop computing capabilities and the Internet and World Wide
              Web. The learning modules are housed within an active learning environment, a
              server-side software infrastructure, to support local and distance educational
              opportunities and to promote collaborative learning among students. The online
              learning environment and learning modules emphasize active/group learning,
              inquiry-based constructivist learning on issues related to watersheds and the
              environment, and the interdisciplinary nature of watershed management. In
              accordance with the proof-of-concept status of this project, seven learning
              modules are being developed to provide state-of-the-science treatment of
              important topics in watershed science, watershed engineering, and watershed
              management. Each learning module (1) is Web-based, easily accessible, and cross
              traditional discipline boundaries; (2) is appropriate for introductory earth
              and environmental science courses; (3) reinforces scientific methodology; (4)
              is interactive, intuitive, and inquiry-based; (5) is self-contained and
              vertically scalable for easy implementation by faculty; (6) aims to increase
              students' spatiotemporal and quantitative reasoning skills within the framework
              of already established environmental science and engineering content standards;
              and (7) aims to increase student awareness and understanding of watershed
              science and issues related to the environment. The expected immediate audience
              is approximately 500 students per year in several geoscience, biological,
              ecological, and environmental science courses at Iowa State University (ISU),
              plus an additional estimated 700 students in classes at other institutions that
              will be involved in the implementation plan. The long-term audience is students
              in environmental and earth science courses that include watershed science
              topics and adult learners at resource management agencies such as the
              Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Agriculture. The expected
              outcome will include a learning environment and set of learning modules that
              address national demands for watershed education and training. The evaluation
              utilizes standard tools for formative and summative evaluation in conjunction
              with educational rubrics for assessing students' learning outcomes. In addition
              to implementing and evaluating a prototype environment and learning modules to
              a diverse population of ISU students, the project is developing the framework
              for implementation and evaluation at four national and international
              institutions. Dissemination of the products of the project will be accomplished
              by involvement of faculty from other local and national institutions on an
              advisory board; presentation of papers at workshops and national conferences;
              creation of an Internet repository for the electronic discussions of interested
              faculty; and publication in educational journals, newsletters, and CD (or
              DVD)-ROM media.
