Title       : Conflicting Evidence in Waterfowl Systematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0089760

Award Number: 0089760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Sorenson msoren@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Helen F. James  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB 0089760
Michael D. Sorenson

Dr. Michael Sorenson of Boston University
              has been awarded a grant to construct a comprehensive phylogeny or evolutionary
              tree for the avian family Anatidae (the ducks, geese, and swans) by comparative
              DNA sequence analyses.  Found on all continents except Antarctica, the
              waterfowl are economically and culturally important due to their popularity
              with sport hunters, birders, aviculturalists, and artists. Waterfowl have also
              figured prominently in evolutionary biology and more recently have become
              "flagships" for wetlands conservation About 5,000 base pairs of DNA sequence
              data will be collected for each of the ~150 species of waterfowl. These
              molecular data will be combined with previously published information on their
              morphology and behavior to reconstruct the evolutionary relationships among
              waterfowl species, genera, and sub-families. Preliminary results suggest
              significant conflict between morphological and molecular evidence and point to
              a substantial revision of current views of waterfowl phylogeny. This conflict
              appears to be largely the result of convergent evolution in morphological
              characters associated with diving. 
The ecological and behavioral diversity of
              waterfowl combined with an extensive body of existing comparative data present
              unparalleled opportunities for the study of molecular, behavioral,
              morphological, and life history evolution. The realization of this potential,
              however, relies on the availability of a robust and well-corroborated phylogeny
              which allows one to discriminate between shared ancestry and adaptation to
              common environmental conditions as alternative explanations for similarities
              between species. Comparative analyses will lead to a better understanding of
              the ecological adaptations of waterfowl and thereby inform the efforts of
              wildlife managers and conservation biologists. The research also will provide
              systematists with an exemplary data set for the development of new 

