Title       : Inferring the Phylogenetic Position of the Acoelomate Bilateria with
               Mitochondrial Gene Arrangements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a0089654

Award Number: 0089654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249999             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Turbeville jmturbeville@vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0089654
James M. Turbeville

Dr. James Turbeville of the University of
              Arkansas has been awarded a grant to study the phylogenetic relationships of
              invertebrate animals by using gene rearrangement data.  The animal groups
              lacking a body cavity (acoelomate phyla) have been considered the most
              primitive bilaterally symmetrical animals and have played a central role in
              theories of animal evolution.  These animals (e.g., flatworms and ribbon worms)
              are an important component of animal biodiversity, yet their position in the
              tree of life (phylogenetic position) remains uncertain after years of intensive
              research.  Mitochondria are structures in cells (organelles) responsible for
              energy production.  They possess a small genome (DNA) which contains 37 genes
              encoding proteins and structural components involved in energy generation. 
              Recent studies have indicated that mitochondrial gene rearrangements will yield
              reliable features for clarifying the relationships of major animal groups
              (phyla).  To further evaluate the potential of this approach for estimating the
              phylogeny of animals, mitochondrial genomes of the acoelomate flatworms
              (Platyhelminthes), ribbon worms (Nemertea) and the enigmatic Xenoturbella will
              be sequenced and the arrangements of genes determined.  These data will be
              compared with mitochondrial gene arrangements available for other multicellular
              animals (metazoans) using appropriate methods to reconstruct a phylogeny for
              these groups. 

The data will allow a test of many long-standing hypotheses
              of animal relationships.  
The results of this study will contribute to our
              knowledge of these poorly understood animals, by increasing our understanding
              of patterns of diversification and providing insight into the evolution of
              morphological traits, patterns of gene evolution, developmental mechanisms and
              body plans.  

