Title       : The Use of Hand-Held Computer Algebra System Calculators Throughout the
               Mathematics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0089400

Award Number: 0089400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon P. Gordon gordonsp@farmingdale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arlene H. Kleinstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Farmingdale
	      Rt 110 & Melville Rd
	      Farmingdale, NY  11735    516/420-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)

The project is providing for a large-scale,
              multi-stage effort to redesign the entire quantitative curriculum based on the
              existence of CAS (Computer Algebra Systems) technology. There is adaptation of
              materials from several texts including Mathematics in Action, Functioning in a
              Real World, and Interactive Differential Equations. Educational technology is
              being incorporated into every course.

The project stages include: 
* The
              development of appropriate materials to implement a detailed and comprehensive
              plan that has already been developed and agreed to by all the faculty for full
              integration of CAS technology into all appropriate courses in mathematics and
              related courses in the sciences and technology. The direct use of CAS is being
              incorporated into all courses at the calculus and higher levels. All courses
              below calculus (including developmental mathematics, algebra and precalculus,
              as well as all related courses in the sciences and technology) are being
              completely redesigned to reflect the existence of CAS and its use in the higher
              courses. 
* A faculty development and training program, especially for
              part-time faculty, to prepare for the mplementation. 
* The actual
              implementation, evaluation, and several stages of revision of the new
              curriculum. 
* Full scale evaluation of the project. 
* Development of a
              project web site. 
* A variety of regional and national dissemination
              activities to acquaint the various professional communities with the results of
              such an extensive rethinking of the entire curriculum. 


