Title       : EPSYCH: Interactive simulations and experiments in Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a0089420

Award Number: 0089420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Bradshaw glb2@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy McCarley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Cognitive (73) 
The realm of the mind is mental process: thinking
              is not an object, but an intricate activity carried out by the brain.
              Traditional educational forums (classroom lectures, books) cannot readily
              depict the dynamic and reactive character of human thought; instead, they
              merely describe these processes. An alternative approach is to use
              computer-mediated educational materials that enable students to experience
              human thought processes. In previous work, sponsored by NSF, we created some
              educational units for an interactive website known as epsych. Epsych provides
              students with interactive demonstrations, experiments, and models designed to
              reveal our current understanding of the dynamics of thinking. Previous units
              include vision, hearing, decision-making, and learning. Now we are extending
              this site by adding units on language, problem-solving, brain and mind,
              consciousness, social processes, memory, and comparative psychology. These
              units incorporate a number of modules, each of which includes Java programs
              that allow students to conduct experiments, interact with psychological models,
              and experience demonstrations about psychological processes. From these
              experiences, students acquire a better understanding about how human thinking
              works, as well as a better appreciation for the role of experimentation in
              illuminating psychological processes.

Several aspects of the site make it
              both user-friendly and learner-friendly. The site incorporates a number of
              indexes that allow for fast access to individual demonstrations, experiments,
              simulations, and units. A consistent look-and-feel across the site also
              facilitates user interaction. To sustain student motivation, the site
              challenges students with puzzles, allows them to manipulate and control
              interesting models of thought, and provides information on their own
              performance vis-a-vis other students. 

National dissemination is currently
              being performed via the World Wide Web. Instructors nationwide have access to a
              mailing list that shares new developments, bug reports, comments, and
              invitations to participate in beta testing of new modules or provide comments
              about modules under developments. To provide long-term support, we are seeking
              contacts with publishers as a way to transition the site to commercial support.
              The site is compatible with CD-ROM publication or with a password-protected web
              site. 

