Title       : Interactive Computer and Web-Based Learning of Software Packages Used in
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2001    
File        : a0089035

Award Number: 0089035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen W. Crown swcrown@panam.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Freeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arnold Lumsdaine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Pan American
	      1201 West University Dr
	      Edinburg, TX  785412999    956/381-2011

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Engineering - Mechanical (56)


It is essential for the modern engineer
              to have a high degree of technological sophistication and computer literacy,
              and so learning commercial engineering analysis software packages has become a
              significant part of many engineering courses. Although the use of these
              commercial software packages may aid in teaching fundamental concepts to
              students, it can often have the opposite effect when valuable course time is
              taken up in teaching students the basics of using the software. The primary
              objective of this project is to put students in a position where they can
              quickly and easily learn necessary software, and then use that software to
              reinforce course concepts. This is being accomplished through the development
              of full-screen, audio-visual, interactive tutorials for software that is used
              extensively in four Mechanical Engineering courses, beginning with a freshman
              course (Engineering Graphics) and continuing in three upper-level courses
              (Measurements and Instrumentation, Kinematics and Dynamics of Machines, and
              Computer-Aided Engineering). In addition, a "Faculty Multimedia Tools
              Development Toolbox" is being assembled to facilitate development of software
              tutorials and interactive instructional tools by faculty in any discipline.


              
The Principal Investigator for this project previously developed interactive
              computer tutorials, games, and quizzes for a freshman Engineering Graphics
              course, which has been recognized and awarded regionally and nationally for
              excellence in instructional courseware. In the first year of the three-year
              grant, the Engineering Graphics materials are formatively evaluated, enhanced,
              and implemented at the University of Texas-Pan American (UTPA), and development
              begins on materials for the other three project courses. In the second year,
              the Engineering Graphics course is implemented and evaluated at other
              cooperating institutions-South Texas Community College (in McAllen, Texas),
              North Central Technical College (in Mansfield, Ohio), and the University of
              Nevada-Reno. UTPA is a minority institution, with a population that is 85%
              Hispanic. Implementing and assessing the materials at multiple institutions
              verifies that it is effective for diverse audiences. Furthermore, in the second
              year, the materials developed for the other three project courses are
              implemented and assessed at UTPA. In the third year, the materials developed in
              the first two years are published and tested at other institutions and the
              "Faculty Multimedia Tools Development Toolbox" is created. This "Toolbox",
              created out of the experience of the investigators in developing such tools for
              diverse courses and diverse audiences, allows faculty in other locations and
              other disciplines to create similar software tutorials and teaching aids for
              their own applications with minimum effort. The course materials and "Toolbox"
              will be published and distributed through a major publisher of academic
              materials.
