Title       : Scattering of Atoms and Molecules by Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0089503

Award Number: 0089503
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Manson jmanson@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1682,1765,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0089503
Manson
This is award to develop and extend the theory of surface
              scattering of atoms and small molecules.  The thrust of the work in this
              proposal is toward developing a theory in the semiclassical and classical
              regime that includes the exchange of energy with the lattice vibrations of the
              surface, the rotational excitation of the molecule, and the excitation of
              internal vibrational modes of the molecule.  The resulting theory will provide
              information on scattering, sticking, and desorption of molecular projectiles
              and will help in understanding the dynamics that lead to elementary chemical
              reactions on the surface.  The focus of this work will be to determine the
              influence of  more realistic interaction potentials in atom scattering and to
              extend the approach to develop a fully self-consistent theory of molecular
              scattering with surfaces.  Extensive numerical calculations will be performed
              to compare the theory with experiments.  Calculations for specific systems
              include: state-to-state scattered distributions and sticking coefficients of
              small molecules like CH4 and C2H2 from LiF(001) surfaces, metal substrates, and
              adsorbate covered surfaces; heavy rare gases scattering from liquid surfaces
              with the aim of exploring the ability of such experiments to give information
              on the surface composition of liquid metal alloy mixtures; photodesorption
              probabilities of alkali atoms and small molecules such as NO with an aim to
              extract information on the effects of temperature through lattice
              vibrations.
%%%
This is an award involving participation of graduate students
              and undergraduate students to develop a quantitative theory of atomic and
              molecular scattering from surfaces.  The application of such a theory will
              enable extraction from experiments, of basic physical information on the
              interaction of specific atoms and molecules with surfaces, on defects and
              adsorbates on surfaces, and on the surface itself.  This information is
              potentially useful for a wide variety of applications including the
              construction and characterization of robust nanoscale structures on
              surfaces.
***

