Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Estimation in Generalized Linear Mixed Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9625476

Award Number: 9625476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. McCulloch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9625476  McCulloch    The generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) generalizes
              the standard linear  model in three ways:  accommodation of non-normally
              distributed responses,  specification of a possibly nonlinear link between the
              mean of a response  and the predictors, and allowance for some forms of
              correlation in the data.  Unfortunately, standard techniques like maximum
              likelihood estimation are  computationally difficult for GLMMs and hence a
              number of alternate  approaches have been proposed.  This research will develop
              two approaches to  inference for GLMMs:  1) computationally-intensive
              simulation-based methods  for maximum likelihood estimation, and 2) methods
              based on  "joint-maximization" ideas.  The joint maximization methods will be
              viewed  as a set of generalized estimating equations for the purpose of
              theoretical  evaluation and improvement.  The new approaches will be evaluated
              and  compared to extant methods.      Generalized linear mixed models are an
              important and broadly applicable set  of statistical models for the analysis of
              data.  For example, they can be  used to model repeated counts of animals
              through time at fixed sampling  locations for the purpose of environmental
              assessment.  They are applicable  to data which are gathered in a wide variety
              of formats and are capable of  modelling data exhibiting associations. 
              Association in the above example  would arise because repeated data values at a
              single location would be  similar.  Failure to incorporate such associations
              can lead to incorrect  conclusions from the analysis of data.  Unfortunately,
              the use of  generalized linear mixed models has been limited due to
              computational  difficulties and the lack of availability of well-tested
              parameter  estimation methods which have known performance characteristics. 
              This  research will develop two approaches to the analysis of such data and 
              evaluate their performance, both in absolute terms and in relation to extant 
              methods.
