Title       : Exploratory Research: Systematic, Regional Survey in Southeastern Shandong
               Province, China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9625455

Award Number: 9625455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1996   
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne P. Underhill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Anne Underhill, Gary Feinman and
              their colleagues will conduct an archaeological survey in southeastern Shandong
              province which is located in the Yellow River region of China. The goal of this
              one month field season is to conduct a preliminary evaluation of the region,
              determine the extent of surface materials present, and establish a program of
              long term collaborative U.S. - Chinese research. Previous work in the region
              has revealed the presence of abundant remains from the late Neolithic Period,
              including large walled sites that were probably centers of settlement
              hierarchies, cemeteries indicating social differentiation and finely made craft
              goods such as jade ornaments and elaborate pottery vessels. Given the early
              dates for these sites, the region has long been recognized as a likely center
              for the development of complex societies. Research to date however has focused
              on individual sites and has not attempted to set these into a broader regional
              context. It is not known how such central places interacted with or extended
              their power over surrounding hinterlands. Research into complex societies in
              other parts of the world has demonstrated that full understanding can be gained
              only when individual sites are viewed from this broader perspective. Drs.
              Underhill and Feinman will use survey techniques which were developed and have
              been broadly applied in Middle America and test their feasibility in the
              Shandong region. They will conduct a systematic survey of a 50 km square region
              and the results will provide the basis to design a larger scale project. 
              Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies arose and were
              maintained in many parts of the prehistoric world. Through the comparison of
              individual cases they hope to discern underlying general processes. While it is
              clear that complex societies developed independently in China, and while many
              sites have been excavated, they have not been set into the necessary regional
              contexts. The Underhill-Feiman research is important because it will accomplish
              just this. It will introduce a new archaeological approach to China and further
              collaboration between Chinese and American scientists.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
