Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Flowgraph and Saddlepoint Methods for Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1996      
File        : a9625672

Award Number: 9625672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aparna V. Huzurbazar aparna@stat.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9625672  Huzurbazar    This research involves the application of flowgraph
              and saddlepoint  methods to problems in statistics with particular emphasis on
              prediction  in stochastic networks. Stochastic network models are of current
              interest   in statistics and can be applied to study a variety of natural
              phenomena.  Consider the progression of diseases such as kidney failure,
              cancer,  or AIDS. Of interest is the prediction of a survival time for a
              patient.  Survival times can be thought of as first passage times from one 
              state to another in a stochastic network so that prediction of a  survival time
              for a patient involves analysis of a complex stochastic  network. This research
              is concerned with such prediction.  Methodology is developed for computation of
              Bayesian  predictive distributions for stochastic networks in situations 
              involving a multitude of covariates and heavily censored data.   These methods
              are used in conjunction with generalized linear models   and proportional
              hazards models, so that predictive distributions as well as    predictive
              hazards and predictive survival functions for   first passage times between any
              two states of a disease, or more generally,  stochastic networks, are computed.
                %%%   This is a study of flowgraphs which extends beyond   the natural
              emphasis area of  survival analysis  into several diverse areas of  engineering
              systems.  Flowgraphs were originally developed in the engineering sciences  to
              design and analyze complex systems. For example, these systems could be  
              descriptions of a manufacturing process, the reliability of  an artificial
              organ, or the predicted time to completion of a  building project. The analysis
              of flowgraphs traditionally has been  hampered by computational difficulties.
              Current engineering methods   involve time-consuming computer simulations. The
              computational  aspects of this research are based on saddlepoint
              approximations.  Saddlepoint approximations are high performance
              computationally intensive   techniques that provid e fast and accurate
              approximations to these problems.   The results developed here are applicable
              in the areas of reliability, and   industrial, electrical, and systems
              engineering, in addition to survival  analysis.  ***
