Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Global Continuation Methods in Nonlinear Elasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9625830

Award Number: 9625830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21320              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Healey tjh10@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              6/3/96    Dear Dr. Hariharan:    Our Department Financial Assistant is now
              working up a new budget  in  accordance with your recommendations from today. 
              She will mail  it out  sometime tomorrow for your non-official approval, before
              we sign  it, etc.  Is a Text format OK for this, or would it be better to fax
              it to  you?    I am prepared to make a best effort attempt to meet the original
               scope of  the work, given the reduced budget.    Here is the abstract that you
              requested:  *************    DMS-9625830: Global Continuation Methods in
              Nonlinear Elasticity    P.I.: T.J.Healey    Abstract.    We plan to carry out
              research in global nonlinear analysis of  partial  differential equations of
              nonlinear elasticity.  A major thrust  of the  proposed work will be focused on
              problems involving phase change  (weak  solutions and loss of ellipticity). 
              The analysis of such models  at a very  general level is fundamental to the
              understanding of martensitic  transformations and shape-memory effects, which
              are observed in  many  advanced engineering alloys.  Some interesting problems
              of  classical  nonlinear elasticity will also be considered.  The work has two 
              major  goals: (i) To obtain new qualitative results and detect new  phenomena -
              of  both mathematical and physical significance; (ii)  To obtain new 
              global-continuation (existence) results in problems of 2 and  3-dimensional 
              elasticity - including problems involving phase transformations.   In 
              classical problems (rubber elasticity), tools developed by Healey  and 
              co-workers in previous NSF-sponsored work will play an important  role.  For 
              phase-change problems, an entirely new approach based upon  higher-gradient 
              regularization, global continuation and singular limits is being  proposed.   
              Broadly speaking,the proposed work will provide important  mathematical 
              underpinnings to difficult nonlinear problems arising in  traditional 
              engineering fields like structural & mechanical engineering and  also in  more
              modern areas like materials scien ce. The work has the  potential to:  (i)
              provide new mathematical tools for the analysis of hard  problems of 
              engineering practice,leading ultimately to safer and more optimal  design of 
              structures; (ii) lead to a better understanding of the nonlinear  material 
              behavior of certain engineering alloys, with potential  applications to 
              manufacturing engineering and the design of non-passive or  "smart" 
              structures.      *********    Let me know if this is not acceptable - I'll be
              happy to make  changes.    Thanks,    Tim Healey
