Title       : CAREER: Towards a New Generation of Multimedia Storage Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9625013

Award Number: 9625013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leana Golubchik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Efficient storage organization and access is of central  importance to the
              advent of large scale multimedia systems.  Multimedia  applications, ranging
              from video-on-demand (VOD) to  medical tele-presense or large scale scientific
              computations,  involve storage and retrieval of large volumes of information 
              subject to a spectrum of real-time constraints.  Current  storage systems are
              inadequate to address the needs of multimedia  systems.  Indeed, various recent
              experiments in delivering VOD to  populations of several thousand customers
              have established  storage access as a key barrier to success.  There is thus a 
              growing need for a new generation of high-performance storage  technologies
              that can efficiently support large scale multimedia  systems.    The main goal
              of the proposed research is to develop novel  architectures and resource
              management algorithms for multimedia  storage systems that will result in
              orders of magnitude  performance improvements.  The main thesis pursued here is
              that a  storage system can exploit intrinsic, non-random, access 
              characteristics of multimedia applications to accomplish  dramatic performance
              improvements.  This research  effort will  have several important contributions
              to the study of multimedia  systems in general and to their storage
              technologies in  particular.  It will seek to characterize storage access
              patterns  of the broad spectrum of multimedia applications and study 
              techniques to take advantage of these characteristics in  improving storage and
              access efficiency.  The proposed study will  consider the entire storage
              hierarchy, study the entire pool of  resources and how these resources
              interact, as well as devise  methods for incorporating application and workload
              constraints  and characteristics into resource management techniques.  Such 
              media-aware, workload-aware, and application-aware storage  organization and
              access mechanisms can significantly improve  performance of a storage server. 
              ***
