Title       : Acquisition of a Powder X-ray Diffractometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9625851

Award Number: 9625851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Donahue edonahue@.liu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Azzedine Bensalem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Long Island U Brooklyn
	      University Plaza
	      Brooklyn, NY  11201    718/403-1011

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9625851  Donahue    With this award, we will carry out a comprehensive research 
              program to develop x-ray microbeam diffraction and direct  imaging techniques
              based on Bragg-Fresnel optics.  The two  main objectives of our development
              effort are: 1.) to  develop high quality Bragg-Fresnel optics by employing the 
              state of the art nanofabrication technologies and thorough  theoretical
              investigation of the optical properties of Bragg-  Fresnel lenses (BFL) by
              computer simulation, with an  ultimate goal of producing BFLs with - 50 nm
              resolution; and  2.) to develop experimental methods for effectively  utilizing
              BFLs in a broad array of x-ray analytical methods  widely used in advanced
              materials and biological research,  including x-ray diffraction (e.g., small
              and macro-molecular  crystallography), small angle scattering, nanometer 
              resolution hard x-ray imaging (tomography and microscopy),  and nanostructure
              characterization of electronic materials.  By the first year, we will fabricate
              linear and circular  BFLs; during the second year we will design and begin 
              construction of a BFL based x-ray transmission microscope.  In the third year
              we will develop a BFL-based  microfluoresence microscope for elemental
              characterization.  %%%  We are in a strong position to undertake the
              development of  Bragg-Fresnel optics at the University of California, Santa 
              Barbara.  We have access to the unique combination of  resources essential to a
              BFO development program:  state of  the art x-ray facilities (including access
              to synchrotron  beamlines) for characterizing BFLs and submicron to  nanometer
              microelectronics fabrication facilities  (particularly Electron Beam
              Lithography and reactive ion  etching capabilities) for producing the BFLs. 
              These  resources are available to us on campus through two NSF  supported
              research centers: the Materials Research  Laboratory (MRL) x-ray facility and
              the Nanotech, the UCSB  branch of the National Nanofabrication Users Network
              (NNUN).  ***
