Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Viscous Incompressible Magnetohydrodynamics: Analysis and
               Numerical Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9625096

Award Number: 9625096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Schmidt pgs@cam.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amnon J. Meir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625096  Schmidt    Magnetohydrodynamics (or MHD) is the theory of the
              macroscopic   interaction of electrically conducting fluids with a magnetic
              field. In the   viscous incompressible case, MHD flow is governed by the
              Navier-Stokes   equations and the pre-Maxwell equations of the magnetic field.
              The latter   will in general transcend the region of conducting fluid and,
              ideally, extend   to all of space. It is mostly this feature, the
              electromagnetic interaction of   the fluid with the outside world, which gives
              rise to challenging problems of    mathematical analysis and numerical
              approximation.  In earlier work, the   authors have developed a novel approach
              to viscous incompressible MHD   that avoids some intrinsic difficulties of
              traditional approaches by   employing fluid velocity and current density
              (rather than velocity and   magnetic field) as the primary variables. The
              velocity-current method has   been successfully applied to prove the
              well-posedness of certain stationary   MHD flow problems and to develop an
              efficient finite-element algorithm   for the numerical approximation of
              solutions.  One objective of the   proposed research is to extend the
              velocity-current method, both   analytically and numerically, to more complex
              stationary problems, as they   arise in liquid-metal technology and other
              applications. Major tools will be   integral-equation methods, mixed
              variational formulations, and the coupling   of finite-element and
              boundary-element methods. In another direction, a   suitable generalization of
              the velocity-current method will be employed to   analyze time-dependent MHD
              flow problems. Initially, the focus will be on   qualitative properties of the
              ensuing systems of integro-differential   equations, via Faedo-Galerkin and
              semigroup methods; ultimately, the goal   is again the design of efficient
              algorithms for the numerical approximation   of solutions in physically
              realistic situations.    Magnetohydrodynamics (or MHD) is the theory of the
              macroscopic   interaction of el ectrically conducting fluids with a magnetic
              field. It is of   importance in connection with many engineering problems, such
              as   sustained plasma confinement for controlled thermonuclear fusion, liquid- 
              metal cooling of nuclear reactors, and electromagnetic casting of metals. It  
              also finds applications in geophysics and astronomy, where one prominent  
              example is the so-called dynamo problem, that is, the question of the origin  
              of the Earth's magnetic field in its liquid metal core.  Due to their practical
                relevance, MHD flow problems have long been the subject of intense cross- 
              disciplinary research, but except for relatively simple special cases, the  
              rigorous mathematical and numerical analysis of such problems is largely  
              terra incognita. The authors have recently developed a novel approach to an  
              important class of MHD flow problems that circumvents some intrinsic  
              difficulties of traditional analyses. The objective of the proposed research is
                to further pursue this approach in order to design qualitative and  
              quantitative methods for the mathematically rigorous and computationally  
              efficient solution of MHD flow  problems in physically realistic situations.
