Title       : Acquisition of Rheometer and Laser for in situ Optical Measurements of
               Flow-Induced Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9625856

Award Number: 9625856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103322             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Pine pine@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric F. Matthys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              L. Gary Leal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9625856  Pine  Over the past ten years, University of California, Santa Barbara 
              has become one of the premier centers for research on complex  liquids and has
              made fundamental advances in the understanding of  polymer solutions, colloidal
              suspensions, surfactant systems, and  biomaterials.  Research on these systems
              is highly  interdisciplinary with participants from several departments 
              including Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering,  Materials, Chemistry,
              Physics, and Biology.  The study of the  flow behavior of these systems has
              been a central and consistent  focus, with many innovations being developed at
              UCSB.  %%%  This award is for the acquisition of a commercial fluids  rheometer
              and an argon ion laser in order to develop a high  performance measurement
              system capable of making simultaneous  rheological and optical measurements. 
              The instrument will be  used to study the relationship between flow and
              structure in  complex fluids.  The rheometer is capable of making dynamic, 
              transient, and steady state measurements of shear and normal  stresses in
              macromolecular solutions and suspensions.  To this  rheometer, we will add the
              capability of performing several  optical measurements including small and
              large angle light  scattering, microscopy, and flow birefringence.  The optical
               measurements will provide crucial information about structural  changes which
              accompany rheological changes of the fluid under  study.  By simultaneously
              performing both rheological and  structural measurements, this instrument will
              significantly  advance the state-of-the-art and provide a unique and powerful 
              tool for understanding the flow and processing of complex fluids.  ***
