Title       : Acquisition of a Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope for Nanotexture and
               Microcharacterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9625692

Award Number: 9625692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301871             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter N. Kalu Kalu@eng.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Justin Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simone C. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hamid Garmestani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick J. Foreman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9625692  Kalu      This award supports the acquisition of a Scanning 
              Transmission Electron Microscope (STEM) as the next step in  the growth and
              development of the materials research  community at two major academic
              institutions, Florida  Agricultural and Mechanical University (FAMU) - a 
              minority/HBCU institution, and Florida State University  (FSU), together with
              the Center for Materials Research and  Technology and the National High
              Magnetic Field Laboratory.  The research projects address the need for 
              microcharacterization of technologically important materials  in a number of
              fields such as advanced aluminum-based  aerospace alloys, composites, high
              strength conductors, high  temperature alloys and electronic thin films.  The
              primary  objective in acquiring an STEM with a nanotexture analytical 
              capability is to enable the faculty and researchers at FAMU  and FSU to perform
              research in the area of materials  characterization.  This includes, but is not
              limited to  nanotexture analysis, nanophase identification and in-situ 
              deformation and annealing studies.  The equipment will  compliment our existing
              texture facility and therefore  provide a unique microanalytical capability for
              advanced  research on an international scale.  %%%  The primary objective in
              acquiring an STEM with a  nanotexture analytical capability is to enable the
              faculty  and researchers at FAMU and FSU to perform research in the  area of
              materials characterization.  This includes, but is  not limited to nanotexture
              analysis, nanophase  identification and in-situ deformation and annealing 
              studies.  The equipment will compliment our existing texture  facility and
              therefore provide a unique microanalytical  capability for advanced research on
              an international scale.  ***
