Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Interactions of Commutative Algebras with Analysis,
               Geometry and Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1996     
File        : a9625308

Award Number: 9625308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen E. Smith kesmith@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625308  Smith    The Career Development Plan combines a research program in
              commutative  algebra with an educational program for graduate and undergraduate
               students at the University of Michigan.     Most of the proposed research is
              part of a broader program to  illuminate the connections between analytic ideas
              such as differential  operators and $L^2$-estimates with characteristic $p$
              techniques in  commutative algebra such as tight closure. The goals of the
              proposed  research are: (1) to apply characteristic $p$ techniques towards a 
              solution of Fujita's Conjecture in algebraic geometry; (2) to  understand
              vanishing theorems for cohomology of line bundles on complex  varieties in
              terms of tight closure; (3) to study the ring theoretic  properties of
              differential operators on non-smooth varieties by using  reduction to
              characteristic $p$ methods; and (4) to study a particular  instance where there
              appears to be a direct link between $D$-modules  and modules with an action of
              Frobenius. Parts (I) and (II) of the  Career Development Plan outline specific
              methods by which the research  will be conducted. The main tools are closure
              operations on ideals,  such as the tight closure and the integral closure, and
              the Frobenius  action on local cohomology. A computer project suitable for a
              graduate  student is proposed as a method for understanding the module
              structure  of a ring over its ring of differential operators.        Part (III)
              proposes a four year plan to teach both graduate and  undergraduate students
              projective algebraic geometry and computer  algebra while engaging them in
              state of the art research.    The proposed project is a greatly expanded
              version of research already  in progress on sparse systems of parameters and
              Noether Complexity.  This long term research and educational project includes
              plans for a  new graduate course at the University of Michigan stressing the
              use of  computers in algebraic geometry, and for a junior level seminar for 
              majors in mathematics and computer scien ce in which teams of  undergraduate
              students led by a graduate student learn projective  geometry through
              self-discovery.  The research begun in this seminar  will be expanded to a full
              scale research project on computer algebra.  This project will culminate in a
              conference in which students present  their findings to a broader audience.    
              Part (IV) addresses the educational and human resources aspects of  thePIs
              career goals. A program to bring real-life practitioners of  mathematics in
              business and industry to the undergraduate classroom is  proposed. The
              objectives are to simultaneously motivate the curriculum  and introduce
              students to people like themselves who have used  mathematics to create a
              successful career.
