Title       : Highly Ordered Polymeric Materials via a Monomer Self-Assembly Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9625433

Award Number: 9625433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322153             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Gin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1045,1773,9161,9178,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9625433  Gin  This CAREER grant details the research and educational plans  of
              the Principal Investigator:  A research program dedicated  to the synthesis of
              new polymeric materials is described, as  well as several new approaches to
              graduate and undergraduate  education.  Aside from chemical structure, one of
              the most  important factors in realizing the intrinsic properties of  materials
              is extended order on the small scale.  Order on  the molecular level such as
              crystallinity permits  cooperative interactions between molecules in the
              material  for improved properties on the macroscopic level.  However,  in
              materials science, varying degrees of order are obtained  in synthetic polymers
              and composites typically via post-  synthesis processing (i.e.,
              stretch-aligning).  As materials  chemists, one of the issues that  we would
              like to address  is whether we can control or induce bulk order in materials 
              through the structural design of the constituent molecules,  instead of through
              post-synthesis processing.  Specifically,  we are interested in exploring the
              use of  self-organizing  monomers based on liquid crystals as highly organized
              media  for the construction of a variety of sophisticated polymeric  materials.
               We applying this approach to two areas of  materials research:  (1) The
              synthesis of new piezoelectric  polymers in which order and bulk symmetry can
              be controlled  on the molecular scale.  (2) The synthesis of highly  organized
              polymeric composites in which nanometer-scale  geometry can be predetermined
              through liquid-crystalline  matrix monomers.  %%%  Several ideas for the
              improvement of chemical education at  both the undergraduate and graduate
              levels are also  proposed.  Among these ideas is a modular approach to 
              undergraduate chemical education, where students will be  able to pick the
              topics they are interested in learning  about, in any order they desire.  This
              would be modeled  after special- topics lectures in the Modular Chem 
              Consortium (MC2), and NSF sponsored modular teac hing program  aimed toward
              developing and evaluating a modular approach to  teaching chemistry in the
              first two years of the  undergraduate curriculum.  ***
