Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Approximation Problems in Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9625813

Award Number: 9625813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115872             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luca Dieci dieci@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625813  Dieci       The investigator and his collaborators analyze and
              implement  techniques to resolve outstanding computational issues in 
              differential equations.  The following topics are studied: (1)  computation and
              bifurcations of invariant tori, (2) computation  of Lyapunov exponents and
              applications, (3) orthogonal  factorizations for time-dependent matrices and
              applications, (4)  Riccati equations, (5) logarithms of matrices and matrix 
              interpolation.  In each case the project combines theoretical  analysis and
              extensive computational testing, and develops  working codes.  Several aspects
              of this research are being carried  out in collaboration with Timo Eirola, Jens
              Lorenz, Erik Van  Vleck, Alessandra Papini, Aldo Pasquali, and Ph.D. students 
              Michael Keeve and Benedetta Morini.  The investigator analyzes and  implements
              algorithms to compute invariant tori of  parameter-dependent dynamical systems
              and to study their  bifurcations.  He studies ways to monitor Lyapunov type
              numbers on  the tori in order to detect their smoothness and understand and 
              classify their bifurcations and breakdown mechanisms.  The whole  issue of
              computation of Lyapunov type numbers (or Lyapunov  exponents) is also
              considered.  Quantitative information on these  numbers is needed in order to
              obtain a reliable stability picture  for time-dependent linear systems and
              nonlinear systems.  He  examines applications of this tool to error control. 
              Efficient  and reliable techniques for computation of Lyapunov exponents 
              require study of orthogonal factorizations of time-dependent  matrices.  The
              investigator works on numerical solution of Riccati  equations, and develops an
              integration code based on Gauss  Runge-Kutta schemes.  He studies techniques
              for computation of  logarithms of matrices, emphasisizing the case of a
              sequence of  slowly varying matrices and its application to interpolants of 
              matrices.  Finally, he is writing a book on numerical dynamical  systems with
              emphasis on direct approximation techniques .       Differential equations are
              one of the most powerful models  to describe physical phenomena.  They provide
              a compact  description of a system by giving a continuous description of how  a
              given position in (phase) space of a system at a particular  time influences
              neighboring positions in the immediate future.  The price for such a compact
              description is that we then need to  solve the differential equation in order
              to obtain information  about the system.  Solving the differential equation,
              except in  trivial cases, cannot be done exactly, and we must resort to 
              numerical techniques.  The investigator devises numerical  techniques for
              differential equations, motivated by the following  question: What should we
              approximate, what should we monitor?  Existing techniques are typically very
              reliable at tracking a  specific solution (a trajectory) of the equation over a
              short  time interval, but they are inadequate to provide a complete 
              description of the system, which would need knowledge about many  solutions
              over long time intervals.  This need is particularly  true for models of
              complicated phenomena, which may take the form  of systems of coupled
              oscillators and coupled nonlinear  differential equations, or high-dimensional
              time-varying matrix  equations.  These cases are of interest in this project
              and find  applications in almost all applied sciences: from the study of 
              complicated biological and chemical interactions, to the optimal  control of
              time-dependent manufacturing processes, to stability  assessment for
              time-dependent phenomena in general.  In concrete,  the following issues are
              studied. (1) For many systems, all  solutions eventually approach a finite
              region of phase space, and  then stay there afterwards.  The investigator
              devises techniques  that target directly such eventual finite regions, to avoid
               transient behavior. (2) A differential equation, because it  mimics a given
              physical system, usually has built in some key  properties.  For example, in
              modeling a rigid rotat ion, the  solutions of the differential equation should
              be rigid rotations.  Unfortunately, most numerical techniques will fail at
              preserving  even such a seemingly simple characteristic.  The failure of a 
              numerical method to preserve essential characteristics might have  very
              unpleasant effects.  The investigator works on techniques  that maintain the
              relevant geometrical properties of the  solutions. (3) For a given model, the
              fundamental question is the  one of stability.  How robust is the model? How
              sensitive are  solutions to small changes in the model? Or, in a deceivingly 
              different but mathematically equivalent way, how fast is a system  approaching
              its eventual state? The investigator studies ways to  monitor indicators in
              order to answer these questions, and also  applies this study to assess error
              propagation during  discretization.
