Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Menodromy Kernels, Discriminant Loci, and Fundamental
               Groups of Algebraic Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9625463

Award Number: 9625463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Domingo Toledo toledo@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators study fundamental groups of algebraic varieties.  Particular
              attention is given to the fundamental groups of complements of discriminant
              loci.  These complements parametrize smooth hypersurfaces in projective space. 
              They are studied by means of the period mappings associated to the variation of
              Hodge structure of the hypersurfaces and of varieties naturally associated to
              the hypersurfaces.  The corresponding monodromy representations are also
              important in this study.  Zariski studied the case of zero-dimensional
              hypersurfaces (points on the projective line), where the fundamental group is
              the braid group of the sphere and the corresponding representations include the
              permutation and  Burau representations.  The investigators are making progress
              on corresponding questions for higher-dimensional hypersurfaces.  Particularly
              precise results are being obtained for curves and surfaces of low degree.   As
              one application, the investigators use this knowledge to construct  examples of
              projective and quasi-projective varieties with interesting fundamental groups. 
               This research is in the field of algebraic geometry, which is one of the
              oldest fields in mathematics as well as one of the most active at present. 
              Originally it treated the geometry of curves in the plane defined by polynomial
              equations.  Now it treats similar questions in many dimensions, uses techniques
              from many branches of mathematics and theoretical physics, and it turn it
              influences these branches, and other subjects.   This research is concerned
              with specific interactions between algebraic geometry and topology that have
              been developed not only  by mathematicians but also by physicists studying
              Feynman integrals.  The present research also concerns the study of braids. 
              Braids have been central to several branches of mathematics since their
              mathematical introduction by Emil Artin in 1925, and their influence continues
              to expand in mathematics and physics.
