Title       : Chiral Interferometry and Density Functional Theory of Magnetic Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2000 
File        : a9625497

Award Number: 9625497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Harris raharris@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Robert Harris of the University of California, Berkeley is   being
              supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational   Chemistry Program
              to continue his research in two distinct areas.  The   first deals with the
              existence of superpositions of handed molecules,   while the second deals with
              magnetic responses in molecules.  A basic   consequence of quantum mechanics is
              the existence of superpositions of   handed molecules.  Until recently there
              were no suggestions as to how to   prepare these fundamentally quantum objects.
               Harris has very recently   advanced an elementary theory of how the
              superpositions may be prepared,   and their coherence assessed.   One purpose
              of the proposed research is   to generalize both the idea of these coherences
              and construct more   realistic and varied ways of preparing and measuring them.
               Given their   production in a variety of conditions, it is proposed to
              investigate the   behavior of these superpositions.   In particular, the PI
              will examine   how they collide with other systems, as well as how their
              coherence   degrades in condensed matter.  Finally, rotational coherences which
              are   chiral will also be investigated.  The second area involves magnetic  
              responses in molecular systems which historically involves calculating  
              diamagnetic and paramagnetic contributions separately.   A recently   proposed
              magnetic field density functional theory emphasizes that density   functional
              theory allows,  in principle, a gauge invariant theory to be   automatically
              constructed.   In addition, all responses are universal   functionals of the
              electron density in the absence of magnetic fields.     Calculations of
              magnetic responses will be carried out.   In addition, a   theory of changes in
              electron density due to distant groups and their   relation to magnetic
              responses, will be constructed.    The first aspect of this work deals with the
              existence of superpositions   of handed molecules, which arrises as a basic
              consequence of quantum   mechanics.  Until recently there were no suggestions
              as to how to prepare   these fundamentally quantum objects.  The PI and his
              colleague J.Cina,   have very recently advanced an elementary theory of how the
                superpositions may be prepared, and their coherence assessed.   In work   to
              be carried out, a detailed theory will be constructed for real   molecules so
              that experiments may be carried out.   A second purpose is   to see how the
              excited state photochemistry, which is a consequence of   the superpositions,
              differs from that of ordinary handed molecules and   mixtures of those
              molecules.  The second aspect of this work deals with   Nuclear Magnetic
              Resonance.  (NMR) is used to determine the structure of   a variety of
              molecules and more complex systems such as proteins and RNA.     The assessment
              of these structures is based on the variation of the NMR   parameters of the
              system with changes in geometry and environment.  The   research proposed is
              based on a new method by the PI for calculating in a   systematic way the NMR
              parameters.  The method is based on the electron   density of the system, and
              how it changes with geometry and environs.     This way of looking at NMR
              parameters has no precedent and should be   useful in the construction of the
              electron density itself.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
