Title       : Acquisition and Development of X-Ray Instrumentation for the Study of
               Nanostructured Materials and Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1997     
File        : a9625965

Award Number: 9625965
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luz J. Martinez-Miranda martinez@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Briber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9625965  Martinez-Miranda    The properties of very thin films often deviate
              from the  bulk due to confinement and surface energy effects.  The  deviation
              from bulk properties depends on parameters such as  film thickness, strain and
              processing conditions and these  variations can depend on the depth within the
              film.  Many  advances in thin film processes are the result of advances  in the
              techniques used to characterize these materials.  The  development of high
              intensity x-ray sources has made  possible in-house studies of aggregate
              samples, quasi-  ordered materials, very small samples and thin films. 
              Currently in the Materials and Nuclear Engineering  Department at the
              University of Maryland there are a range  of problems being studied which
              depend on the  characterization of structure in the nanometer size scale.  This
              award provides support for the purchase of an 18 kW  rotating anode x-ray
              source and the construction of a small  angle x-ray scattering (SAXS)
              diffractometer.  The two ports  on the rotating anode source would be used for
              the small  angle diffractometer and for a thin film four  circle 
              diffractometer already available in the Department.  This  equipment will allow
              us to perform small angle analysis of  thin film and bulk morphology in the
              size range of 1-100 nm  and in-plane and depth profile analysis of thin films. 
              %%%  The on-going research problems which can be addressed  immediately by the
              use of the four circle diffractometer  would include:  thin films of liquid
              crystals,  semiconducting multilayers, films of metal aggregates and 
              disordered clusters, polymer nanofoam dielectric films, and  reactive polymer
              blend interfaces.  In addition to many of  the systems listed above, the SAXS
              system could be used  immediately to solve current research problems in area
              of:  structure of metal aggregates and clusters, structure of  highly branched
              dendrimer molecules and characterization of  reactive polymer blends.  All of
              these research areas are  current projects in the Dep artment where the
              application of  x-ray scattering techniques would have a dramatic and 
              substantial impact on solving outstanding structural  characterization and
              application problems in the fields of  electronic devices, optical display
              devices and polymer  blends.  ***
