Title       : Career: Stratified Volume Holographic Optical Elements for Volume Holographic
               Data Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9625040

Award Number: 9625040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory P. Nordin nordin@ece.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625040  Nordin  There is a growing need for high capacity, rapid access data
              storage  systems for applications such as video-on-demand, multimedia, large
              scale  databases, and storage of huge sensor-derived data sets. As has been
              widely  recognized, volume holographic storage concepts offer the potential of 
              achieving such large data storage capacities in an extremely dense format  with
              rapid data access times. However, holographic materials issues  continue to
              pose challenges for the practical realization volume  holographic data storage
              systems. A key aspect of this situation is the  lack of suitable thick (-1 cm)
              permanent holographic media for read only  and write-once-read-many (WORM)
              systems. Such media are a critical  requirement for many potential applications
              in which dynamic storage is not  needed.    The primary goal of the research
              plan in this proposal is to solve this  problem by developing a method whereby
              currently available thin-film  holographic media with otherwise attractive
              properties can be used in  applications such as volume holographic data storage
              that require thick  holographic media. Specifically, stratified volume
              holographic optical  elements (SVHOE's) composed of thin holographic layers
              interleaved with  optically homogeneous buffer layers to form thick (~1 cm)
              structures will  be developed to emulate the properties of conventional bulk
              holographic  media. Previous studies of SVHOE's indicate the presence of a
              periodic  angular sensitivity, which is unsuitable for volume holographic data 
              storage in which the Bragg effect is used to minimize crosstalk between 
              superimposed pages of recorded information. We will investigate removing  this
              periodic angular sensitivity by modifying the SVHOE structure in two  ways;
              first, with random buffer layer thicknesses and, second, with thicker 
              holographic layers that themselves operate in the Bragg diffraction regime. 
              Critical issues to be addressed include: (1) generalization of SVHOE 
              diffraction models and analysis to the  case of highly multiplexed gratings, 
              (2) development of models of SVHOE diffraction behavior for random buffer 
              thicknesses and thick holographic layers, (3) experimental verification of  the
              predictions of such models, (4) determination of the fundamental and  practical
              limits of SVHOE data storage capacity, and (5) determination of  optical
              crosstalk and bit error rate performance both theoretically and 
              experimentally. The outcome of the proposed work will be a thorough 
              exploration of SVHOE diffraction properties and how such structures can be 
              configured and used for holographic data storage systems.    The education plan
              proposed herein is composed of three elements. The first  is a new
              interdisciplinary graduate course for both computer engineering  and optics
              students on the use of optics and photonics in electronic  digital parallel
              computing. It will be taught by a computer engineer and an  optical scientist,
              and will include both optics and parallel computing  topics. The intent is to
              provide optics and computer engineering students  with a broad enough
              background that they can investigate in a highly  practical manner the
              potential of enhancing electronic digital computers  through the employment of
              optical devices and subsystems. The second  element of the education plan is
              the development of a one credit hour  enrichment laboratory for undergraduate
              students on 3-D displays. During a  six-week summer term, students will be
              exposed to a wide range of 3-D  display topics, from basic concepts to
              state-of-the-art research and  development work. They will personally explore
              the effects of various 3-D  visual cues with special hardware available at UAH,
              and they will make  their own holograms. The third element is a K-12 outreach
              program targeted  at high school and elementary school students. High school
              students will be  involved in a one day hands-on holographic display seminar as
              part of UAH's  Introduction of Minorities to Engineering and Technology
              program. In  addition, a series  of science and engineering topics will be
              developed for  a half-day elementary school presentation that will include many
               demonstrations and examples and one or two short projects. The aim of the 
              presentation will be to encourage inquisitiveness and curiosity about  physical
              phenomena, and to provide a sense of the purpose of science and  engineering
              activity. All of these educational activities will involve the  use of optics
              for practical applications, which is also the basic thrust of  the research
              project.  ***
