Title       : Competitive Analysis of Problems in Resource Allocation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9625844

Award Number: 9625844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171809             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra Irani irani@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on algorithms that work with limited  information.  This
              research investigates on-line algorithms in  the context of various resource
              allocation problems in operating  systems.  This project is taking a twofold
              approach to each  problem.  The first approach is to perform a theoretical
              study  using competitive analysis.  The competitive measure is used to 
              evaluate on-line algorithms by measuring their performance in  relation to the
              optimal off-line algorithm which has available to  it complete information
              about the problem instance at hand. This  effort plans to perform empirical
              tests to evaluate the  performance of various on-line algorithms in a realistic
              setting.    The first two problems addressed in this project are related to 
              memory management.  The first of these addresses ways in which  information
              about the access pattern of a program available at  compile time can be used to
              guide page replacement and  prefetching policies.  The investigator will
              develop methods  which can take a program and automatically generate
              appropriate  memory management instructions to be inserted in the code.  The 
              second problem addresses allocating memory resources among users  in a
              multiprocessing environment.  This work addresses this  problem for general
              multiprocessing environments as well as  methods specifically designed for
              database systems.  The third  problem examines preemptive load balancing
              strategies over local  area networks under a probabilistic model for process
              duration.  The last problem is an investigation of disk scheduling  strategies.
               This work is motivated by the fact that the  availability of larger cheap
              memory has made it possible to have  long queues of disk updates which means
              that more sophisticated  scheduling policies can have a greater impact on disk 
              utilization.  ***
