Title       : Identification of Round Rotor Generator Stability Constants from Operating Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1998       
File        : a9625662

Award Number: 9625662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158696             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Keyhani keyhani.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625662  Keyhani    In the next few decades, the power systems of the United
              States  will face bottlenecks in transferring bulk power due to the  virtual
              absence of new transmission line construction.  The  increased utilization of
              existing facilities to cope with the  growing magnitude of bulk power transfers
              and third-party access  will require a closer look at system stability
              requirements.  In  addition, as more thyristor-based controllers, including
              phase  shifters, advanced static VAR compensators, and modulator series 
              capacitors, are used to control bulk power networks, accurate  dynamic models
              of generators, will be required for precise  control of bulk power transmission
              systems.    Rapid development in computer technology has facilitated 
              computerized instrumentation of power systems.  In the next few   years, power
              systems will be monitored and operated by many  computers in a decentralized
              control structure.  Computers will  be installed in power plants to monitor the
              input and output  responses of the generators.  The operating responses can be
              used  for the development of generator models and tracking of key  parameters
              for incipient failure detection.    The objectives of this project are to
              develop a new technology  for identification of round rotor generator models
              based on  operating data resulting from disturbances occurring in power 
              systems.  The operating data for this project will be provided by  Arizona
              Public Service Company (APS) for Cholla and Four Corners  units (see Section H
              for APS letter of support).  Signal  processing and system identification
              methods will be used to  develop the technology for estimation of stability
              parameter of  the round rotor generators from the operating data.    The
              significance of the proposed research is that engineers at  utility companies
              can use the proposed technology to develop  generator models for use in power
              system control and stability  studies.  Furthermore, by tracking the machine
              parameters and  turns ratio of stator and f ield windings, the incipient faults
                of synchronous machines can be detected in real time.  Finally,  the results
              of this research can be used by the power systems  control engineers to
              accurately predict and control the dynamic  performance of
              electronically-controlled future power systems.  ***
