Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Semi-parametric Methods for Longitudinal Data Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9625350

Award Number: 9625350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi S. Altman nsal@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9625350  Altman      Linear and generalized linear mixed models are powerful
              tools for  analysis of longitudinal response curves.  This research focuses  on
              semi-parametric extensions of these models: recovery of the  underlying curve
              via self-modeling methods,  estimation and  inference for parameters which
              summarize covariate effects and  the use of the curves as data in statistical
              routines such as  analysis of designed experiments, discriminant analysis and 
              clustering.  A novel feature of the representation is separate  parametrization
              of the time and response axes which allows the  covariates to act on the
              response both by changes in the level of  response and by time dilation or
              contraction.  Estimation and  inferential techniques are under development. 
              The methodology  has applications in the many areas in which mixed models are 
              used:  medical and epidemiological research, environmental  studies, public
              policy assessment, and economics, to name just a  few.     In many studies the
              response of each individual can be thought of  as a curve over time.  Examples
              include the the progression of  HIV infection in patients under different
              treatment programs and  the degradation of pesticides in different soils under
              different   environmental conditions.  Similar types of data are used for 
              public policy assessment, economics, psychology, pharmokinetics  and numerous
              other fields.  Understanding the evolution of  response over time can be
              critical to interpreting the effects of  treatments and other influences. 
              Recent advances in statistical  modeling have greatly improved the efficiency
              of estimating  treatment effects but require that the investigator specify the 
              shape of the response curve and the types of treatment effects  expected prior
              to analyzing the data.  The methods developed for  this project allows the
              shape of the response curve to be  determined from the observed data, while
              retaining simple  measures of treatment effects.  A novel feature is that 
              treatments which stretch  the time scale of the response (for  example, by
              slowing disease progression) are handled in a natural  way.  Related work
              covered by this project involves the use of  response curves to find subgroups
              with similar response evolution  and for classification of individuals into
              groups, such as  healthy and diseased.
