Title       : Development of an Ellipsometric Microscope for Measuring Liquid Surface
               Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1996       
File        : a9625867

Award Number: 9625867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce M. Law bmlaw@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Law  9625867    The structure of droplets or the texture of films at liquid 
              surfaces are indicative of the underlying surface  interaction forces, line
              tension and surface elasticity. The  understanding of surface interactions is
              important in many  physical, chemical, and biological processes.  For example, 
              surface interactions control the phase diagram of Langmuir  films which are
              frequently used as model systems for  biological membranes, surface
              interactions also control the  spreading properties of a liquid droplet which
              is important  in the understanding of lubrication, similarly surface 
              interactions influence the orientation of liquid crystal  molecules which are
              used in many modern optical devices.  There are therefore many scientific and
              technologically  important reasons for studying the structure of droplets and 
              the texture of films at liquid surfaces.  With this award,  we will develop an
              improved ellipsometric microscope to  study liquid surface structure.  It
              overcomes various  technical difficulties associated with a previous 
              ellipsometric microscope design which could only study thin  films or droplets
              on solid surfaces.  For isotropic films or  droplets at liquid surfaces the
              improved ellipsometric  microscope can determine the film thickness as a
              function of  position with ~0.1 nm thickness resolution and ~1 um spatial 
              resolution, while for anisotropic films of  known thickness  and composition at
              a liquid surface the ellipsometric  microscope can determine the variation in
              film anisotropy  with ~l um spatial resolution.  This instrument will be used 
              to study the nucleation and growth of wetting droplets as  they coalesce to a
              uniform wetting film.  The instrument  will also be used to study topological
              defects in freely  suspended liquid crystal films of known thickness.  The 
              unbinding of disclinations and dislocations is believed to  play an important
              role in the 2-D melting process of freely  suspended liquid crystal films.  %%%
               As far as we are aware this will be th e first instrument of  its kind which
              can determine the absolute tilt angle of  anisotropic films with micrometer
              spatial resolution  (provided the film thickness is known).  This instrument 
              should therefore prove of general use in many other  situations of interest to
              the scientific and industrial  community.  For example, it could be used to
              study tilt  angle transitions and defects in Langmuir films.  It could  also be
              used in monitoring the quality control of  anisotropic films in an industrial
              or research setting, for  example, it can quantify the uniformity of
              hightemperature  superconducting films or Langmuir-Blodgett layers.  ***
