Title       : The Kinetics and Photochemistry of Tropospheric HOx Cycling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9625437

Award Number: 9625437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $352695             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Hynes ahynes@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9625437   Hynes   This project has three components that relate to the
              tropospheric cycling of the hydroxyl radical, the most important oxidant in the
              troposphere. The first project involves laboratory measurements of the quantum
              yield for production of singlet oxygen atoms in ozone photolysis at long
              wavelengths (295-350 nm). In the atmosphere, these singlet oxygen atoms react
              with water vapor to form hydroxyl. In the laboratory, the singlet oxygen atoms
              will be monitored directly via Resonance Enhanced Multiphoton Ionization
              (REMPI) or indirectly through Laser-Induced Fluorescence (LIF) of hydroxyl
              radicals and by monitoring the appearance of triplet (ground state) oxygen
              atoms via 2-photon LIF. These types of measurements are needed in order to
              accurately model hydroxyl radical production in the atmosphere under all
              conditions.   The second component addresses the kinetics and photochemistry of
              the hydroperoxyl radical. Many of its reactions appear to proceed via complex
              mechanisms and several display complex pressure and water vapor dependencies.
              Because of the difficulties involved with high pressure kinetic studies of this
              radical, its kinetic database is limited. The photofragment-LIF technique will
              be used for kinetic studies of the reactions of hydroperoxyl with nitric oxide,
              nitrogen dioxide, and carbonyl compounds. Temperature and pressure dependencies
              will be determined under realistic atmospheric conditions. The extension of
              this technique to the study of radical-radical reactions, in particular the
              reactions of hydroperoxyl with peroxy species, will be investigated.   The
              third component addresses the kinetics and mechanism of the reaction of
              hydroxyl radical with isoprene. Isoprene is a significant sink for hydroxyl in
              clean and moderately polluted environments and the oxidation appears to proceed
              via the formation of an addition complex. These complexes can further react
              with molecular oxygen, ozone, nitrogen dioxide, or nitric oxide, and the
              effective rates and temperature depen dencies of the reactions can be a complex
              function of gas composition and pressure. The pulsed laser photolysis-pulsed
              laser induced fluorescence technique will be used to perform direct kinetic and
              mechanistic studies of this reaction under realistic conditions of atmospheric
              composition and temperature.  ***
