Title       : Carbon Monoxide in Comets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9625360

Award Number: 9625360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46205              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Womack   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1207,1214,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625369  Womack    The ability to observe and obtain data on comets provides a 
              unique opportunity to study the formation of the solar system,  since they are
              the best-preserved specimens of the gas and grains  of the protosolar nebula
              cloud out of which the solar system was  formed.  Investigating the chemical
              composition of comets is a  powerful way to gain insight into the different
              populations of  comets and the outer planetesimals.  This research project has 
              three main goals:  1) To investigate how the comae of comets,  whose formation
              are driven by Carbon Monoxide (CO)-ice  sublimation, differ from those whose
              formation is driven by  water-ice sublimation, 2) To search for chemical
              composition  differences between short-period comets and giant planetesimals, 
              which share a common origin in the Kuiper Disk in our Solar  system, and 3) To
              investigate the origin of cometary CO.    Carbon monoxide sublimation rates
              will be obtained by analyzing  millimeter/submillimeter-wavelength spectroscopy
              observations of  three comets experiencing C0-ice, but not water-ice,
              sublimation.  Observations of five comets, whose formation of their comae are 
              driven primarily by water-ice sublimation, will also be made.  These data from
              the observations will be used to test models of  CO-ice sublimation that occurs
              directly from the nucleus and to  probe variations between short-period comets
              and Kuiper Disk  objects.  Since CO may derive from photolysis of methanol and 
              formaldehyde, millimeter/submillmeter wavelength spectra of H2CO  and CH3OH
              abundances will be obtained for several productive  comets to search for
              correlations between CO and these candidate  precursor molecules.  Visible and
              near-IR wavelength imaging will  be performed on the comae in conjunction with
              spectroscopy to  test models of CO production from the dust and to monitor 
              cometary outbursts.    Pedagogical research indicates that students often learn
              much  more from collaborative learning, rather than from a solely  independent
              effort.   A group of 3-5 students will work together  as an observing team that
              will be responsible for implementing an  observing program of photometric
              imaging using a 16-inch  telescope, on the Erie, Pennsylvania campus, that is 
              equipped  with a Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) detector.  The observing team 
              will have two goals: 1) To track comets over several months to  search for
              outburst activity and 2) To obtain simultaneous images  of a comet when
              millimeter/submillimeter wavelength spectroscopy  is being carried out at
              another telescope in another part of the  country.  ***
