Title       : Visualizing Learned Models and Data for Exploratory Machine Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9625726

Award Number: 9625726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Armand E. Prieditis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Visualizing Machine Learning Models and Data  Choosing an appropriate model for
              the data or changing an existing model are both essential, but difficult steps
              in machine learning. Surprisingly, the trend in machine learning research has
              been to ignore that wonderful visual information processor--the  human--and to
              build learning systems that are stand-alone and fully automated.  This research
              is attempting to show that machine learning is a task best shared by humans and
              machine because of their unique capabilities.  Human vision gives us built-in
              features such as motion detection and direction, stereoscopic depth, edge and
              shape detection, grouping by color, light, and shade.  Because of these
              features, humans are good at quickly recognizing complex patterns in visual
              data, quickly detecting outliers in visual data, and visually manipulating a
              model to reflect the data.  In contrast, machines are good at fast, accurate,
              and repetitive calculations necessary for machine learning. Not only is an
              appropriate division of labor between human and machine important, but a
              visualization of a learned model can serve as a visual explanation of why the
              learned model fits the data.  Finally, visualization together with direct
              manipulation of the model can make it easier for the user to change the model
              to reflect the data, immediately see the results, and focus on interesting data
              regions. The impact of this research is that is may become easier to find good
              learning models and to visually understand why they are good.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
