Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Combinatorists of New England One Day Meetings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1996     
File        : a9625446

Award Number: 9625446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27375              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Haas rhaas@math.smith.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann N. Trenk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ethan M. Coven  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Eaton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth P. Bogart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael O. Albertson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Birgitte Servatius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a series of one day meetings on combinatorics  and graph
              theory. The investigators will hold five meetings per  year at Smith College.
              These meetings provide a seminar  atmosphere for combinatorists and graph
              theorists in the  northeastern part of the United States.  This research is in
              the  general area of Combinatorics. Combinatorics attempts to find  efficient
              methods to study how discrete collections of objects  can be arranged. The
              behavior of discrete systems is extremely  important to modern communications.
              For example, the design of  large networks, such as those occurring in
              telephone systems, and  the design of algorithms in computer science deal with
              discrete  sets of objects, and this makes use of combinatorial research. In 
              addition, the type of enumerative information being sought in  this project has
              been of use in the design of geometric  algorithms for problems in robotics and
              motion planning.
