Title       : Spin- and Circular-Polarized Resonant Photoemission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9625340

Award Number: 9625340
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Edward L. Wolf                          
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris Sinkovic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9625340  Sinkovich    The  objective  of this research is to determine the 
              nature  and behavior   of  quasiparticles  in  strongly  correlated  electron 
              systems,   where   band  formation  plays  an   important  role.  Conventional 
               difficulties  in  analysis   of   spin  polarized  photoemission  from 
              non-ferromagnets  will  be  circumvented  by combining  the spin analysis with 
              circularly polarized soft-x-ray radiation  in  the  vicinity  of the 
              transition  metal  2P  (L3) photoabsorption edge.  These photo emission
              measurements will  for the   first  time   extend  the  application  of  
              spin-resolved  photoemission  spectroscopy  to all  transition  metal 
              materials irrespective                    of    their  magnetic   state        
                               (ferromagnetic,  antiferromagnetic, etc.). The new techniques
              will be  applied  to simple  transition  metal  oxides, high-Tc 
              superconductors,  and narrow  band ferromagnets. The  experiments will use
              state-of-theart  third generation  synchrotron radiation sources in Europe and
              the United  States.  %%%  The  fundamental  understanding  of  magnetic 
              materials  remains incomplete, particularly for the class of materials  in
              which  the magnetic electrons interact strongly with one  another. These  are
              highly   correlated  electron  systems,  and  include  the   high temperature 
              superconductors. This  project exploits state-of-theart   synchrotron 
              radiation  sources  to  produce   photoemitted electrons  from magnetic 
              materials. An analysis of the  magnetism (spin  polarization)  of  the 
              photoelectrons   yields   crucial  information about the magnetic materials
              themselves. The  results of  the  project  will test current theories  of  the 
              origin  of magnetism  in highly correlated electron  systems. The information
              is  primarily of fundamental  interest and the results may lead to development
              of new  magnetic and superconducting materials.  ***
