Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Asymptotic & Singular Perturbation Methods for
               Bifurcation Problems with Applications"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9625843

Award Number: 9625843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Erneux terneux@ulb.ac.be  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Erneux  9625843       The investigator studies a series of mathematical problems
               connected with singular perturbation and bifurcation problems.  The project is
              divided in three distinct parts.  A.  Slow passage  problems: He analyzes the
              slow passage through resonance in a  solid state laser and the slow passage
              through locking in a  semiconductor laser.  Both problems are motivated by
              current  experimental work.  B.  Laser instabilities: Many practical lasers 
              are known to exhibit damped or sustained pulsating oscillations.  He
              investigates a series of specific problems and develop  asymptotic methods for
              their description.  C.  Biological and  medical problems: He works on three
              different problems, one  involving coupled chemical reactions, a model for
              bursting  oscillations, and a class of moving boundary problems modeling  the
              controlled release of pharmaceutical drugs.  The common  difficulty is the
              failure of a standard quasi-steady state  approximation.       The investigator
              studies a series of practical problems that  are difficult, long, or expensive
              to investigate by using  traditional experimental methods.  This is the case
              for many  commercially used lasers that exhibit undesired instabilities and 
              for new pharmaceutical devices that allow long releases but are  poorly
              understood physically.  Many of these problems are  described by mathematical
              models that are studied numerically.  These numerical simulations can be long
              because the models depend  on several parameters or because of numerical
              difficulties.  The  main goal of the project is to determine analytical
              solutions of  these problems that may then reduce or guide the numerical 
              simulations.  Each specific problem described in this project  (lasers -
              biology) is motivated by current collaborations with  experimental groups or
              with biophysicists.
