Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems in Probability Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1998  
File        : a9625458

Award Number: 9625458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172796             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry Kesten kesten@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625458 Kesten  ABSTRACT   The investigator studies several problems in
              probability theory. More specifically, the main problems deal with
              first-passage percolation, ordinary percolation and central limit theorems for
              optimizing functionals. For the usual first-passage percolation model the
              proposer wishes to establish some general properties of the asymptotic shape of
              the set of points which can be reached in a large time; this asymptotic shape
              should be strictly contained between a romboid and a cube. He also is
              investigating how the asymptotic shape varies when one allows the passage-time
              of a vertex to be dependent on how many neighbors have already been reached. In
              ordinary percolation the investigator (with several colleagues) is
              investigating the distribution of the size of the largest cluster in a big box,
              and hopes to establish a number of analogues to known results for the largest
              cluster on a complete graph in which each edge is present with a certain
              probability (the Erdos-Renyi random graph). Finally, in a different area, he is
              attempting to prove central limit theorems for some optimizing functionals
              which are somewhat similar to minimal spanning trees.   The problems in this
              proposal are motivated in part by statistical physics and by behavior of
              certain optimization algorithms. Through the first part of this work one gains
              insight into the large time behavior of some stochastic growth models, and how
              variations in the local rules (i.e., rules for the behavior of the system in
              small neighborhoods) influence the global behavior of the system. The research
              on optimization algorithms deal with quantities which depend on the distances
              between a large number of randomly chosen points.  These studies are expected
              to give us an understanding of the typical behavior of some difficult and
              important optimization problems for which no good computational methods are
              known at present.
