Title       : Stochastic Modeling of Ion Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9625384

Award Number: 9625384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Rice rice@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625384  Rice and Fredkin  ABSTRACT    The investigators do research on a number
              of problems that arise  in modeling the stochastic behavior of ion channels and
              in the  statistical analysis of patch clamp recordings: (1)   investigations of
              maximum likelihood estimation of kinetic  parameters with particular attention
              to computational aspects and  the interpretation and assessment of the kinetic
              models;  (2)  investigation of problems which arise in the analysis of records 
              in which multiple channels are present;  (3) investigation of   the utility of
              models which are based on stochastic differential  equations in contrast to
              Markov models with a discrete state  space, which have typically been used in
              the field.  Ion channels  are large proteins that allow current in the form of
              ions to pass  across cell membranes.  These channels are the fundamental units 
              of current conduction in the neuromuscular system and the  interrelationships
              of a large variety of ion channels shape the  electrical signals of the system.
               The study of ion channels is  useful not only for the purpose of deeper basic
              understanding of  the neuromuscular system, but also because ion channel
              function  is implicated in various neuromuscular diseases and because 
              pharmaceutical products, such as anesthetics, are targeted at ion  channels. 
              An experimental technique known as the "single channel  patch clamp" allows
              recordings to be made which provide important  information about these
              channels.  The apparently random  character of the recorded currents has led to
              the widespread use  of statistical models for the dynamics of the channels and
              to the  use of statistical techniques of data processing.  The very large 
              quantity of data produced by such recordings poses substantial  computational
              problems which must be resolved in order that  important information about the
              channels can be extracted  efficiently.  This interdisciplinary proposal is
              primarily  concerned with the development of effective statistical and 
              computational  methodology.
