Title       : Synthesis and Optical Properties of Complex Metal Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9625151

Award Number: 9625151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302314             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colby A. Foss cfoss@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1045,1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9625151     Foss    The general research goal of this Career
              proposal is to synthesize metal particles of sufficient  uniformity and
              complexity such that they engender optical behaviors heretofore unseen in 
              metal particle composite materials. This project deliberately targets particles
              whose  dimensions lie between ca. 5 nanometers (nm) and 50 nm. Metal particles
              within these limits  contain a sufficient number of atoms so as to possess bulk
              optical properties, but are small  enough that they do not scatter appreciably
              light at visible and longer wavelengths. The  synthetic work will focus
              specifically on three basic structural types: 1) cylindrical particles 
              composed of two or more different elemental subunits; 2) branched metal
              nanostructures; and  3) chiral nanostructures. Type 1 particles will be
              prepared via template synthesis, which  involves the electrodeposition of
              metals into the pores of anodic aluminum oxide films. The  template synthesis
              method will allow for electrochemical control of both cylinder radius and 
              length, as well as the sequence of the different metal layers of which the
              cylinder is  composed. Type 2 particles will be prepared in similar fashion to
              type 1, except that the  anodic alumina films will be grown using a voltage
              reduction regime that produces branched  pore structures. The preparation of
              chiral structures (Type 3) will involve the vacuum  deposition (at grazing
              incidence) of gold and other metals onto nanoscopic silver post  substrates
              prepared via template synthesis. Oxidation of the silver foundation will
              facilitate  release of the chiral particles into solution. Structural
              characterization of all particles will  involve transmission electron
              microscopy (TEM) and/or atomic force microscopy (AFM).  UV/Visible and
              near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopic studies of particles in all three types will 
              be done to assess the relationship between particle structure and plasmon
              resonance  absorption. Composite materials containing oriented particles of
              types  1 and 2 which have  been prepared so as to lack inversion symmetry will
              also be evaluated for bulk second  harmonic generation (SHG). Solutions
              containing type 3 particles are expected to exhibit  optical activity, and will
              thus be examined using circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy.  %%%  This project
              is concerned with the application of template synthesis methods to prepare 
              nanoscopic metal particles of unprecedented geometric and compositional
              complexity. By virtue  of their complexity, these particles are expected to
              exhibit optical behaviors that are normally  considered the sole province of
              molecular entities. The project will lead to a more detailed  understanding of
              the relationship between metal particle structure and composite optical 
              properties. Furthermore, as some of the anticipated properties have not been
              observed previously  to arise from gross particle asymmetry, this project may
              also lead to new applications of  nanoscopic metal particles. Relatedly, since
              the proposed synthetic strategies are based primarily  on chemical and
              electrochemical methods (as opposed to photo- and electron beam 
              lithographies), they will be easily available to many research groups.
