Title       : CAREER: Investigation of Femtosecond Dynamics and Optical Switching in Active
               Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9625532

Award Number: 9625532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mansoor Sheik-Bahae msbahae@astro.phys.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: ECS-9625532    Principal Investigator: Mansoor Sheik-Bahae   
              CAREER: Investigation of Femtosecond Dynamics and Optical Switching in Active
              Semiconductors    The principal goal of this research is to investigate the
              feasibility of ultrafast all-optical switching in semiconductor laser
              amplifiers waveguides  Data transmission networks must adapt to ever increasing
              demand for high transmission capacity.  Although optical fibers provide a large
              usable bandwidth (30 terabits/sec) a serious limitation on system bandwidth has
              been imposed by the current electronics switching (less than 10 gigabits/sec).
              Active semiconductors can be a key technology to break this bottleneck.  Very
              large and fast nonlinearities have been recently discovered in active
              semiconductor laser diodes, which are based on fundamental processes inherently
              different form those of the passive semiconductors used heretofore.   This
              research will further develop and exploit the nonlinear optical properties of
              active semiconductor lasers within the context of development of a practical
              ultrafast switching device. The following fundamental studies will be carried
              out: measurements of gain and refractive nonlinearities in semiconductor laser
              amplifiers as function of wavelength, current density and temperature, and
              design of an optical switch in an active directional coupler geometry.  Then,
              optical switches will be fabricated by the Center for High Technology Materials
              at the University of New Mexico and their performance tested. Successful
              completion will have direct implications for faster exchange of data in
              fiber-optic communications networks and for the national leadership of the U.S.
              in the important area of electro-optic communications.
