Title       : Mathematical Sciences: An Algebraic Measure of Computational Information Content
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9625445

Award Number: 9625445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel Lerman mlerman@math.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                DMS-9625445  PI:  Manuel Lerman  University of Connecticut      Degree Theory
              analyzes the possible situations in which a program's oracle  has the knowledge
              to predict how other specified oracles will act, through  the use of an
              algebraic structure introduced by Post and Kleene fifty years  ago. One of the
              main goals of Degree Theory has been to determine how  closely this algebraic
              structure captures the notion of information  content. In other words, there is
              a desire to determine whether oracles  with different information content look
              different algebraically, or- if  not- whether this inability to differentiate
              between two oracles is  reflected in the algebraic structure in some more
              subtle way.  The main  tool for the study of the algebraic model of information
              content is the  "priority method".  Lerman is a co-developer of a framework
              which allows  one to apply this technique in very general situations.  The
              technique has  not only been applied to study structural questions about
              information  content, but has found applications to other areas of mathematical
              logic  and computer science.    Modern computing is interactive; programs pause
              frequently to ask for input  from an oracle (the user) before continuing.  Thus
              the true universal model  for computing is one in which an oracle is appended
              to the computer. This  project concerns the analysis of situations in which one
              oracle has the  knowledge to predict how other specified oracles will act.
              Lerman is a  co-developer of a framework which is used to analyze such
              programs, and is  currently refining this framework to more easily determine
              whether such  programs can be combined without producing conflicts. Insights
              obtained  from the framework will apply to a range of situations involving
              computer  programs with users who are providing input to the programs.
