Title       : Evaluating Independence in Linear and Generalized Linear Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9625897

Award Number: 9625897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Christensen fletcher@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Bedrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 96-25897  Christensen     The investigators study methods for evaluating the
              independence  assumption in standard normal theory linear models and in 
              generalized linear models.  The research develops both formal  tests and
              informal graphical procedures for evaluating  independence.  The methods are
              based on the formation of rational  subgroups of observations that were
              collected under similar  circumstances.  The formal tests for independence are
              based on  models that incorporate the subgroups into the linear structure.  
              For normal theory linear models the procedures can also be used  to provide
              tests for variance component models.  The researchers  study the properties of
              these tests.    Statistical models are widely used in the physical and social 
              sciences for prediction and for understanding the relationships  among factors
              in complex systems.  Statistical models are used in  environmental evaluation,
              to improve industrial processes, and to  develop chemical processes.  An
              important assumption made in most  statistical models is that observations are
              obtained  ``independently'' of one another.  This assumption has important 
              ramifications for the validity of statistical procedures.  Assuming
              independence, when it is not true, can lead to erroneous  conclusions. 
              Unfortunately, this assumption has traditionally  been very difficult to
              evalute.  The investigators develop new  methods for evaluating the validity of
              the independence  assumption and study the behavior of those methods.
