Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Implementation of Accurate Methods for Practical
               Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9625440

Award Number: 9625440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336153             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Casella   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin T. Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. DiCiccio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9625440  Casella    Although much research effort has been expended on
              developing   accurate approximation techniques such as saddlepoint and improved
                likelihood-based procedures, less effort has been devoted to assessing the  
              types of inferences that can be achieved in practice by using these methods.  
              When this assessment is made, it is seen that the available inferences are  
              severely limited in scope by both statistical issues and computational  
              complexity. These two sources of limitation are intertwined, as   computational
              difficulties can arise from the inherent demands of   valid frequentist
              procedures. Ensuring the correctness   of frequentist inferences can be
              computationally intensive, requiring   many cumbersome evaluations of the
              complex expressions that derive   from higher-order asymptotic approximations.
              In this research, these   difficulties are overcome by a synthesis of
              frequentist and Bayesian   inference, as the latter approach is simpler in
              outlook and implementation.    In particular, the computational problem is
              addressed by adapting   sampling-based techniques, such as Markov Chain Monte
              Carlo, to attain   the higher-order approximations. The result will be improved
              inferences   in a wide variety of practical problems; examples include logistic
              regression,   censored data models, and variance component estimation.   %%% 
              In more complicated statistical models, statisticians have typically relied  
              on approximate methods of inference, primarily because exact methods   can be
              both difficult to derive and complex to compute. However,   the validity of
              these approximate methods rests on the sample size being   large, which means
              that such methods may not be accurate in problems   with small samples. Now
              that inexpensive computational power has   become widely available,
              statisticians are attempting to use the more   realistic and complex models.
              For example, models used in analyzing   global environmental change, or DNA
              assessment, are quite complex.   The focus of t his research is to develop
              statistical methods that offer   both accuracy and computational tractability. 
              This work necessarily blends   high-performance computing with modern
              statistical methodology.   ***
