Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Diffusion Processes and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a9625782

Award Number: 9625782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel W. Stroock dws@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625782 Stroock  ABSTRACT   The principal investigator intends to continue his
              research into the applications of integration on path spaces to various
              problems.  In the past, he helped develop techniques which lead to the
              derivation of formulae for solutions to certain partial differential equations
              in terms of integrals over an appropriate path space.  He then used these
              formulae to obtain quite refined estimates on the solutions represented.  More
              recently, he has been trying to use related methods to gain insight into
              differential geometric problems suggested by recent physical considerations. 
              In particular, he hopes to learn how to construct and analyze diffusions on
              spaces of loops in a Riemannian manifold.    In the Newtonian picture of the
              world, physical objects were thought to follow definite paths, and the goal of
              physics was to predict the path that a particular object would follow.  In the
              quantum mechanical picture, physical objects are no longer thought to be so
              constrained.  Instead, they are thought to governed by physical laws which can,
              at best, predict the probability of their following a particular path.  The
              Newtonian and quantum picture are reconciled by the fact that, with
              overwhelming probability, a massive object will follow a path which is close to
              the one predicted by Newtonian physics.  On the other hand, when dealing with
              very small objects, the Newtonian prediction can be quite far off, and one can
              only make predictions by averaging over spaces of paths.  For this reason, it
              becomes important to understand how to average over paths.  The mathematical
              theory of averaging over various path spaces has been one of the central themes
              of  mathematics in this century.  Its applications are numerous and are not
              restricted to physics.  Indeed, over the past two decades, very sophisticated 
              path-space models are the basis on which commodities and financial instruments
              of all sorts have been priced.  Averaging over path spaces is the  central
              theme of the research proposed in  this project.
