Title       : Saddlepoint Methods in Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1998      
File        : a9625396

Award Number: 9625396
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Butler walrus@stat.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9625396  Butler    This research is concerned with the application of
              saddlepoint methods in four areas: (a) First they are used to construct
              intractable likelihoods in dynamic stochastic systems models so as to allow for
              statistical inference.  This leads to the computation of performance
              characteristics for these systems with applications in production management
              and systems reliability.  (b) Secondly, saddlepoint methods are used to
              approximate special functions arising in Statistics and applied Mathematics
              including Bessel and hypergeometric functions of scalar and matrix argument. 
              The matrix argument functions cannot always be accurately approximated and,
              when they can, the computational times needed are often prohibitive.  By
              contrast , the saddlepoint approximations are highly accurate and can always be
              computed in a couple seconds. (c) Saddlepoint approximations are developed for
              the multivariate cumulative distribution functions arising in sampling theory. 
              (d) Saddlepoint theory related to the generalized inverse Gaussian
              distributions is also investigated.    Concepts and models for stochastic
              systems and networks are now found in all areas of science.  Examples include
              various models for computer system networks, ecosystems, production management
              methods in manufacturing, and reliability testing.  The first part of this
              project develops methods that will allow for statistical inference with such
              models so as to assess various performance characteristics related to such
              systems.  These evaluations in turn allow for the description and prediction of
              outcomes for the system as well as for system construction and design. 
              Ultimately these model-based descriptions and predictions pertain to the real
              phenomena that underly the models.  The second major part of this proposal
              concerns the approximation of important special functions that arise in the use
              of statistical methods and applied mathematics.  Special functions were created
              by mathematicians because they repeatedly arise in the  solution of a wide
              range of important scientific problems. The special functions addressed here
              are called Bessel and hypergeometric functions and are perhaps the most
              important, widely encompassing and general of the special functions in
              Mathematics.  These functions historically have played a central role in the
              physical and mathematical sciences and are extremely difficult to compute.  The
              proposal suggests highly accurate approximations to these functions that can be
              computed in a fraction of the time that is currently needed for their
              approximation.
