Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Symplectic and Contact Structures and Low Dimensional
               Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9625654

Award Number: 9625654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Gompf gompf@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625654  Gompf       This project deals with the interplay between symplectic
              and   contact geometry and low-dimensional topology.  A main focus of the 
              investigation is on the topology of Stein surfaces, or complex affine 
              varieties that are also smooth 4-manifolds.  These are automatically  Kaehler,
              hence symplectic, and when their topology is finite, they  have natural
              boundaries that are contact 3-manifolds.  The principal  investigator is
              studying Stein surfaces by means of their handle  decompositions, addressing
              questions such as the following:  Which  3-manifolds arise as boundaries of
              Stein surfaces, i.e., which  3-manifolds admit holomorphically fillable contact
              structures?  Which  homotopy classes of 2-plane fields on a given 3-manifold
              can be  realized in this manner?  How many Stein surfaces can have a given 
              3-manifold as boundary?  Through the known connections between  symplectic and
              4-manifold topology (such as Seiberg-Witten theory),  this should relate to the
              classification problem for smooth  4-manifolds as well as to other problems,
              such as the slice genus of  classical knots.       One of the cornerstones of
              modern mathematics and physics is the  notion of a "manifold," that is, a space
              that looks locally like  ordinary Euclidean space.  Curves are 1-dimensional
              manifolds, and  surfaces are 2-dimensional.  The space in which we live is 
              3-dimensional, and the universe, space-time, is an example of a  4-manifold.  A
              basic question of topology is what shapes such spaces  can have.  Ironically,
              the familiar dimensions 3 and 4 are by far the  least understood -- even less
              understood than dimensions 5 and higher,  where there is more "room" in which
              to work.  Almost nothing was  known about the shapes of 4-manifolds until 15
              years ago, when the  revolutionary breakthroughs of Freedman and Donaldson led
              to an  explosive growth in knowledge and techniques.  In the last few years, 
              it has become apparent that topology in low dimensions (i.e., 3 and 4)  is
              intimately linked to sympl ectic and contact geometry.  These  latter fields
              emerged from classsical physics (Hamiltonian  mechanics), and in recent years
              they have become rapidly developing  independent subjects with connections to
              various other areas of  mathematics (for example, algebraic geometry).  The
              principal  investigator has been studying 4-manifolds since the initial 
              breakthroughs in the field, and he is now examining the connections  between
              low-dimensional topology and symplectic and contact geometry.  Using
              topological techniques, he recently expanded the scope of  symplectic geometry
              by showing that symplectic structures are much  more common than originally
              believed.  He is currently producing new  examples of contact structures, and
              new tools for analyzing them.  He  anticipates that continued investigation of
              the interplay between  these three areas should lead to further insight into
              all three.  ***
