Title       : CPMSA: "Hartford Partnership for Minority Student Achievement"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9625121

Award Number: 9625121
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $950000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Daniel   (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Hartford Public Schools
	      153 Market Street
	      Hartford, CT  061031029    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Hartford Public Schools requests $2,966,810 for a five year  project to
              implement its Comprehensive Partnership for Minority  Student Achievement. 
              Through the efforts of a strong alliance led  by the Hartford Public Schools,
              it will more than double the number  of minority students enrolling in and
              successfully completing  precollege courses and triple the number advancing on
              the SMET  studies in four year colleges by the last year of the grant cycle.   
              The Hartford Public Schools is the largest school district in  Connecticut and
              the second largest in New England, enrolling 24,745  students in thirty-two
              schools.  Enrollment is 94% minority, about  equally divided between African
              American and Hispanic populations,  making it the highest percentage minority
              enrollment LEA in New  England.  Hartford's school dropout rate, poverty index,
              and  adolescent crime and unemployment are among the highest in the  nation. 
              Among Connecticut's 166 school districts, Hartford  students score the lowest
              on State tests in reading, mathematics  and science.  Less than 2% of
              graduating seniors go on to pursue  SMET studies in higher education.    
              Confronting these dismal statistics, the Hartford Board of  Education, with
              help from parents, teachers and leaders from higher  education, government,
              business and the community has made school  reform its top priority.  Guided by
              a reform-spirited Strategic  Plan, the school system has set its sights on
              revolutionizing its  educational program.  hartford's CPMSA both complements
              and  strengthens Plan initiatives, and a successful application will  enable
              Hartford to focus even greater energy and resources in the  critical area of
              science and mathematics teaching and learning.   The Hartford CPMSA will lead
              systemic change through the strategic  use of resources in an environment of
              true partnership.    Hartford's proposed CPMSA builds on past NSF-funded
              efforts to both  the school system and its partnering agencies and focuses on 
              revitalizing science and mathem atics education through (1) teacher  training
              (2) student enrichment (3) parent involvement and (4)  curriculum reform and
              enhancement.  1,016 teachers--90% of K-6  generalist teachers and 100% of 7-12
              mathematics and science  teachers--will be trained through the project and all
              of Hartford's  students will benefit, with 4,470 directly participating in
              after  school, weekend and summer activities.  Hartford and its partners  are
              prepared to offer a wide and coordinated array of activities  through the CPMSA
              and through the extensive leveraging of resources  that build on recent
              efforts.  These efforts include: a nationally  acclaimed, Fund for the Reform
              and Improvement of Schools and  Teaching pilot project integrating mathematics,
              science and  technology at the middle school level; a new K-12 mathematics 
              curriculum and a strengthened 7-12 science curriculum; a network of  higher
              education providers and representatives from government,  business, industry,
              and community-based organizations geared  towards attracting and keeping
              minorities in college; a new set of  performance standards across all grade
              levels in all content areas;  and a recently authorized technology improvement
              budget.    The Hartford area is rich in science, mathematics, engineering and 
              technology-infused business and industry.  However, the gap between  the
              competencies of Hartford school system graduates and local  labor market needs
              has widened during the last ten years, with  industry becoming increasingly
              technological and complex at the  same time that student performance has
              plummeted.  The CPMSA is an  opportunity to prepare Hartford's youth for future
              employment in  these industries as it raises the number of minority SMET 
              professionals in the population and contributes to lasting reform  of the
              Hartford Public Schools.  ***
