Title       : Directed Synthesis Using Zintl Ion Building Blocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9625378

Award Number: 9625378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Dorhout pkd@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9161,9178,AMPP,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Peter K. Dorhout, Department of Chemistry, Colorado State University,   is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program   of the
              Chemistry Division under a Faculty Early Career Development Award    for
              studies of the use of Zintl ion building blocks in material   synthesis. 
              Lanthanide Zintl ion materials will be synthesized using a   building block
              concept whereby known Zintl phase structures are examined   as precursors to
              and reactants for new materials.  New lanthanide   selenodiphosphate and
              selenoantimonate compounds will be prepared from   molten salt reactions at
              moderate temperatures.  These materials are   expected to show thermoelectric
              and/or antiferromagnetic behavior, and   these properties and their theoretical
              basis will be examined. The   educational plan is aimed at developing new
              laboratory experiments in   X-ray diffraction and thermal analysis, a new
              course in solid state   chemistry, and an undergraduate research program. 
              Unique combinations of elements from various portions of the periodic   table
              can result in solid state materials with new and useful properties.    The
              synthesis of these types of materials is frequently approached in an  
              empirical, trial-and-error fashion by combining the elements at high  
              temperature.  This proposal combines Zintl ions, negatively charged   clusters
              of main group elements, with lanthanide metals in a systematic   and rational
              building block approach.  This approach is aimed at   developing low
              temperature synthetic routes to these materials, and a   fundamental
              understanding of the basis for the observed physical   properties of these
              materials. These materials may posess unique   conducting and magnetic
              properties, and the advances in synthetic   methodology and in the theoretical
              understanding of these systems will   allow for the design of new materials
              with predictable physical   properties.  The educational plan focuses on
              curriculum development,   student mentoring, and research.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
