Title       : Acquisition of a High Frequency Measurement System for Mesoscopic Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9625550

Award Number: 9625550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232330             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Webb rawebb@squid.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Lobb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9625550  Webb  The goal of this project is to elucidate the high frequency 
              properties of mesoscopic structures using a state-of-the-art high  frequency
              low noise measurement system.  During the last decade it  was discovered that a
              wave mechanics approach must be adopted when  describing the propagation of an
              electron through any small  conductor, including insulators and dirty metals as
              well as nearly  perfect crystals. Electron interference effects, which are 
              responsible for many of the large fluctuations observed in  transport
              experiments, can be traced to the existence of large  phase coherence times for
              the wave function of the electron. These  large times in turn have lead to the
              discovery of persistent  currents in normal metals, Universal Conductance
              Fluctuations  (UCF), h/e & h2e Aharonov-Bohm effects, non-local quantum
              effects,  length-independent conductance fluctuations, and an understanding  of
              how these new quantum effects ensemble average to their  classical values. 
              Very little is known about the properties of  the wavefunction which describes 
              systems on time scales comparable to the coherence time (t~10-9  sec).  The
              recent discovery that it is possible to make two  terminal mesoscopic devices
              through which we can control the  passage of electrons, one at a time, by using
              a third capacitively  coupled gate electrode to the sample has generated much
              hope that  these devices might be the transistors of the future.  The 
              frequency at which these single electrons pass through the device  is f=IDc/e
              and is on the order of lx109 Hz for most samples  studied to date.  The
              applications of such a technology are quite  extensive.  They range from
              transistors to ultra-sensitive  electrometers and current standards.  In this
              project we will  systematically explore the high frequency properties of these 
              types of mesoscopic systems by using a new instrument that will  allow us to
              directly measure the high frequency transport and  magnetic properties of our
              samples.  We believe that attemp ts to  probe mesoscopic systems on a time
              scale comparable to the  coherence time of the wavefunction will almost
              certainly produce a  better understanding of the true nature of the quantum
              physics of  these systems.  %%%   Since the physics of small structures
              provides the foundation  upon which future electronic industry technologies may
              be based,  it is extremely important that we identify and understand all the 
              potentially relevant physical properties that these systems  exhibit.  Only
              after these properties are reasonably well  understood can we attempt to
              propose to use any one of them in a  new or improved technology.  The work
              described here is a  relatively new direction for the studies of mesoscopic
              structures:  we believe experiments in the area of magnetic and transport 
              properties of mesoscopic structures are likely to discover new  phenomena which
              have yet to be anticipated and expand our  fundamental knowledge of condensed
              matter science.  ***
