Title       : RUI: Interacting Particle Systems in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1996      
File        : a9625126

Award Number: 9625126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54137              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rinaldo Schinazi schinazi@math.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9625126 Schinazi  ABSTRACT   Interacting particle systems are spatial stochastic
              models on a countable set (usually the lattice).  The investigator uses these
              systems to model several biological phenomena. Many of these models have
              already been considered in  the mathematical biology and physics literature but
              very few rigorous results have been proved. So far most of the mathematical
              theory about interacting particle systems deals with monotone (or attractive)
              systems. When one deals with epidemics, monotonicity does not hold. To prove
              results for non-monotone systems is crucial since so many phenomena in our
              world are not monotone in any (mathematically ) useful way.   Interacting
              particle systems are very useful in studying epidemics. For instance, The
              investigator proposes the following model for the spread of an  epidemic. There
              is a grid of sites and each site is either empty, healthy or infected. Healthy
              and infected individuals give birth to healthy individuals on empty nearest
              neighbor sites. Healthy individuals get infected by infected nearest neighbors.
              Healthy and infected individuals die at different rates. This seems adequate
              for epidemics like the AIDS epidemic for which infected individuals may give
              birth to healthy individuals. One of the results proved by The investigator is
              that, given an infection rate which is large enough, the epidemic will persist
              if and only if the rate at which infected individuals give birth is high
              enough. While the model considered is a gross simplification of the real world
              it does give an interesting idea to test. Namely, is it true that the countries
              where the AIDS epidemic is the most devastating are the countries where the
              rate at which infected individuals give birth is the highest?
