Title       : CAREER: Rare Event Simulation Techniques and Their Applications to Models of
               Computer and Telecommunication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9625291

Award Number: 9625291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Perwez Shahabuddin perwez@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1045,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9625291  Shahabuddin   The research plan for this project focuses on new
              strategies for efficient simulation of computer and telecommunication systems. 
              For many large-scale systems, simulation is one of the few means available to
              analyze system performance, but because these systems must often meet critical
              standards, estimating the probabilities of certain "rare events", e.g.
              overflows from a finite buffer queue or system failures, via simulation may be
              time-consuming and difficult.   The research has two main thrusts:  first, to
              investigate the extension of importance sampling techniques to non-Markovian
              processes, and second, to investigate a relatively new technique called
              importance splitting.  These techniques will be studied in the context of
              queueing and reliability problems.  Collaboration with researcher(s) at a major
              computer systems manufacturer is proposed on performance analysis of high speed
              telecommunications networks."  The educational plan has two specific goals (1)
              to develop an advanced simulation course at the M.S./Ph.D. level that would
              expose students to more modeling and analysis tools; and (2) to expand the
              involvement of talented undergraduate students in  research activities.  The
              investigator will enhance the exposure of students to industrial problems from
              the experiences gained in working directly with a large industrial firm and
              incorporting interactions with industry into the curriculum.   Moreover, to use
              his 5-year industry experience to enhance the exposure of students to
              industrial problems.              The development of efficient techniques for
              simulating  large-scale systems holds the potential for significant
              contributions to the design, control, and analysis of these systems.  The
              principal investigator has previously developed an impressive body of work in
              the area of importance sampling for queueing and reliability problems.  The 
              research builds on this work, and there is strong potential for incremental
              gains.  Moreover, the educational plan promise s to bring many of the results
              of the research back to the classroom.
