Title       : Intelligent Control Concepts for Computer Numerical Control Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2001      
File        : a9625814

Award Number: 9625814
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert G. Bennett   (Principal Investigator current)
              Royce Bowden  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625814 Bowden  The objective of this research is to design and develop a
              prototype sensor fusion adaptive critic neurocontrol system which will generate
              the cut paths for a computer numerical control (CNC) machine given only the
              desired surface shape and the maximum allowable surface error.  This research
              will lay the foundation for the development of software and hardware simplify
              the interface between the product  design and automated fabrication processes
              and to improve product quality.  It attempts a technological leap in adaptive
              controls research for CNC machining processes and a major advance in as well. 
              This group will develop, test, and demonstrate a novel sensor fusion adaptive
              critic neurocontrol system for cutting airfoil shaped ruled surfaces.  The
              neurocontrol system will provide a 5-axis milling machine with the intelligence
              to cut molds for airfoil shapes based on a mathematical description of the
              desired shape.  The neurocontrol system will make use of the multiple sensor
              readings available during the cutting process as inputs to the adaptive critic.
               The sensor information will be fused for dimensionality reduction and to
              provide greater richness of inputs.  The adaptive critic is a powerful method
              for adaptive control.  To maximize the probability of successfully achieving
              the research objective, a cross-disciplinary team of experts has been assembled
              for the project.  Members of the team come from the Department of Industrial
              Engineering at Mississippi State University (MSU), MSU's Raspet Flight Research
              Laboratory (RFRL), and Accurate Automaton Corporation. Mississippi State
              University's RFRL has a strong precision mold making activity and Accurate
              Automation Corporation has an extensive history in neural network system
              development. ***
