Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Inference for Nonparametric Regresssion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9625496

Award Number: 9625496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall Eubank eubank@stat.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 96-25496  Eubank  Problems of inference for parametric and nonparametric
              regression are investigated.  Tests of goodness-of-fit for parametric
              regression models are proposed that derive from the comparison of parametric
              and nonparametric estimators.  This is accomplished for rather general models
              that include generalized linear and time series models.  New methods are
              developed for analytic, asymptotic comparison of these nonparametric type tests
              through the use of intermediate asymptotic efficiency.  These testing ideas are
              extended to more general goodness-of-fit problems, such as testing for
              additivity, where the null model is even nonparametric. Other inference
              problems are also studied, including several proposals for the construction of
              asymptotically valid confidence intervals for nonparametric regression that
              have good finite sample properties.    It is often reasonable to believe in
              many areas of science, such as biology, engineering, psychology, etc., that the
              data being collected is produced by two components: a nonrandom component,
              representing a characteristic of nature common to all individuals or subjects,
              and a random component that accounts for individual variation.  The nonrandom
              component represents the reproducible or predictable aspect of the phenomenon
              being studied and is therefore of considerable interest. In many cases, from
              theoretical considerations or past experience, one can postulate a mathematical
              framework or model that is believed to describe the nonrandom component. When
              such models are correct they can provide useful summary and predictive tools.
              However, an incorrect model can lead to misleading conclusions and inaccurate
              predictions of future events. Thus, it is important to have methodology for
              assessing the accuracy of postulated models for data. This research focuses on
              the development of new tools for this purpose that rely on the comparison of
              two types of estimators for the nonrandom component: namely, an estimator that
              is computed under the assumpt ion that the postulated model is correct and a
              very flexible estimator that does not employ this assumption. The theoretical
              statistical issues that are addressed in this work include the development of
              objective criteria for comparing the two estimators and the determination of
              values for these criteria which indicate that the data does not support a
              postulated model. Other problems that are considered include the use of the
              data to construct intervals that have a known, specified, chance of containing
              the unknown, nonrandom component of the data.
