Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Time Series and Point Processes: Networks and Wavelets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9625774

Award Number: 9625774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Brillinger brill@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9625774  Brillinger  This project has two parts.  A first is to develop
              statistical techniques for dealing with graphical models whose vertex variates
              are time series or point processes.  Part of the motivation comes from problems
              in the neurosciences and in system sciences where one sets down box and arrow
              diagrams meant to provide the flow of information between interconnected units.
               In the neuroscience case the units will be neurons, the data will be the
              firing times and models will developed and fit for the interconnections of
              single units or of groups of units.  Analyses will be carried out for
              experimental data including some collected from neurons distributed through the
              auditory system of the cat.  In various other substantive fields one is also
              interested in detecting the presence of connections and estimating the strength
              of those connections.  The second part of the project concerns the development
              of wavelet variants, for random processes, of some existing ordinary
              statistical techniques.  Wavelets are of use in eliciting signals of
              nonstationary character from time series and images for example.  Both parts of
              the project will require development of complex stochastic models and their
              properties, having in mind practical implementation.     A time series is a
              wiggly line meant to represent a phenomenon fluctuating in time, such as a
              seismogram, an electrocardiogram or an electroencephalogram.  A point process
              is a collection of times at which an event of interest occurs, such as an
              earthquake or a nerve cell firing or changes in mean level (for example of a
              river).  A network is a flow or wiring diagram of interacting entities such as
              nerve cells or cities or computers.  A focus of the research is with the case
              of time series or point processes recorded at each of the units of a network. 
              The time series and point processes are interacting and it is desired to learn
              the strengths and directions of those interactions.  Wavelet analysis is a
              novel method for elicitilg information  concerning phenomena that may be
              changing, from time series or image records.  The problem of detecting and
              estimating change arises often in problems of the environment and in particular
              of global warming.  It is intended to extend the wavelet technique to other
              types of evolving and distributed data such as point processes or
              categorical-valued processes.
