Title       : A Qualitative Framework for Reasoning Under Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9625901

Award Number: 9625901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Y. Halpern halpern@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Agents must reason and act in an uncertain world. The standard approach to
              representing this  uncertainty is to use probability.  While probability has
              many advantages, there are situations  where it seems inappropriate or
              unnecessary.  The  long-term goal of this project is to  understand to what
              extent we can maintain the benefits of probability while using more 
              qualitative approaches. The focus is on one measure of belief, called a
              plausibility measure,  where the plausibility of an event is just an element in
              some partially-ordered space.  Plausibility measures generalize the bestknown
              approaches in the literature, including  probability, possibility (based on
              fuzzy logic), and Dempster-Shafer belief functions. Four main  lines of
              investigation are being pursued:   (1) Default reasoning---using plausibility
              to give  semantics to defaults such  ``birds typically (or normally) fly''. 
              (2) Belief dynamics---using plausibility to capture an  agent's beliefs, and
              defining an appropriate notion of conditioning to capture how these  beliefs
              change over time.  (3) Qualitative decision theory---using plausibility as a
              basis for  a qualitative approach to  decision making.  (4) Complexity
              issues---investigating whether  qualitative reasoning using plausibility is 
              easier than more quantitative reasoning.   This  research should help provide
              tools for a powerful, yet easy-touse, framework for representing  uncertainty. 
              It is hoped that a combination of qualitative and quantitative reasoning under 
              uncertainty will be more effective in providing reasoning ability to
              intelligent agents than  either approach used alone.  ***
