Title       : CAREER: Computer Modeling of Bone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2000      
File        : a9625030

Award Number: 9625030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony M. Keaveny tmk@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625030  Keaveny  The goal is to develop a comprehensive program in  orthopaedic
              biomechanics at UC Berkeley by integrating  research with teaching at both the
              undergraduate and  graduate levels.  Developments from the proposed 
              computatinal research will be incorporated into an  existing undergraduate
              class in biomechanics by way of  introducing a laboratory-based computer
              project.  Other  teaching objectives include:  development of a new  graduate
              course in computational biomechanics;  introduction of research seminars for
              undergraduates and  graduates to assist in career choices; inclusion of 
              undergraduates and graduates in the proposed research;  expansion of research
              and teaching collaboration between  the Departments of Mechanical Engineering
              at UC Berkeley  and Orthopaedic Surgery at UCSF; and development of short 
              videos of experimental procedures and a CD ROM-based  textbook for the
              undergraduate biomechanics class.  The  major research goal is to develop a
              computational  framework for the study of the biomechanics of trabecular  bone
              and to use this framework to address a number of  fundamental issues on the
              mechanical behavior of this  complex biological tissue.  These issues are
              concerned  primarily with the relationships between the mechanical  behavior of
              tissue at the microstructural level vs. the  mechanical properties at the whole
              specimen level.  Specifically, relationships between locations of maximum 
              stress and strain within the specimen vs. trabecular  porosity and architecture
              will be investigated as well as  the failure modes that accompany these trends.
               The  sensitivity of these trends to anatomic site, damage, bone  loss,
              variations in tissue properties, and loading modes  such as tension,
              compression, shear, off-axis, and multi-  axis will also be determined.  In
              collaboration with  researchers from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 
              capabilities will be developed to perform three-  dimensional "high-resolution"
              finite element models of 40  trabecular bone spe cimens, using massively
              parallel  computation on models with up to 100 million elements.  The modeling
              technique will be prospectively validated  against experimental data for an
              additional 40 specimens  of trabecular bone taken from a range of anatomic
              sites.  Finite element parameter studies will then be performed to  address the
              specific research objectives.  Results from  this project will be relevant to
              biological form-function  relations in trabecular bone, aging, diseasae,
              trauma,  drug development, and artificial bone substitutes.  The  computational
              developments will also improve the ability  to perform stress analyses on any
              geometrically complex  structure, even beyond the realm of bioengineering.  ***
