Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Reaction-Diffusion Models for Mathematical Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9625741

Award Number: 9625741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Cosner gcc@math.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Cantrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Cosner  9625741       The investigators study mathematical models for the
              dynamics  of spatially distributed biological populations.  The main goal of 
              the research is to provide a better theoretical understanding of  how the
              spatial aspects of an environment such as size, shape,  and geographic
              variability can affect populations or communities  inhabiting the environment. 
              The underlying motivation is to  address questions about such topics as the
              optimal design for  nature reserves or the likely ecological effects of
              modifying  environments or introducing new species into them.  The 
              investigators construct and analyze mathematical models for the  interactions
              between spatially distributed populations and their  environment and/or other
              populations.  Most of the models involve  partial differential equations,
              primarily reaction-diffusion  equations and systems, often with explicit
              spatial dependence in  the coefficients.  Some of the models are based on
              specific  biological situations, and others are designed to answer more 
              general questions about spatial effects.  These two aspects of the  research
              overlap to some extent.  For example, the investigators  study a model of
              interactions between aphids and ladybird beetles  that involves multiple
              spatial scales.  The modeling techniques  are designed to treat that specific
              system but are also relevant  to other problems involving multiple scales.  A
              primary goal of  the mathematical analysis is determining whether models
              predict  extinction or persistence for the populations they describe.  To 
              address that issue the investigators extend and apply the notion  of uniform
              persistence from the theory of dynamical systems and  search for alternative
              approaches to the analysis of persistence.  Other important components of the
              mathematical methodology are  nonlinear analysis (especially bifurcation theory
              and related  topics), maximum principles and comparison methods, and the 
              spectral theory of elliptic operators.  A secondary research goal  is to 
              obtain new mathematical results that are useful in the  context of
              applications.       The investigators study ways of using mathematics to 
              understand ecological problems.  The problems mostly involve  spatial aspects
              of the environment; for example, how to design  the most effective type of
              buffer zones for nature reserves, or  how to predict the likely effects of the
              fragmentation of natural  habitats on the populations that inhabit them.  The
              problems also  involve interactions between different biological species, for 
              example predators and prey.  The methodology is to express the  essential
              features of a biological system in terms of equations  and then to perform a
              mathematical analysis of the equations to  determine what they predict.  The
              analysis often requires the  development of new mathematical results, which may
              be of use to  other investigators.  A typical goal of the analysis is to 
              determine the effects of various environmental and biological  factors on the
              persistence or extinction of populations.  A  reason for using mathematical
              models is that in situations  involving endangered species, genetically
              engineered organisms,  or large scale environmental change, it is often
              impossible to do  experiments but crucial to have some idea of what to expect. 
              Some of the models are directly motivated by problems in refuge  design or pest
              control.  Others are motivated by basic scientific  questions about the effects
              of the spatial aspects of  environments on populations, but even those may
              eventually prove  to be relevant to issues raised in the contexts of
              environmental  protection and the biological effects of global change.
