Title       : Asymptotic Approximations in Probability and Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1998  
File        : a9625732

Award Number: 9625732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandor Csorgo csorgo@sol.cc.u-szeged.hu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625732 Csorgo  ABSTRACT  In probability, the investigator studies a concrete
              construction of an infinitely divisible approximation to the distribution of a
              sum of independent and identically distributed random variables with a
              completely arbitrary distribution. This construction, motivated by a purely
              probabilistic approach to the problem, has the potential to achieve the best
              possible overall rate of such approximations. In statistics, the investigator
              studies three different and unrelated groups of problems. One of these is
              concerned with the overall asymptotic normality, at the best possible rate of
              convergence, of certain least squares estimators for the exponent of a
              regularly varying tail of a distribution function, by means of the
              quantile-transformation method. The second is the exploration of universal
              large-sample Gaussian approximations to cumulative-hazard and product-limit
              processes under random censorship without any conditions on the estimated
              distribution or the censoring mechanism, where the investigator uses a
              combination of strong-approximation and martingale-theoretic analyses. The
              third group of problems is concerned with rounding off a recent theory of
              nonparametric curve estimation under short- and long-range dependent Gaussian
              subordination by answering the outstanding questions for random-design
              regression.   The investigator's Probability project studies an approximation
              to sums of independent observations, which, unlike the usual approximations in
              terms of bell-shaped curves-- responsible only for the middle portions of the
              data -- attempts to incorporate the effects of the extremes as well. In
              Statistics, the investigator is studying three different groups of problems.
              The first one is concerned with the robust estimation of measures of "thickness
              of the tails" of data sets. This problem is important in various applied
              statistical and actuarial situations, such as the assessment of the variability
              of stock-price changes and the distribution of large claims in insuran ce
              business, particularly in bankruptcy re-insurance. The second group of
              statistical problems is to investigate the basic large-sample behavior of
              estimation when the observed data are incomplete due to the presence of
              nuisance effects and/or the necessity of an early termination of data
              collection; situations commonly referred to as random censorship. Here the
              investigator's anticipated results aim at greatly stretching the limits of
              concrete applicability of statistical estimation techniques for survival
              analyses with randomly censored data. These are of great interest in medical
              follow-up studies and reliability engineering. In the third group of problems
              in Statistics, the investigator extends his recent theory to cover all major
              curve-estimation patterns (density estimation, fixed-design and random-design
              regression) with long-memory data sets. The complete theory will explore the
              basic distributional properties of commonly used curve-estimation methods in
              time series analysis when the observations may be long-range dependent, as in
              many typical applied problems in geophysics and hydrology.
