Title       : Building on Superprocesses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9625753

Award Number: 9625753
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Adler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625753 Adler  ABSTRACT  Super Brownian motion (SBM), currently one of the
              hottest topics in Probability Theory, is what one gets by renormalising an
              infinite number of branching Brownian motions. It is of intrinsic interest to
              probabilists, and of more general interest because of ties to PDE theory, and
              because it may turn out to be a very important process for modeling purposes
              and  as a building block from which other measure valued processes can be 
              constructed. This project is primarily aimed at seeing how well SBM indeed 
              serves as such a building block, by investigating a number of other infinite
              dimensional stochastic processes that can be built either from SBM or from
              simple variants of it. The first example that will be tackled is  a ``super
              iterated Brownian motion'' that seems to be accessible to this approach and yet
              is a stochastic process which promises a lot of surprises in its structure and
              behavior.  As a modeling tool, the random processes that will be studied in
              this project have applications to a wide diversity of different fields. They
              provide good models for studying the development of genetic diversity over a
              large  number of generations, and, indeed, it was as models here that
              superprocesses originally developed. In this and related projects, the PI and
              his colleagues will also be using superprocesses to study the dispersion of
              mass via ocean  currents. It is hoped that the models developed will lead to a
              better  understanding of the statistical aspects of, for example, the spread of
              ocean pollutants. Another side benefit will be the study of the spatial 
              structure of populations of small ocean dwelling organisms such as plankton, a
              topic of both ecological and defense (radar) interest.
