Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic, Geometric and Combinatorial Structures Related
               to Multivariate Hypergeometric Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1998   
File        : a9625511

Award Number: 9625511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Zelevinsky andrei@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zelevinsky    This award provides funding for a project that will mainly be
              conducted in   the following two areas: (A) Multivariate discriminants,
              resultants, and  hyperdeterminants. (B) Representations of quantum groups and
              piecewise-  linear combinatorics. Both of these subjects have deep relations
              with the  theory of multivariate hypergeometric functions. Another unifying
              feature  is that in both areas an essential role is played by new kinds of  
              combinatorics whose main objects of study are lattice points in convex  cones
              and polytopes and their piecewise-linear transformations. The   principal
              investigator is going to continue his work on the following   topics: (1)
              explicit polynomial formulas for multivariate discriminants  and resultants,
              (2) singular loci of discriminant varieties, (3) algebraic  and combinatorial
              properties of canonical bases in representations of   quantum groups, (4)
              geometry of totally positive matrices, (5)  Chow varieties of 0-cycles and
              symmetric functions in several vector  variables, (6) secondary polytopes and
              maximal minor polytopes.    This research explores connections between
              Combinatorics, Algebra, and   Geometry. One of the goals of Combinatorics is to
              find efficient methods   to study how discrete collections of objects can be
              arranged. The behavior   of discrete systems is extremely important to modern
              communications. For   example, the design of large networks, such as those
              occurring in telephone   systems, and the design of algorithms in computer
              science deal with discrete   sets of objects, and this makes use of
              combinatorial research.
