Title       : Parallelization of Scheduling Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9625784

Award Number: 9625784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101438             (Estimated)
Investigator: Min-You Wu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Static scheduling utilizes the knowledge of problem  characteristics to reach a
              global optimal, or near optimal,  solution.  Although these scheduling
              algorithms apply to  parallel programs, the algorithms themselves are
              sequential,  and are executed on a single processor system.  The memory  and
              speed of a single processor limits the size of the graph  that can be handled. 
              Using multiprocessors to schedule  tasks to multiprocessors is a natural
              solution to solve  these problems. In fact, a scalable scheduler is not 
              feasible without parallelizing the scheduling algorithm and  running it on a
              parallel computer.    There are two major data domains in a scheduling
              algorithm,  the source domain and the target domain.  The source domain  is the
              macro-dataflow graph; the target domain is the  schedule for target processors.
               Two approaches are  proposed, the vertical scheme and the horizontal scheme. 
              The advantages and disadvantages of the two approaches will  be studied.  This
              research has already accomplished the  primary stage.  Two parallel scheduling
              algorithms have been  developed, vertical parallel MCP (VPMCP) and horizontal 
              parallel MCP (HPMCP).  New parallel scheduling algorithms  will be developed. 
              An incremental parallel scheduling is  also proposed for applications with
              dynamic and  unpredictable features.  The goal of this project is to 
              investigate this approach and evaluate its performance for  some important
              applications, and to integrate  these results  into a tool-set that will
              provide support for scheduling of  dynamic and irregular problems.  ***
