Title       : Carbon Fiber Reinforced Concrete As An Intrinsically Smart Concrete for Damage
               and Strain Sensing During Dynamic Loading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9625691

Award Number: 9625691
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah D. L. Chung ddlchung@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Smart concrete has a potential to provide non-destructive damage assessment
              capability, which is important for the timely repair, safety and long-term
              durability of critical civil infrastructure systems.  Moreover, real-time
              strain monitoring is needed for control of structures.  In contrast to concrete
              rendered smart extrinsically by the use of embedded or attached sensors, this
              project is focused on concrete that is intrinsically smart.  This intrinsically
              smart concrete is concrete containing as little as 0.2 vol.% short carbon
              fibers.  It is much less expensive per unit sensing volume than concrete with
              embedded sensors, and  sensitive to permanent damage as well as reversible
              deformation.  In this research, technical issues will be addressed in order to
              characterize this new smart structure material for applications in critical
              segments of structures.  These issues include (1) effect of the degree of
              damage (controlled by the stress amplitude) on the electrical response, (2)
              effect of the strain rate, (3) extension from compressive, tensile and flexural
              loading to torsional loading, (4) dependence of the electrical response on the
              direction of resistance measurement, (5) extensive testing for statistical
              analysis of the electrical response, (6) effect of steel reinforcement on the
              electrical response, (7) multiple electrical signal monitoring during steel
              reinforced concrete beam and column testing, (8) extension from multiple signal
              monitoring to two-dimensional mapping by reisistivity tomography, and (9)
              applications in critical sections of infrastructural systems.  In addition to
              providing the smart behavior, the addition of carbon fibers to concrete also
              serves to increase the flexural strength, toughness and freeze-thaw durability,
              and to decrease the drying shrinkage and electrical contact resistivity (when
              in contact with metals, as encountered in electrical probing).  An
              interdisciplinary team of researchers will participate in this program of
              study; including a materials scientist (PI) and a structural engineer.  This is
              a an award under the 5th year initiative on structural control research.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
