Title       : Development of an Ultrafast Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Dynamic Surface
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1998      
File        : a9625749

Award Number: 9625749
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey Nunes gnunes@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9625749  Nunes      This award provides support for the development of an 
              ultrafast scanning tunneling microscope capable of  investigating a wide
              variety of surface phenomena.  In order  to ensure stable and reproducible
              surface and tip conditions  for tunneling, the microscope will be operated in
              ultra-high  vacuum using a standard high-vacuum chamber system with a  full
              complement of surface analysis and preparation tools.  The microscope will
              achieve resolution on picosecond time  scales using the technique of tunnel
              junction mixing.  In  this technique, the intrinsic nonlinearity of the tunnel 
              junction between the sample and microscope in combination  with an
              optically-launched high-speed electrical pulse,  allows the detection and
              measurement of fast processes on  the sample surface.  Efforts to maximize the
              time resolution  available with this technique, and to push towards 
              femtosecond time scales, will require the use of nano-  fabricated tunneling
              tips with integral photoconductive  switches.  Research on the design and
              development of these  tips will be carried out as part of a collaborative
              effort  with the University of Alberta and the Alberta  Microelectronics
              Centre.  The effort at the University of  Alberta will also include the
              assembly of a 100 fs pulse  width Ti:sapphire laser system which will first be
              used in  the testing and evaluation of the microfabricated tips under  ambient
              conditions, and later combined with the ultra-high  vacuum tunneling
              microscope.      The development of this instrument will open up a new 
              dimension in scanning tunneling microscopy:  The opportunity  to probe systems
              on atomic time scales as well as atomic  length scales.  This capability will
              allow the study of a  wide variety of systems, including the dynamics of
              defects  in semiconductors and heterostructures, the nonequilibrium  response
              of superconductors, and the dynamics of structural  reconfigurations and charge
              transfer in optically excited  molecules.  The ability to carry out such stu
              dies will make  the scanning tunneling microscope a high-resolution probe in 
              all four (space-time) dimensions.
