Title       : CPMSA: Comprehensive Partnerships for Minority Student Achievement (CPMSA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a9625139

Award Number: 9625139
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Celestine Pea                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3836992            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayne B. Sargent jsargent@jackson.k12.ms.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan R. Merritt  (Principal Investigator former)
              Ron Sellers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mildred V. Mason  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Jackson Public School Dist
	      P.O. Box 2338
	      Jackson, MS  392252338    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Jackson Public School District proposes to provide a program  which
              addresses the need to increase the number of minority  students enrolled in
              science and mathematics courses while  decreasing the disparity between the
              academic performance of  minority and majority students nationally.  The
              Comprehensive  Partnerships for Student Achievement (CPMSA) project will be a 
              collaborative partnership among the Jackson public School District,  Jackson
              State University, Tougaloo college, the Algebra Project,  and others.  Middle
              school students will be targeted initially, and  the project will insure full
              participation of all who come in  contact with the students, including
              principals, teachers,  counselors, and parents.  Plans and strategies include: 
              restructuring the science and mathematics curriculum to align it  with the
              national standards and eliminate general courses; moving  toward more hands-on,
              student-centered, discovery-based learning;  requiring content certification
              for teachers of science and  mathematics; providing enrichment experiences for
              students;  enhancing skills of teachers and counselors; and increasing 
              mathematics and science awareness and expectations of parents.    JPSD already
              has initiated curriculum and administrative  restructuring which emphasizes the
              need "to improve the quality and  quantity of science and mathematics education
              received by minority  students, who are significantly underrepresented in
              science,  engineering, and mathematics (SEM) fields."  The District has 
              adopted these goals--Every JPSD student will be at or above grade  level; score
              at or above the national average on the ACT: and  graduate or pursue continuing
              education and/or military services.   The new administration also is promoting
              the significance of  "expectation" in student achievement.  All of those
              involved with  students are being advised to "expect" students to do well.  
              Administrators, teachers, and parents have embraced the proposed  reforms and
              are actively involved in developin g plans for change.   University support is
              evident, such as Jackson State University  with a history of forerunner
              programs designed to accomplish the  described goals.  The fact that the goals
              and activities of the  District are already in line with those of CPMSA will
              make systemic  reform an easier task.  All segments of the community, including
               universities, businesses, churches, and community organizations are  agreeing
              to participate in this endeavor.  The goal of this project  is to increase the
              number of minority students enrolling in an  successfully completing precollege
              courses which will prepare them  to pursue undergraduate programs in the
              sciences, engineering, and  mathematics.  ***
