Title       : CAREER: Algebraic and Geometric Techniques for Interface Detection in Static and
               Dynamic Enviroments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1998  
File        : a9625217

Award Number: 9625217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dinesh Manocha dm@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The problems of interference detection are fundamental in  computational
              geometry, solid modeling, robotics,  manufacturing, computer graphics and
              computer-simulated  environments. These include collision detection between 
              geometric models undergoing motion, surface intersection  between linear and
              curved surfaces, collision avoidance for  robot motion planning, visibility
              computations, hidden  surface removal and boundary computations.    This
              research takes a three-fold approach to these problems  using algebraic,
              numeric and geometric techniques:    1. Develop fast and robust algorithms for
              interference  detection between geometric models in static and dynamic 
              environments. The set of models include polyhedra, splines,  algebraic surfaces
              and deformable objects.    2. Specialize these algorithms to interactive
              collision  detection, hidden surface removal, surface intersection and 
              boundary computation with special emphasis on robustness.    3. Develop
              efficient software libraries for interference  detection between moving
              polyhedral objects, solid models  defined using algebraic surfaces and boundary
              evaluation.  The resulting libraries will be distributed as public domain  code
              and demonstrated on different applications.    The research efforts will be
              complemented with the following  educational goals:    1. Development of
              undergraduate and graduate courses on  geometric, symbolic and scientific
              computing.    2.  Develop novel teaching methods and electronic course  notes
              using the World-Wide Web (WWW) technology.    3.  Use of graphics, geometry and
              animation tools to develop  an algorithm animation and programming laboratory
              for  undergraduate courses.    4. Serving as a mentor to high school and
              undergraduate  students to work on graphics and modeling related projects  in
              our laboratory.  ***
