Title       : WORKSHOP: ORGANIZATION OF THE 1996 INTEGRATED PHOTONICS RESEARCH TOPICAL
               MEETING, APRIL 28-MAY 3, 1996, BOSTON MA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1996     
File        : a9625762

Award Number: 9625762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Hennage dhennage@osa.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Optical Soc of America
	      1816 Jefferson Pl NW
	      Washington, DC  200362505    202/223-8130

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625762  Hennage    This is a request for a grant towards defraying the cost of
              attendance at  the OSA/IEEE Integrated Photonics Research Conference (IPR) for
              selected  American students who would otherwise be unable to come to the
              meeting. It  is expected that participation will significantly advance the
              educational  and research impact of the conference.    A very important aspect
              of IPR is its unique role in education and training  in the field of
              guided-wave optoelectronics. The conference presents  students and researchers
              with the latest ideas and results, and provides a  forum for discussion and
              sharing contributions with colleagues as well as  leading scientists. The
              purpose of the grant we propose here is therefore  to help sustain the
              participation of graduate students in the meeting.    At present large
              conferences such as the LEOS Annual, OFC, OSA Annual, CLEO  and SPIE meetings
              are increasingly soliciting integrated optics papers.  Unfortunately,
              relatively few researchers are able to attend all these  forums, while yearly
              attendance at IPR has remained relatively constant at  200-250 attendees with
              15-20 % being students. This has led to some  dissatisfaction among many
              members of the integrated optics community.    To reverse this trend by
              strengthening the educational and research content  of IPR, the conference this
              year has undergone several major changes.  First, the technical program
              committee has been expanded from 44 to 59  members. Many of the new members
              were added to help organize eight  semi-autonomous symposia on key emerging
              areas in guided-wave optics  ranging from Silicon Photonics and Parallel
              Optical Interconnects to  Optical System Modeling and Integrated Optics and
              Micromachining. In future  years, the more successful symposia will hopefully
              develop into permanent  sub-units of the conference and additional symposia
              will be established as  warranted. Since symposia papers undergo the same
              careful review process as  normal contributed papers, we hope in this mann er
              to combine the  flexibility of a small topical meeting format with the high
              scientific  standards normally associated with large professional meetings.   
              At the same time, IPR will continue to offer a full program of regular 
              submitted papers in its core areas - numerical simulation and design,  active
              semiconductor devices, dielectric waveguides and waveguide devices  and
              photonic component manufacturing and packaging technology. These  sessions
              traditionally have attracted many of the top international  scientists in the
              guided-wave optics field from a wide cross-section of  organizational
              backgrounds. Indeed, the geographic distribution of  registrants for IPR'95 was
              - North/South America: 54%, Europe: 25%, and  Pacific Rim: 60%.  ***
