Title       : Experimental Evaluation of Robust Controllers in Buildings with Added Hysteretic
               Passive Damping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1997    
File        : a9625693

Award Number: 9625693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry J. Goodno   (Principal Investigator current)
              James I. Craig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Calise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1497      ARCHITECTURE & MECHAN SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project conducts studies of using a hybrid combination of passive damping
              and robust active control to provide enhanced levels of energy dissipation in
              buildings in seismic environments.  A significant feature of this program is
              the use of state-of-the-art methods for designing robust controllers that are
              capable of handling the unstructured uncertainty in both the model for the
              plane (the controlled structure and in the disturbance (the earthquake).  The
              robust hybrid control proposal offers considerable promise because the
              attractive features of both passive and robust active control are combined such
              that passive energy dissipation can be used to handle small disturbances and
              also reduce design requirements for active systems.  The focus of the research
              is a series of experimental tests, and supporting analytical studies, on a 1/4
              scale six story test building structure located at NCEER, SUNY Buffalo.  The
              research effort will be made to develop a robust control system for the test
              structure; combine the active system with an optimal passive damping system
              based on special hysteretic damping connectors developed and tested in prior
              research; design a test program based on experience gained from previous
              laboratory small-scale tests; install passive and active devices on the six
              story structure and carry out a series of shake table tests; and evaluate
              results, compare measured and predicted response, and assess implications. 
              This research project will be one of the first efforts to actually test
              promising active control systems at near full-scale and in practical
              situations..  It is expected to provide new insight into the implementation of
              hybrid control systems in actual building structures.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
