Title       : CAREER: Development in Innovative Optoelectronic Devices and Optical
               Characterization Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  2000  
File        : a9625236

Award Number: 9625236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Selim Unlu selim@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625236  Unlu  We propose a research program in innovative optoelectronic
              devices and  characterization techniques closely tied to educational efforts in
               photonics curriculum development. The research program focuses on high  speed
              and high-efficiency photodetectors, critical components in optical 
              communication signal processing and measurement systems. In parallel,  research
              in near-field thermal imaging can yield a factor of 10 improvement  over
              current techniques, providing important information for the design 
              optimization of sub-micron devices and circuits. The educational component 
              utilizes these research programs and others in creating modular photonics 
              applications suitable for incorporation into the standard undergraduate 
              engineering courses and upper-level laboratory settings.    Photodetectors for
              today s high performance optical communication and  signal processing systems
              must have high sensitivities, short response  times, and low power consumption.
              Over the past five years a new family of  optoelectronic devices has emerged
              whose performance is enhanced by placing  the active device structure inside a
              Fabry-Perot resonant microcavity.  Computer simulation studies have shown that
              a drastic improvement in the  high-speed performance of conventional
              photodetectors can be achieved using  the resonant cavity enhanced (RCE)
              detection. Since the RCE scheme is  independent of material system operation at
              a variety of wavelength regions  is possible. We propose to build on the mature
              theory and existing  experience in the RCE detectors and to prototype
              high-performance ultrafast  photodetectors operating at near-IA wavelengths.
              Also based on the RCE  scheme, we propose to fabricate monolithic photodetector
              arrays sensitive  to polarization of the incident light without requiring any
              external  polarization filters and/or beam splitters. Sensitivity of discrete
              devices  can be controlled by recessing the top surface of the detector
              allowing for  the monolithic fabrication of detector ar rays with varying
              sensitivities to  TE and TM polarizations.    In parallel to our efforts in
              optoelectronic devices, we will also pursue  innovative optical
              characterization techniques based on near-field optical  microscopy. We have
              established a state-of-the-art near-field spectroscopy  laboratory funded by
              NSF and industrial collaborators. The proposed  nearfield microscopy research
              will emphasize diagnostics of optoelectronic  devices and the development of a
              new thermal imaging technique utilizing  nanopositioners and IR fibers.   
              Boston University has made a major commitment to Photonics.  The  construction
              of a new interdisciplinary Center for Photonics Research with  state-of-the-art
              facilities and advanced laboratories is underway.  Recently, a new NSF-funded
              curricular program, PRIDE: Photonics Research in  Interdisciplinary Education
              has started under the direction of the PI. The  PRIDE program will create three
              levels of photonics modules to enrich  standard core, specialized elective, and
              design courses of the upper  division undergraduate and early graduate
              curricula. These modules will  incorporate photonics research into a wide range
              of existing curricula, and  demonstrate vertically integrated curriculum
              development. Modular  implementation of photonics into existing courses
              represents a significant  departure from standard curricular development. This
              novel approach reduces  the barriers to entry for cross-disciplinary education,
              is inherently  transportable while maintaining local flexibility of content,
              and  incorporates photonics research into a wide range of different curricular 
              topics. The PI's research program is an integral part of the PRIDE effort.  His
              research advances in photodetectors and near-field optical microscopy  will be
              incorporated into this modular curriculum. In addition to the group  effort in
              curriculum development, PI will also continue to develop new  courses in
              photonics and innovative teaching techniques utilizing World  Wide Web.  ***
