Title       : Symbolic Software for the Investigation of Nonlinear Partial Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1997   
File        : a9625421

Award Number: 9625421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willy A. Hereman whereman@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project continues the development and implementation of new  powerful
              symbolic algorithms for testing the integrability and  the calculation of
              conservation laws.  The construction of closed-  form solutions for systems of
              nonlinear partial differential  equations (PDEs) will also be investigated.   
              In particular, for systems of nonlinear evolution equations, a  first symbolic
              software package will automatically generate  polynomial-type conservation
              laws. Based on scaling properties  (symmetries) of the equations, the proposed
              algorithm provides an  elegant way to construct conserved densities and their
              associated  fluxes.    Based on homogenization techniques, a second software
              package  will allow the user to compute the analytic form of particular 
              solutions for large classes of PDEs. For integrable equations,  the technique
              leads to soliton solutions. For non-integrable  equations, closed-form
              expressions of homoclinic and heteroclinic  orbits can be computed efficiently
              with the method.    The symbolic software to be developed will complement and
              build  on earlier algorithms for the computation of Lie-point and non- 
              classical symmetries, to find soliton solutions via Hirota's  direct method,
              and to test the integrability of differential  equations via the Painleve test.
                 The programs will be written in Macsyma and Mathematica syntax.  They will
              be entirely symbolic and produce analytical output.  The development of novel
              mathematical techniques, in addition to  the refinement and generalization of
              existing methods and  algorithms, is also a part of this research project.   
              The aim is to provide high-quality symbolic packages to  researchers working on
              soliton theory, dynamical systems,  mathematical physics; specifically
              nonlinear wave phenomena in  networks, elastic media, chemical kinetics,
              bio-sciences, fluid  dynamics, plasma physics,  and nonlinear optics.  ***
