Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Wave Interactions in One and Two Space
               Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9625831

Award Number: 9625831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63572              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suncica Canic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Author:  Suncica Canic <canic@gauss.Stanford.EDU> at NOTE  Date:    5/11/96 
              9:39 PM  Priority: Normal  TO: jjenkins at nsf11  Subject:  
              ------------------------------- Message Contents
              -------------------------------  Dear Joe,    Please find attached the abstract
              of my project in the format you requested.   Let me know if you have any
              comments and would like me to   revise the second paragraph.     The revised
              budget of $20.5K for each of three years has been   signed on Friday by Richard
              Hasbrook, Iowa State University representative.   I will fax you the forms this
              coming Monday.     Have a nice weekend.    Regards,    Suncica                 
                         ABSTRACT OF THE PROJECT     "Nonlinear Wave Interactions in One and
              Two Space Dimensions"              Suncica Canic, Iowa State University, Ames  
                      This project deals with nonlinear wave interactions in one and two
              space   dimensions. The main focus is on wave interactions that arise in
              transonic   flow, reflections of a shock by a wedge, multiphase flow through
              the porous   media and chemically reactive fluids. A benchmark problem for
              understanding   the interaction of nonlinear waves in two-space dimensions is
              the shock   reflection problem. Depending on the shock strength and the wedge
              angle   different reflection patterns can occur. Open problems regard the
              transition   criteria between different types of reflection, bifurcation
              diagram   describing two-dimensional elementary waves, and the existence theory
               that would provide a solution space describing possible singularities.   This
              research project proposes a study of self-similar wave interactions  in two
              space dimensions as a first step towards understanding these issues.    The
              study is based on the nonlinear analysis of free-boundary problems for  
              transonic shock waves, on the wave curve analysis of quasi-one-dimensional  
              Riemann problems that arise in hyperbolic wave interactions, and on   numerical
              simulations of the corresponding wave structures. The results from   t his
              project would provide a fundamental contribution towards understanding   the
              nonlinear stability  of transonic shock waves and the development of a  
              general theory of two-dimensional wave interactions.      In one-dimensional
              systems of conservation laws, global existence and   uniqueness of weak
              solutions is still an open question. A delicate dependence   of weak solutions
              on the precise form of diffusion plays a crucial role in   distinguishing 
              physically relevant solutions (in oil reservoir modeling,   chemically reactive
              fluids, elastic plastic deformation, and in numerical   simulations). In this
              project an organized approach to the study of the   influence of the precise
              form of viscosity on the existence and uniqueness   of weak solutions has been
              proposed. Preliminary results surprisingly   indicate symmetry breaking
              solutions for some parabolic conservation laws.            Mathematical issues
              studied in this project derive from applications   such as high-performance
              computing simulations in oil recovery, and the   stability of transonic flow.
              In both applications (nonlinear) waves arise   naturally (e.g., propagation of
              an interface between water and oil   in oil reservoir simulations, formation
              and propagation of shock waves   around a wing in a supersonic flight,
              formation and interaction of waves in a   converging-diverging nozzle).
              Numerical methods used in computer   simulations of these phenomena are
              sensitive to certain parameters. For   example, numerical schemes that produce
              artificial (non-physical) diffusion   may produce misleading answers that may
              result in high production costs.   Therefore, understanding the dependence of
              solutions on the parameters in   a problem (called the stability of solutions)
              is crucial in devising efficient   numerical methods that would produce
              physically meaningful solutions.   This project focuses of the stability of
              nonlinear waves that   arise in a large class of models used in many areas of
              Federal  strategic interests. Two such appl ications are described above.
              Because   of the complexity of the problem, various state-of-the-art
              theoretical   techniques (e.g., nonlinear analysis of free-boundary problems,
              dynamical   systems approach to the influence of diffusion on weak Riemann
              solutions)   coupled with computer simulations, need to be used to tackle the
              problem.   Preliminary results indicate new phenomena that have not been
              studied before   (e.g., the occurrence of singularities in transonic flow and
              symmetry   breaking solutions in oil recovery). These results are crucial   in
              tailoring computer codes to capture the ("correct") physical behavior.
