Title       : SGER: Violence and Family Group Conferencing in Australia and New Zealand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1997        
File        : a9625493

Award Number: 9625493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Daly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625493  Daly  Funding is requested for some travel expenses in connection with
              research on an innovative criminal justice reform, family group or community
              accountability conference. Conferencing, which began in New Zealand in 1989 in
              handling juvenile crime, has since been introduced in Australia, Canada, and
              several states in the U.S. There are only a handful of studies assessing its
              merits.  The researcher will observe conference proceedings at major sites in
              Australia and New Zealand, and conduct research for extended periods in an
              urban and outback Australian jurisdiction (Adelaide and Coober Pedy), where
              conferencing is used in cases of intimate violence (rape and domestic
              violence). The research questions are: Do imbalances of power arise in the
              conference? Are offenders affected by the conference to change their behavior?
              The exploratory nature of the research calls for the gathering of case studies,
              coupled with interviews. The aim is to learn as much as possible about
              conferencing -- how it works, how successful it is, its major implementation
              problems -- to develop some baseline information and to begin to assess its
              merits in comparison to traditional criminal justice responses to crime.   %%%%
               Funding is requested for some travel expenses in connection with research on
              an innovative criminal justice reform, family group or community accountability
              conference. Conferencing, which began in New Zealand in 1989 in handling
              juvenile crime, has since been introduced in Australia, Canada, and several
              states in the U.S. There are only a handful of studies assessing its merits. 
              The researcher will observe conference proceedings at major sites in Australia
              and New Zealand, and conduct research for extended periods in an urban and
              outback Australian jurisdiction (Adelaide and Coober Pedy), where conferencing
              is used in cases of intimate violence (rape and domestic violence). The
              research questions are: Do imbalances of power arise in the conference? Are
              offenders affected by the conference  to change their behavior? The exploratory
              nature of the research calls for the gathering of case studies, coupled with
              interviews. The aim is to learn as much as possible about conferencing -- how
              it works, how successful it is, its major implementation problems -- to develop
              some baseline information and to begin to assess its merits in  comparison to
              traditional criminal justice responses to crime.   ****
