Title       : Bond Making and Bond Breaking Processes at Transition Metal Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9625367

Award Number: 9625367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Rosenberg rosen@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this award, the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic   Chemistry
              Program supports research on transition metal quinoline   complexes by Dr.
              Edward Rosenberg of the Chemistry Department, University   of Montana.  First,
              the synthesis and mechanism of carbon-carbon   bond-forming during nucleophilic
              addition to transition metal-activated   quinolines will be investigated.  Some
              triosmium quinoline complexes   undergo nucleophilic addition regio- and
              stereoselectively at the   5-position of the quinoline ring.  This reaction
              will be exploited for   potential applications in organic synthesis. 
              Carbon-nitrogen bond   cleavage in quinoline derivatives complexed to
              polymetallic sites will   also be studied.  The products of successive
              hydrogenations will be   determined.  In a third project, kinetic isotope
              methods will be used to   determine factors controlling hydrogen transfer to
              and from metals in   stoichiometric and catalytic processes.  Proton barrier
              tunneling will be   considered as a possible pathway.    This project is
              relevant to catalysis, natural product synthesis, and   fuels upgrading.  New
              methods for forming carbon bonds to quinoline could   be applicable to the
              synthesis of neurotransmitter agonists or cytotoxic   compounds. Investigation
              of the behavior of carbon-nitrogen bonds during   hydrogenation may provide
              insight into the hydrodenitrogenation catalysis   reaction, which is important
              to the petroleum industry.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
