Title       : Development of a Photorefractive Glass Processing and Characterization Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1996  
File        : a9625964

Award Number: 9625964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Cerqua-Richardson kcr@mail.creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. G. Moharam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonid B. Glebov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9625964  Richardson  This award provides support for the acquisition of
              equipment to  develop a processing and characterization facility for photo- 
              thermo-refractive glass (PTRG) materials.  This facility is  critical to the
              continued progress in the fabrication of new  optical recording media for high
              efficiency volume holographic  optical element applications based on
              glass-ceramic materials.  Experimental results obtained at CREOL (Center for
              Research and  Education in Optics and Lasers) during the past 18 months have 
              confirmed for the first time in this country, the potential of an  important
              new technology for recording and storing information  through the selective
              nucleation and crystallization of photo-  induced phases in a robust glass
              matrix.  This glass material,  however has to date been obtainable only in
              Russia.  As a result  of our experiments, the limitations of the Russian
              material and  the importance of processing these materials within our 
              laboratory, has been firmly realized.  Establishment of this  facility at CREOL
              will utilize our institute's strengths in both  the design and characterization
              of photorefractive materials and  our unique capabilities in the melting and
              characterization of  new glasses for optical applications.  CREOL contains one
              of the  few academic research groups in the country specifically  engineering
              and melting new glass compositions for optical  applications.  This award will
              enable the establishment of bulk  glass processing capabilities and
              construction of an improved,  reliable and accurate holographic element
              formation and  characterization facility.  The equipment includes furnace and 
              optical finishing facilities to allow in-house melting and  fabrication of
              glass starting materials, and an ultraviolet (UV)  laser system which can
              efficiently irradiate the glass, forming  the hologram, and subsequently
              characterize the quality of the  resulting element.  Once operational,
              irradiation/crystallization  studies on in-house produced glass compo sitions,
              with  accompanying analysis of material physical properties  thermal, 
              mechanical and optical  will continue to be carried out.  %%%  Establishment of
              this Processing and Characterization facility  will assist in the educational
              goals of our program at CREOL/UCF.  CREOL has been instrumental in establishing
              Master's and Doctoral  degree programs in Optical Sciences and Engineering at
              UCF.  Over  twenty courses in optics are taught by twenty five nationally- 
              recognized CREOL faculty.  The co-PI's oversee research programs  containing a
              total of 5 students working on various,  interdisciplinary topics related to
              optics.  Currently, 2  undergraduate and 2 graduate students utilize limited
              (nonoxide)  glass melting facilities.  Acquisition of melting and fabrication 
              equipment identified in this program will allow expansion of lab-  based
              training in traditional glass processing at both graduate  and undergraduate
              levels.  A CREOL-funded Ph.D. student will be  associated with the glass
              processing and optical characterization  of the PTRG materials.  ***
