Title       : Postdoc: Modeling Adsorption of Aqueous Solutions on Activated Carbon Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1996    
File        : a9625876

Award Number: 9625876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Van Rosendale                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46174              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Gubbins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4083      POST DOC RESRCH ASSOC COMP S&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 4083,9178,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The adsorption of water and water/X mixtures on model activated carbons will be
              studied using Grand Canonical Monte Carlo techniques with biased sampling as
              needed.  Such simulations are very demanding because of the hydrogen-bonding
              between the various species; such bonds are relatively long lived, and long
              simulations are needed to ensure ergodic behavior.  Large systems are also
              needed to avoid size effects.  This project will study pure water on an
              activated carbon surface, in which oxygenated surface sites are attached to the
              surface and can H-bond to the H atom in the water molecules.  The effect of
              variation in the density of sites, species of sites, and geometric arrangement
              of sites on the surface will be studied.  In particular the effect of these
              variables on the absorption, filling mechanism, and heats of adsorption will be
              of interest.  This will be followed by studies of water/X mixtures on such
              surfaces.  Initially, X will be a hydrocarbon, methane or benzene.  The pore
              filling mechanism for the hydrocarbon and water are expected to be completely
              different, so that variation of the site parameters is likely to have a
              decisive effect on the selectivity of the pore for one of the components, and
              selectivity inversion is likely to be seen.  Later studies will include the
              case where X is acetic acid.  Both benzene and acetic acid are of practical
              interest, since they are EPA priority pollutants.  The selectivity mechanism
              for acetic acid will be subtle and difficult to predict in advance of the
              simulations, since both water and acetic acid can bond to the surface. 
              Parallel codes will be developed for these simulation on the IBM SP/2 at
              Cornell.
