Title       : Redox-Control Over Ligand Binding: Consequences for Stoichiometric and Catalytic
               Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9625391

Award Number: 9625391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chad A. Mirkin CAMirkin@chem.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Chad A. Mirkin, Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of   the
              Chemistry Division to perform studies of redox-active ligands with   transition
              metals.  The ligands, known as redox-switchable hemilabile   ligands (RHLs),
              are designed to yield electrochemical control over the   steric and electronic
              environment of the transition metals to which they   are bound.  The magnitude
              of these effects will be quantified, and the   relative importance of
              electrostatic and inductive effects in binding   affinity changes resulting
              from the redox chemistry will be assessed.    Electrochemical control of
              chemical transformations that occur at late   transition metal centers is the
              ultimate objective.  Potential   applications for these complexes include
              catalytic olefin hydrogenation,   asymmetric olefin hydrogenation,
              hydrosilation, hydrocyanation, and   methanol carbonylation.    Compounds
              containing metal ions such as rhodium which are bound to   molecules containing
              phosphorus, oxygen and sulfur atoms have been found   to be particularly useful
              catalysts, and this results from the fact that   one part of the molecule binds
              much more strongly than the other part.    The objective of this project is to
              synthesize new molecules of this   sort, known as redox-switchable hemilabile
              ligands, where the binding of   the ligand can be controlled by the addition or
              abstraction of an   electron to or from a redox active substituent on the
              ligand itself.    Because the oxidation state of the ligand can be controlled
              quite easily   using electrochemistry, this could provide an additional element
              of   control to the catalytic reactions, making the catalysts either more or  
              less reactive depending on the oxidation state.  The increased level of  
              control is expected to have important implications for industrially   important
              catalytic processes.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
