Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Origins of the Alachua: A View from Perishables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1997   
File        : a9625478

Award Number: 9625478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9868               (Estimated)
Investigator: R. E. Taylor RETAYLOR@citrus.UCR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. R.E. Taylor, MS Jill Minar will collect data for her
              doctoral  dissertation. She will visit museums in the Southeastern United
              States and examine the cloth impressions on prehistoric pot sherds from a
              number of archaeological cultures. The project has both methodological and
              substantive goals. With the data she collects, MS Minar wishes to determine the
              origins of the Alachua culture which was widespread in prehistoric Florida. On
              a methodological level the project will assist in the development of new
              methods of ceramic analysis and provide insight into the relationship between
              ethnic identity and material culture.   In many parts of the world prehistoric
              peoples decorated the exterior of ceramic pots by pressing cloth or other forms
              of cordage against the unfired  wet surface. When the fabric is removed, a
              pattern remains imprinted in the clay. Although archaeologists have noted this
              and in fact have designated pottery types based on this feature, the cloth
              imprints themselves have never been subjected to detailed analysis.
              Ethnographic evidence indicates that cloth patterns and methods of manufacture
              are often very conservative and closely tied to ethnic identity. Therefore, in
              principle, they should provide an excellent trait to delimit prehistoric
              cultural groups and determine continuity and replacement over time. Cordmarked
              pottery is relatively common in the Southeast USA and many sites have been
              carefully excavated and radiocarbon dated. Therefore this region provides an
              excellent test situation. On the basis of preliminary research MS Minar has
              selected a number of collections which are attributable to the Alachua, to a
              range of possible Alachua predecessors and to groups which are culturally
              unrelated. In this well defined context she will develop and apply her analytic
              techniques. She will make molds of sherd surfaces, examine these under a
              microscope and employ a recently developed image analysis program to describe
              and compare the fabric impressions based on a wide range of attributes.  This
              research is important for several reasons. It addresses a significant regional
              archaeological question. It will help to develop an analytic tool with a wide
              range of potential applications and will also assist in training a promising
              young scientist.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
