Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Limit Theorems in Probability Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1998  
File        : a9625457

Award Number: 9625457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78362              (Estimated)
Investigator: Evarist Gine gine@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625457 Gine  ABSTRACT   The investigator does research on several types of
              limit theorems in Probability Theory, with incidence in Asymptotic Statistics
              and actual computation of spectra of integral operators. The first set of
              questions relates to the law of the iterated logarithm for degenerate
              U-statistics, particularly when the kernel is not square integrable, and to
              applications of U-processes to the asymptotics of lifetime distributions for
              truncated and/or censored data. In a second related set of questions the
              investigator and collaborators approximate spectra of compact integral
              operators by the spectra of certain random matrices and study several aspects
              of this approximation. The procedure amounts to discretizing the kernel by
              means of a random grid instead of the usual deterministic grids. The third main
              area of research concerns selfnormalized sums of independent identically
              distributed random variables, which are related to the Student t-statistic, and
              the aim is to determine the set of distributions for which the t-statistic is
              asymptotically standard normal, or converges in distribution, or is tight. The
              investigator also studies the bootstrap in some non-standard situations. These
              seemingly diverse sets of problems have in common the use of many techniques
              from limit theory, particularly empirical processes and  Probability in Banach
              Spaces, some of them previously developed by the researcher in collaboration
              with others.  One ongoing project of this researcher to study so-called
              U-statistics and U-processes and to expand the scope of their applicability.
              Knowing their properties should help us better understand the behavior of large
              classes of statistical functionals since U-statistics are their building
              blocks. In particular, some of this research will help to better assess the
              accuracy of statistical procedures currently used in the study of censored
              and/or truncated data in Medicine, Astronomy and other fields.  Another project
              involves approximation of spectra of operators,  which are mathematical objects
              that describe the behavior of systems such as chemical reactions. The third
              main topic of proposed research concerns the celebrated 'Student t-statistic,'
              a classical statistical object familiar to virtually everyone who does data
              analysis.  This research is related to determining when the t-statistic can be
              safely used.
