Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis of Patterns and Dynamics of Nonlinear
               Dissipative Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9625680

Award Number: 9625680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Xin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Xin    The first part of the  proposed research concerns the global
              existence and asymptotics of   front solutions to the two-dimensional
              Boussinesq combustion  system on finite and infinite vertical strips with
              unbounded chemical  nonlinearities, and arbitrary Lewis, Prandtl and Rayleigh
              numbers.  Numerical methods will be implemented for calculating front speeds
              and  controling chaotic flame fronts.  The second part concerns the stability,
              instability of vortex  solutions to Ginzburg-Landau equations and related 
              asymptotic analysis. The third part  concerns the dimensional bounds of  the
              universal attractors, qualitative properties of solutions,  approximation using
              reduced equations (such as Swift-Hohenberg like equations), and numerical
              simulation of the Maxwell-Bloch  two level laser systems.    The above proposed
              works are based on problems arising in  dynamics of reacting flows, and lasers.
               Understanding reacting flows is of tremendous practical importance,  and is
              related to industrial chemical processing, energy consumption,  as well as
              biotechnological remediation of environment.  In designing internal combustion
              engines or conducting industrial  chemical processes, one of the immediate
              concerns is to increase the efficiency of fuel burning, and so minimize the
              waste gas output  and reduce air pollution. It is known that well-mixed and
              strongly stirred reacting fluids have more effective contact area and their 
              reaction efficiency is much higher. On the other hand,  stirred fluids behave
              in an irregular and chaotic manner, and are not easy to control.  This
              motivates us to study the properties of  the irregular reacting flows in order
              to utilize them for our needs.        Mathematical models proposed here serve
              as a starting  point for pursuing such an investigation where both analytical
              and  numerical methods can be applied to advance our understanding.  Moreover,
              the techniques we develop can be very useful to other problems, such as
              bioremediation of polluted aquifer.  T here similar irregular or chaotic
              phenomena  exist due to the interaction of chemical species with bacteria 
              growth. Chaotic phenomena also appear in optical systems where  people try to
              produce high power laser output for  massively parallel optical computing and
              processing, image storage,  and high power energy sources. It is essential to
              be able to  achieve coherence and control of the laser output. Mathematically, 
              this amounts to studying stability and instability of  the special solutions of
              the laser system, analyzing the structures and finding good approximations of
              attractors. The two level laser  model we propose here is the first step
              towards this goal.   The progress made and the methodology developed in the
              systematic   study of the two level model will  greatly help us approach more
              complicated yet more appealing  semiconductor laser systems  in the future.
