Title       : Thermodynamic and Spectroscopic Studies of Levitated Microdroplets of Highly
               Supersaturated Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1999   
File        : a9625178

Award Number: 9625178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259647             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan S. Myerson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Arnold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander F. Izmailov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9625178  Allan Myerson    The project examines the behavior of
              supersaturated solutions which must be formed prior to crystallization. 
              Crystallization from solution is an important separation process which is used
              in a wide variety of industries.  In this project, the solvent activity of
              supersaturated aqueous solutions of electrolytes (such as potassium chloride,
              potassium aluminum sulfate and ammonium sulfate) and aqueous and non aqueous
              solutions of non-electrolytes (such as glycine, adipic acid and succine acid)
              will be measured employing electrodynamically levitated solution microdroplets.
               The use of this technique removes the container walls and most dust and dirt
              from the solution so that very high supersaturation can be achieved.  This will
              allow determination of the thermodynamic properties of supersaturated solutions
              over a wide range approaching the spinodal.  In addition, Raman spectroscopy
              will be used to examine the formation and time evolution of subcritical
              molecular clusters.  Appropriate theoretical treatments of the thermodynamic
              and spectroscopic date will be developed and used to calculate the nucleation
              induction time, size distribution of clusters and metastable limit boundaries. 
                The study of the thermodynamics properties and cluster evolution in
              supersaturated solutions is quite difficult because these solutions are hard to
              prepare and keep stable.  The technique of levitated microdroplets provides a
              unique method to prepare highly supersaturated solutions which can be examined
              employing Raman spectroscopy.  Raman spectra of highly supersaturated solutions
              should yield important information on the time evolution of molecular clusters
              in supersaturated solutions prior to nucleation.  In addition, these will be
              the first studies of thermodynamic and spectroscopic properties of
              supersaturated solutions of non-aqueous solutions.    This project will supply
              additional data on the thermodynamic properties of supersaturated solutions of
              industrially important  systems thus allowing modeling of the nucleation and
              crystal growth of these systems making use of the thermodynamic supersaturation
              (supersaturation based on activity instead of concentration).  For cases in
              which the supersaturation is above 10%, it has been shown that the error in
              using supersaturated based on concentration is significant and increases
              rapidly with increasing supersaturation.  In addition the work will supply
              fundamental data on the formation of subcritical clusters prior to nucleation
              through spectroscopic measurements.  Using appropriate theory, this data will
              allow calculation of properties which are important to the industrial practice
              of crystallization and will aid in the design and development of
              crystallization processes.  ***
