Title       : Curve Estimation Models for High-dimensional, Multivariate, and Discontinuous
               Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1997   
File        : a9625984

Award Number: 9625984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans-Georg Mueller mueller@wald.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mueller    In this research, statistical models which contain parametric, smooth
              and  discontinuous components are developed and applied to problems which 
              involve high-dimensional regression, samples of curves as observations, or 
              change-points and jump discontinuities. These models are motivated by 
              scientific problems including the longitudinal analysis of samples of  cohorts
              of subjects, the analysis of spatial incidence data describing the  spread of
              diseases, and the growth of children, where discontinuities may  occur. This
              also includes models which incorporate the influence of  covariates on a sample
              of response curves, and the construction of models  with discontinuous elements
              in the context of segmentation of DNA  sequences and of edge detection in image
              analysis. Methods for fitting the  models are devised, which typically involve
              complex iterative algorithms  using smoothing techniques, generalized linear
              models and estimating  equations as building blocks. The properties of these
              methods are analyzed  and they are applied to data pertaining to the scientific
              problems.     This research contributes to the solution of major scientific
              problems by  providing innovative statistical methods. One such problem is the 
              mortality of the older segments of a population and what one can say about  the
              aging process based on animal models, with potential impact on social  security
              and health care in the 21st century. Sophisticated methods are  needed in order
              to extract and combine the information on the observed  survival of the
              individuals from many cohorts. Another problem is to  describe and analyze the
              spatial spread of AIDS and of other epidemics as  time passes. A third problem
              is the segmentation of DNA sequences which  then may allow for association of
              the segments with biological functions. These  and related problems can be put
              into the framework of the new statistical  models which are developed in this
              research. The application of these  models allows to gain important new insight
              s into fundamental scientific  aspects of these complex problems.
