Title       : Multiobjective Robust Control: Linear Versus Nonlinear Controllers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9625920

Award Number: 9625920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183887             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario Sznaier msznaier@frodo.ee.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625920  Sznaier         Robust control has undergone extensive developments
              that  have been successfully applied to challenging practical problems.  
              However, these techniques are limited by the fact that, in their  context,
              performance must be measured in the same norm used to  assess stability. 
              Clearly, a single norm is usually not enough  to capture different, and often
              conflicting, design  specifications.  Therefore, designers are forced to use
              weighing  functions and similarity scaling, coupled with extensive trial  and
              error, in an attempt to translate realistic specifications  into a form
              amenable to the theoretical framework.       In this research we propose to
              develop a synthesis framework  that explicitly takes into account multiple
              performance  specifications and uncertainty.  The proposed research will 
              combine elements from functional analysis, linear systems theory  and viability
              theory. In the case of linear controllers,  multiobjective problems can be
              recast into a convex optimization   form that can be exactly and efficiently
              solved.  In the case of  nonlinear feedback, preliminary results using
              viability theory  show that any performance level obtained with a linear
              dynamic  state-feedback controller can also be achieved using nonlinear  static
              controllers.  Thus, there exists a potential tradeoff  between linear dynamics
              and static nonlinearities.  This research  effort will result in an expanded
              robust control framework,  capable of addressing realistic problems without
              necessitating  neither potentially conservative approximations for multiple 
              trial and error type iterations, leading to improved and less  costly designs. 
                The portion of the research related to synthesizing multiobjective 
              controllers under hard control constraints and their experimental  validation
              in an anaerobic digester will be carried out in  cooperation with an
              interdisciplinary control group located at the  Universidad Autonoma
              Metropolitana, Mexico, headed by Dr. Rodolfo  Suarez Cortez (Mathemat ics). 
              This research is supported under NSF-  CONTACYT Collaborative Research
              Opportunity.  ***
