Title       : A Software Support System for Parallel Processing in Multiprocessor Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1996       
File        : a9625959

Award Number: 9625959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phyllis E. Crandall crandall@eng2.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9221,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This effort is funded as a Research Planning Grant (RPG). The  availability of
              shared-memory, multiprocessor workstation  clusters offers the opportunity for
              the simultaneous application  of shared memory and distributed memory parallel
              processing  techniques to a single problem.  However, software systems that 
              facilitate this dual-level parallel processing paradigm and allow  the
              programmer, compiler, and run-time system to make the best  use of the
              computational power offered by this platform are not  yet available.  The
              long-term goal of this research is threefold:  (1) to provide a software system
              that furnishes advice regarding  the partitioning methods and cluster
              configuration expected to  yield the best performance,  (2) to develop a
              communication  library that handles both shared and distributed memory 
              communications with a single syntax, and  (3)  to incorporate  both the
              advisory system and the communication library into a  data-parallel compiler
              that transparently handles interprocessor  communication.    During the
              research planning phase, which is being supported by  this grant award, four
              initial steps toward the long-term  research goals will be accomplished.   (a)
              The computation and  communication characteristics of the multiprocessor
              cluster will  be characterized. (b) Mathematical models of performance of 
              applications that exhibit stencil data dependencies will be  developed. (c) The
              advisory system will be designed and  implemented with the initial mathematical
              models. (d) The current  body of research on shared memory and distributed
              memory  communication libraries and data-parallel compilers will be  surveyed
              to determine the best approach for developing the  dual-level communication
              library and incorporating the library  into existing compilers.  ***
