Title       : Spectroscopy of High Energy Vibrational States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1996      
File        : a9625426

Award Number: 9625426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370200             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Muenter muenter@chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports John S. Muenter of   the
              University of Rochester as he continues his investigations into the   structure
              and dynamics of highly vibrationally excited states of small   and medium-sized
              molecules.  He will populate the excited state using   Ti:sapphire laser
              excitation, then probe the prepared state in the   radiofrequency, microwave or
              infrared region using molecular beam   electric resonance spectroscopy.  By
              examining a variety of molecules   with varying densities of states, he can
              characterize the high energy   vibrational state as intramolecular vibrational
              relaxation begins to   occur.  The goals are to determine (a) the contributions
              of various   vibrational modes, including dark states, to the excited state  
              wavefunctions, and the (b) equilibrium structure and (c) dipole moment of   the
              excited state.    This knowledge of high energy molecular states will provide
              important   foundation material for a wide variety of kinetics and dynamics  
              experiments.  High energy states serve as precursors to a broad range of  
              chemical reactions.  These experiments are designed to provide   information to
              maximize the productivity of many kinetics and dynamics   experiments.  In
              addition, data obtained here will provide exacting tests   of theoretical
              potential energy surfaces, and the knowledge of high   energy states gained
              here will allow the construction of more accurate   potential surfaces in the
              future.  Finally, the techniques developed for   this work can be applied to
              many other experiments in physical chemistry.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
