Title       : Development of Eddy Current Spectroscopy: A Contactless Technique to
               Characterize Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1998  
File        : a9625905

Award Number: 9625905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Winston K. Chan winston-chan@uiowa.edu                  wkchan@icaen.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9625905  Chan    This award provides support for development of a novel  method
              of eddy cement spectroscopy.  The sheet resistance of  a film is the product of
              the sheet carrier density and the  carrier mobility , each of physical and
              technological  interest.  The standard eddy current measurement can  determine
              the sheet resistance of a conducting film without  contacting it, but this
              measurement does not give  information about the carrier density or carrier
              mobility  separately.  Buy taking this technique to a regime of  microscopic
              sampling area, the sheet resistance will  fluctuate because of carrier Brownian
              motion in and out of  the sampling area.  The carrier density and the carrier 
              mobility can be separately determined by analyzing the  amplitude and the time
              dependence of these fluctuations.  A  magnetic field is not needed for the
              measurement, so  carriers confined to quantum wires can still be measured.  The
              eddy current spectroscopy (ECS) technique requires a  microfabricated coil to
              be placed near the sample.  A method  where the coil and sample together act as
              an amplitude  modulator that impresses the resistance fluctuations onto a 
              radio frequency carrier is described.  The amplitude  modulated radio frequency
              signal can then be analyzed by a  spectrum analyzer.  %%%  The ECS technique
              has many features that can significantly  advance electrical characterization
              of electronic materials  in either a research or a manufacturing environment. 
              These  features include:  It is a noncontact and a nondestructive  technique,
              so sample preparations is unnecessary;   it only  requires that a coil be near
              the sample, leaving room for  other probes, electrical properties then can be
              spatially  correlated with other properties of the sample;  it  intrinsically
              measures a small area, so high resolution  mobility and carrier density maps
              can be obtained;  it is  sensitive to the microstructure of the sample, and can
              help  elucidate microstructures; and it does not require any bulky  component, 
              such as a large magnet, and can potentially be  desktop size.    ***
