Title       : Nonlinear Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9625613

Award Number: 9625613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge Nocedal nocedal@ece.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Three research projects in nonlinear optimization will be  undertaken; they
              range from theoretical studies of constrained  optimization algorithms to the
              development of a network-based  optimization system capable of solving problems
              automatically  over the Internet.    The first project is devoted to the design
              of limited memory  approaches for large-scale nonlinear programming.  Limited
              memory  methods have proved to be quite useful for solving many classes  of
              large unconstrained problems, but their economy and simplicity  have not been
              fully exploited in the nonlinearly constrained  case. The basic guiding
              principle in this work is to employ only  algorithms with modest computational
              requirements and to  represent limited memory matrices in compact form, so that
              the  overall cost of the iteration is only a fraction of that required  by the
              standard Sequential Quadratic Programming iteration.  The  new algorithms will
              allow the user to choose between direct and  iterative methods for solving the
              linear subproblems arising in  the iteration.    The second project is devoted
              to the design and analysis of  interior-point methods for nonlinearly
              constrained (non-convex)  optimization problems. This is a long term research
              effort that  first aims at identifying the crucial ingredients of the 
              algorithms, such as the choice of model, the function, and the  numerical
              techniques for solving the (ill-conditioned)  subproblems.  The new methods
              will be formulated in a trust  region framework, which allows a uniform
              treatment of the convex  and non-convex cases. The research will be guided by a
               combination of numerical testing and convergence analysis.    An
              Internet-based optimization system called NEOS has recently  been developed by
              a group of investigators at Northwestern and  Argonne. One of the objectives of
              NEOS is to allow users to solve  optimization problems remotely and with
              minimal effort using  modern web browsers. The third project in this proposal 
              considers extending the capabilities of  NEOS so that it can  interact with
              modern modeling languages. A new constrained  optimization server will also be
              developed.  ***
