Title       : Solvent-Initiated Photochemistry of Transition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1996      
File        : a9625664

Award Number: 9625664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick E. Hoggard phoggard@scu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9198,9229,AMPP,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Patrick Hoggard, Department of Chemistry, Santa Clara University, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of   the
              Chemistry Division to perform studies of radical chain reactions in   solution
              which are initiated through the absorption of light by the   solvent. 
              Specifically, he will determine whether the initial oxidizing   agent in
              chloroform solvent-initiated reactions is a peroxy radical or a  
              hydroperoxide. Reactions in which the metal-based quantum yield increases  
              with decreasing irradiation wavelength will be explored using osmium,  
              molybdenum and palladium di- and tri-nuclear species in chlorinated   solvents.
              Ruthenium bipyridine reactions will be probed under conditions   where oxygen
              is not limiting in an attempt to discover photoreversible,  
              temperature-hypersensitive systems. Examples of potential  applications   of
              these phenomena include systems that periodically change composition   under
              irradiation, `smart` glasses that darken under irradiation above a   given
              temperature, and photocatalytic systems for the destruction of   halogenated
              hydrocarbons in water.  The absorption of light energy is commonly used to
              initiate chemical   reactions. When these reactions take place in chlorinated
              solvents, there   is some ambiguity as to whether the reactants themselves
              absorb the   energy, or whether the solvent molecules absorb the energy first
              and then   transfer it to the reactants.  This is an important mechanistic
              question   because of the potential applications which can result from a clear 
               understanding of these processes and the corresponding ability to   manipulate
              them.  Dr. Hoggard will examine a series of metal complex   substrates with
              differing reduction potentials and search for new   solvent-initiated
              photoreactions.  He will also pursue photocatalysis   studies of
              chlorohydrocarbon degradation in aqueous media as well as   reactions which are
              hypersensitive to temperature.  These types of   photoreactions can have high
              quantum yields, and may have implications   for the degradation of
              environmentally recalcitrant chlorinated   hydrocarbons.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
