Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "CAREER Program: Peter Smereka
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1996       
File        : a9625190

Award Number: 9625190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Smereka psmereka@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1045,1271,9146,9178,9251,9263,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Smereka       The investigator undertakes a program of research and  education
              under a Career grant.  Efforts are directed toward the  study of bubbly fluids.
               A goal is to develop effective equations  for such fluids.  The first step is
              to derive the equations of  motion for a finite collection of interacting
              bubbles.  The  behavior for an infinite number of bubbles is deduced from
              kinetic  theory, which gives rise to a kinetic equation that is a 
              coarse-grained description of the mixture.  This procedure has been 
              implemented to derive two sets of effective equations that  describe
              concentration and sound waves in an ideal bubbly flow.  In both situations it
              is observed that the spatially homogeneous  solution may be unstable.  In the
              first case the instability  results in the bubbles clustering and in the later
              case it  indicates the bubble oscillations will synchronize to each other.  A
              damping mechanism similar to Landau damping is found in the  stable case.  This
              is connected to the spectral theory of linear  operators with a continuous
              spectrum and has no finite-dimensional  analogue.  The investigator extends
              this work to investigate the  interaction of acoustic modes with convective
              modes.  The theory  will also be broadened to include the effects of gravity,
              liquid  viscosity and bubble size distribution.  With a view towards a more 
              general theory of bubbly flow, the investigator examines the  effects of a
              small, slowing varying vorticity field on an ideal  bubbly flow.  It is
              anticipated that the studies will be performed  in collaboration with a
              graduate student.  In addition to its  relevance to engineering problems, this
              project contains  substantial educational aspects.  The student will be exposed
              to  fluid mechanics, potential theory, Hamiltonian mechanics, kinetic  theory,
              spectral theory of linear operators, and numerical  methods.  A new graduate
              level mathematics class is also developed  on the numerical solution of
              interface problems with level sets.  The advantage of this  approach is that it
              handles topology changes  naturally and easily.  This class is expected to
              attract not only  mathematics students but science and engineering students as
              well,  because interface problems have wide-spread interest.       An important
              emphasis of this project is to further enhance  the applied mathematics program
              in the mathematics department at  the University of Michigan and promote
              education at the interface  between mathematics and engineering.  One aspect of
              this project is  to develop effective equations for bubbly fluids.  A bubbly
              fluid  is a dispersion of gas bubbles in a liquid and can be found in a 
              variety natural and industrial settings.  The effective equations  will give a
              bulk or coarse-grained description of this mixture.  At  the present time
              computer resources do not exist to numerically  simulate directly a bubbly
              fluid.  For this reason considerable  effort has been made in the development
              of models for bubbly  fluids.  The other aspect of the project is to
              incorporate  applications of mathematics in a significant portion of 
              mathematics classes.  At the undergraduate level, the investigator  plans to
              develop an enriched calculus course that focuses on  applications for
              engineering students.  The investigator plans to  continue redesigning a senior
              level partial differential equations  class to include more physics,
              applications, and computer-related  assignments.
