Title       : Acquisition of a Custom Molecular Beam Epitaxy System for Metals and Insulators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1996      
File        : a9625892

Award Number: 9625892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189120             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Lederman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy C. Giles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9625892  Lederman    The considerable recent interest in magnetic thin films and
               superlattices has been fueled in large part by the potential  technological
              applications of giant magnetoresistance (GMR),  exchange anisotropy (EA), and
              perpendicular anisotropies in  metallic ferromagnets.  However, numerous topics
              of interest  in this field have not been fully explored, including the 
              magnetic interactions in superlattices composed of  alternating  metallic and
              insulating layers, and purely  insulating magnetic superlattices.  These types
              of  superlattices could further our basic understanding of  magnetic
              interactions and lead to unexpected technologies.  The molecular beam epitaxy
              (MBE) system sponsored by this  award is designed to grow and characterize a
              wide variety of  magnetic superlattices, including those composed only of 
              insulators, only of metals, or combinations of insulators  and metals.  %%% 
              Characterizing the structure of these materials is important  because the
              surface and interface structure in magnetic thin  films and superlattices can
              significantly affect their  physical properties.  In order to understand these 
              properties, it is crucial to study the surface of these  materials as a
              function of growth parameters, such as film  thickness, growth temperature, and
              growth rate.  Structural  studies can also aid in distinguishing the structural
               effects from the intrinsic superlattice and interface  effects.  This can be
              done in-situ using surface-sensitive  techniques such as reflection high energy
              electron  diffraction (RHEED), low energy electron diffraction (LEED), 
              scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), and x-ray photoelectron  spectroscopy
              (XPS) without contamination from the air.  This  information will be
              complemented with ex-situ x-ray  diffraction measurements.  ***
