Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Hierarchical Model Determination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1998  
File        : a9625383

Award Number: 9625383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan E. Gelfand alan@stat.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gelfand    Recent computational advances have made it feasible to fit  
              hierarchical models in a wide range of serious applications.  With   this
              capacity various issues in model determination arise.  This   research studies
              the selection of a best model within a collection of   such models.  It
              concerns itself with the trade-off between goodness   of fit and parsimony and
              the inappropriateness or shortcomings of   customary criteria.  The research
              also addresses the matter of model   adequacy.  With hierarchical models, model
              failures can occur at each   stage.  Approaches for identifying the existence
              of such failures and   their nature are examined by the investigator.  Finally,
              for   hierarchical models hyperprior specification is often vague.  This   work
              considers conditions under which the resultant posterior is a   proper
              distribution.    The modern intellectual contribution of statistics is modeling
              and   inference.  In working with scientists from other fields, the  
              statistician helps to formulate appropriate models for the   scientists'
              problems and data as well as to indicate how inference can   be developed which
              provides answers to the questions which motivated   the scientists'
              investigations.  With the wide availability of high   speed computing,
              increasingly sophisticated models are being   considered permitting the
              research effort to focus on the   determination of the most appropriate model
              for the application   rather than having to settle for an obviously inadequate
              one.    Nonetheless, models must offer some simplification or else they are  
              no easier to understand than the complex phenomenon they are   modeling.  This
              research addresses several important issues in the   process of determining a
              satisfying model.
