Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Motivic Cohomology with Finite Coefficients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9625658

Award Number: 9625658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ann K. Boyle                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Voevodsky vladimir@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9625658      Recently some progress has been achieved in the construction of
              the basic theory of (mixed) motives.  The PI is in possession now of a number
              of techniques which make it possible to approach at least some of the "hard"
              motivic conjectures. These conjectures can be divided into two classes
              depending on whether they deal with rational or finite coefficients. The goal
              of the research described in this proposal is to understand the structure of
              the "Motivic world" for finite coefficients.  It turns out that the usual
              "motivic t-structure" intuition does not work in the finite coefficients case.
              One of the possible replacements for it seems to be the "chromatic" intuition
              which was very successfully employed in algebraic topology in the last decade.
              This approach was used in the recent PI's preprints where it was shown that a
              number of standard conjectures about motives with finite coefficients could be
              solved if we had a good definition of algebro-geometrical analogs of the higher
              Morava K-theories.    To construct these theories seems to be a nontrivial but
              relatively straight forward problem. The steps to be taken include the
              description of the cohomological operations in motivic cohomology, construction
              of algebraic cobordisms through an algebro-geometrical analog of Thom spectrum,
              computation of its "coefficients ring" using "motivic" Adams spectral sequence
              and finally the formal construction of algebraic Morava K-theories from the
              algebraic cobordisms.    This is research in the field of algebraic geometry.
              Algebraic geometry is one of the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one
              which has had a revolutionary flowering in the past quarter-century.  In its 
              origin, it treated figures that could be defined in the plane by the simplest
              equations, namely polynomials. Nowadays the field makes use of methods not only
              from algebra, but from analysis and topology, and conversely is finding
              application in those fields as well as in physics, theoretical computer
              science, and robotics .
