Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Applied Asymptotic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9625341

Award Number: 9625341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jet J. Wimp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9625341  Wimp    This proposed program consists of several topics in applied 
              asymptotic analysis. These topics by and large have not been systematically 
              covered in the general books dealing with asymptotics, yet are of great 
              significance in applied science and engineering.  For instance, the central 
              limit theorem is one of the keystones of probability theory, yet no readily 
              available source on asymptotics has discussed its applications and 
              ramifications.  Certain problems in combinatorics, in particular, the  theory
              of random walks, can be elucidated by asymptotic methods; yet these  have
              received no unified treatment.  Most books have an extensive treatment  of
              differential equations, but difference equations, which are just as  important,
              require their own methods of attack.  Renewal equations, which  arise in
              investigations in computer science and engineering, have been  occasionally
              treated but have not yet received the attention they deserve.  The topics to be
              investigated are motivated by these deficiencies:  the  drunkard's walk and
              convolution sequences;  the stability and convergence  of the solutions of
              non-linear difference equations;  the application of  probabilistic methods to
              problems in applied asymptotic analysis; error  distribution in the numerical
              inversion of matrices; and renewal equations  arising in the recovery of
              information in communications systems employing  multiaccess channels.  %%%   
              Scientists are often interested in what happens "in the large."  Examples of
              this abound in everyday life.  For instance, if the number of  users of the
              internet continues to grow in some well-defined fashion, what  precisely will
              happen to the time required to log onto the system?  What is  the likelihood
              that a medication ingested into the human system will reach  its target after
              an extended period of time?  How are the populations of a  given agricultural
              pest and the plants on which it feeds related over an  extended period of time?
               Is the future growth in major criminal  offenses  in a city strongly dependent
              on the current rate of minor criminal  offenses?  Will the population of a
              country, given sufficient food supply,  continue to grow at a disastrous rate,
              or are there self-limiting features  of population growth that will prevent
              this from happening?   The  scientific mathematical language often used to
              model such situations is  called the theory of difference equations.  In this
              research program, we  intend to develop new methods for attacking such
              equations, and hence to  help resolve some practical issues which these
              equations describe.  ***
