Title       : Renovation of the Carraway Building Research Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9415178

Award Number: 9415178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $609999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Zindler zindler@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Leroy Odom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Furbish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neil S. Lundberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherwood W. Wise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9198,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Florida State University is the recipient of funds from the Academic Research
              Infrastructure Program to aid in the renovation of the second and third floors
              of the Carraway Building.  Occupied by the Department of Geology,  the facility
              was designed and constructed 40 years ago.  The range of research activities in
              which faculty, graduate, and undergraduate students are involved in span
              diverse disciplines within the Earth sciences, encompassing the areas of
              structure and tectonics, sedimentology, micropaleontology, marine geology,
              hydrology, geomophology, and isotope geochemistry.  Changes in faculty, and in
              growing research programs over the past 40 years, along with deterioration and
              aging of some of the physical infrastructure, have resulted in a precarious
              situation. The building is no longer adequate to support current and planned
              research and training activities.  The renovation will consist of relocating
              and consolidating activities dedicated for research and research training.  The
              intent is to make more efficient use of limited available space, by developing
              shared laboratories for purposes and activities common to research personnel. 
              As a result, there will be a reduction in the duplication of facilities, the
              alleviation of severe crowding in existing laboratories, and the provision of
              better access of facilities to students and staff. More serious problems
              associated with the design and aging of the facility that directly affect the
              quality of and potential for certain types of research activities will be
              addressed.  The renovation will supply adequate utilities to areas where they
              are needed, replace old and disabled fume hoods, and significantly reduced the
              level of dirt and contamination associated with the building's air-handling
              systems, exposed overhead pipes, and decaying acoustical tiles.  Upon 
              completion, the modernize facility will create the ideal laboratory setting,
              enabling the pursuit  of current and future research that will provide more
              opportunities for  students to engage in research training.  Moreover, the
              modernization of the laboratory facilities will enhance the department's
              capability to attract visiting scientists, and to recruit quality faculty
              members.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
