Title       : Renovation of the Rutgers Nuclear Physics Laboratory into a Central Facility for
               the Laboratory for Surface Modification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1997  
File        : a9415021

Award Number: 9415021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $575500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore E. Madey madey@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric L. Garfunkel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Bartynski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Torgny Gustafsson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will provide funding for the renovation of research space in the
              Nuclear Physics  building located on the Busch Campus of Rutgers University. 
              Constructed in 1963, the structure  was previously dedicated for nuclear
              research activities.  However nuclear research is no longer  conducted in the
              building, and the vacated space will become available for the Laboratory for 
              Surface Modification (LSM).  The LSM is a multidisciplinary laboratory composed
              of faculty,  postdocs, and students from five academic departments:  physics,
              chemistry, ceramics, materials  science and electrical engineering.  Research
              at the LSM focuses on advanced developments in  the science and engineering of
              surfaces and thin films.  Presently, individual LSM laboratories  are dispersed
              throughout the Physics building and five other buildings on the campus.  ARI
              funds  will be used for substantial renovations to laboratory space, including
              the installation of new  walls, partitions, and upgrading the electrical, HVAC,
              and plumbing systems.  Moving the LSM  to this building will benefit the
              program by relieving overcrowding, and by providing a central  location to
              house individual labs and shared facilities.  The relocation will produce
              enhanced  focus, visibility and identification of research, fostering new
              opportunities for the education of  students, collaborative interactions
              between researchers across traditional departmental  boundaries, and for the
              expansion of interactions with high technology industries.
