Title       : Replacement Biological Research Laboratory Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9415143

Award Number: 9415143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $711137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce M. Cohen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ram K. Sihag  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ole Isacson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph A. Nixon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : McLean Hospital
	      
	      Belmont, MA  02178    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 In the last decade, McLean Hospital, affiliated with the Harvard Medical
              School, has been one of the world's most productive sites for neuroscience
              research.  For the most part, laboratory research at McLean is done at the
              Mailman Research Center (MRC).  Constructed in 1945, the MRC currently provides
              laboratory support and space for 24 investigators, 26 post-doctoral students, 7
              graduate students and additional undergraduate and graduate students during the
              summer.  At present, neuroscience research is performed in the Biological
              Research Laboratory facility.  Researchers engage in programs of related
              projects studying the cytostructural elements essential for normal neuronal
              growth and development and signal transduction mechanisms mediating neuronal
              plasticity in development and aging.  However,  due to its antiquated support
              facilities, coupled with significant building code modifications and
              requirements, the facility no longer provides adequate laboratory space. 
              Infrastructure utilities, including HVAC, electrical, plumbing, water
              filtration, and acid neutralization systems are in desperate need of
              replacement. High technology instrumentation and techniques required to conduct
              many of the extremely complex analytical tasks cannot be sustained in the
              presently configured space.   This award will provide partial funding for the
              replacement of the Biological Research Laboratory.  Upon completion, modernized
              research space will be available to support investigations in
              neurodevelopmental, molecular and structural neuroscience.  The research
              programs will benefit by an improved infrastructure that will be capable of
              supporting advanced techniques and by  furnishing  a clean environment required
              for operating the instrumentation utilizing these techniques.  This renovation
              project will provide the neuroscience program with a laboratory environment
              designed to complement modern research procedures required to meet high
              technology research protocols.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
