Title       : Dissertation Research: Prehistoric Andean Ethnicity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1994   
File        : a9415462

Award Number: 9415462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1994   
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8100               (Estimated)
Investigator: George L. Cowgill Cowgill@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cowgill    Under the direction of Dr. George Cowgill, Ms. Vicki Cassman will 
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze  remains from
              three prehistoric cemeteries located in Arica, Chile  and which date from the
              period between A.D. 300-1200. Because of  the hot and dry climate human remains
              as well as delicate  cultural materials are extremely well preserved, and in
              addition  to ceramic vessels, these prehistoric graves contain abundant 
              textiles. Decades of archaeological research have indicated that  this lowland
              coastal area of Chile has served at least once and  perhaps repeatedly as the
              destination for groups of individuals  who moved westward out of the Andean
              highlands. Ms. Cassman  wishes to understand the long-term mechanisms of
              culture contact  and to determine how, over long periods of time interactions 
              developed between host and immigrant groups. She will use  stylistic analysis
              of both interred bodies and included grave  goods to achieve this goal.
              Textiles play an important role in  traditional Andean cultures and a great
              deal of effort goes into  their production. Cloth, with its distinctive
              designs, serves not  only utilitarian and decorative purposes, but also
              functions as  an ethnic marker. The designs it contains and the manner in which
               it is woven reveals both the status and ethnic identity of its  wearer.
              Therefore it provides an excellent medium for the  analysis of cultural
              process.    The Andean and Coastal region of Western South America is marked 
              by strong latitudinal zonation. Resources change dramatically  with height and
              different groups both historically, and  presumably prehistorically adapted
              different strategies to assure  an adequate supply of different goods needed
              for survival. In  some cases this was achieved through trade, in others through
               conquest and in others through colonization. Archaeologists wish  to
              understand the range of strategies and to determine the  situations in which
              different approaches were employed. Through  the use  of mortuary analysis, Ms.
              Cassman will have a uniquely  rich data base to examine this question. The
              results will be of  interest to many archaeologists. The project will also
              assist in  the training of a promising young scientist.
