Title       : Species-Specific and Ontogenetic Sensor Charateristics of Marine Planktonic
               Copedpods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1996   
File        : a9415791

Award Number: 9415791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustav-Adolf Paffenhofer cmp@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2453

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9415791  Paffenhofer    The long term goal of this project  is to identify,
              describe  and quantify key processes which govern the abundance,  composition
              and distribution of zooplankton in the ocean.  The general hypothesis, is that
              both, signal perception and  the ability to respond to signals determine if a 
              feeder/predator captures food/prey, or if the prey avoids or  escapes from the
              predator.  The ideas for this project were  triggered by (a) articles on
              sensory performance of  copepods, and (b) results from ongoing studies of
              behavior  of prey and predators.   In addition to major differences  between
              species, prior work has indicated a range of small  to major differences among
              developmental stages within  species.  Observation of behavior alone are
              insufficient to describe a  stage's or species' range of  capabilities to
              perceive and  capture food, and to perceive and avoid predators.  These 
              observations must be coupled with information regarding the  organisms' sensory
              physiology.  Therefore, this project will  examine: (a) the abundance and
              distribution of chemo-and  mechanosensors on the cephalic appendages of
              nauplii, early  copepodid stages, and adult females of five abundant species 
              of marine planktonic copepods; and (b) ontogenetic changes  in abundance and
              distribution of both sensor types using  data obtained through (a). The project
              will utilize Laser  Scanning Confocal Microscopy (LSCM) to describe the sensor 
              distribution and orientation in 3-D (larger scale) and  sensor type (smaller
              scale) and Transmission Electron  Microscopy (TEM) to obtain ultrastructural
              information on  the major sensor types as confirmation of the LSCM 
              observations.    The significance of the proposed studies lies in improving 
              our understanding of what developmental stages and adult  females of abundant
              copepod species can perceive and what  they can not.  Perception of food and
              predators is crucial  for the existence of all species of planktonic copepods. 
              Combining data from static (structure) an d dynamic  (behavior) observation 
              should result in more than the sum  of both: relating information on coarse
              copepod morphology  (e.g. appendage size) to information on feeding behavior, 
              motion behavior sensor abundance and distribution, and  sensor ontogenetic
              changes should improve our understanding  (a) about how and why certain copepod
              species and stages can  exist in their respective environments, and (b) how
              they may  be phylogenetically related.  ***
