Title       : Inspection with Holographic Optical Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1996        
File        : a9415834

Award Number: 9415834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299304             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y. Fainman fainman@ece.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9415834  Fainman  A hybrid optical/electronic system that uses holographic
              optical  elements for the inspection of machined parts is proposed.  With  this
              approach, a holographic optical element corresponding to the  part is generated
              using the database that exists in the computer-  aided design system.  The
              holographic optical element stores  information on the geometry of the ideal
              designed part, which is  later compared with the real, machined part.  The
              comparison is  done by an optical system interfaced with a microcomputer to
              obtain  digital output.  With this strategy, instead of measuring the  absolute
              values of the shape, the PI measures only the deviations  of the actual part
              surface from the designed part.  Measuring  deviations instead of absolute
              values may increase the measurement  resolution and accuracy by orders of
              magnitude.    The proposed research on the development of a CAI system will
              have  a significant impact on manufacturing technologies because it will 
              provide tools that will allow different subsystems in the  manufacturing
              processes to be integrated in real time.  The  proposed studies will also
              advance the areas of optical signal  processing and optical computing.  For
              example, new approaches to  encoding problems for computer holography will be
              introduced, and  a new method based on the optical utilization of a priori
              knowledge  will be developed for image processing, pattern recognition and 
              machine vision.    The Technology Reinvestment Project of ARPA has recently 
              established a Manufacturing Engineering program at UCSD; thereby  the proposed
              work will also have a unique impact on the education  of students at the
              graduate and undergraduate levels in  manufacturing engineering.  They will
              gain extensive first-hand  experience in the growing field of optics in general
              and in optical  sensing and optical signal processing in particular.  The
              students  background will be further enhanced through special courses and 
              seminars related to this subject.  The PI expects  that the unique  background
              of the students (i.e., optical technology and  manufacturing systems, including
              CAD, CAM, and robotics) will be an  important factor in the introduction and
              efficient integration of  advances in optical technology into different areas
              of U.S.  manufacturing industry.  ***
