Title       : Renovation of Frick Chemical Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9415063

Award Number: 9415063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1700000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Herschel A. Rabitz hrabitz@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Warren S. Warren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The goals of the Department of Chemistry at Princeton University are to pursue
              basic research at the highest level, and to educated undergraduate, graduate
              and post-graduate students in the theoretical and experimental basis for
              Chemistry. At Princeton, chemistry plays an integral role in interdisciplinary
              programs such as the Princeton Materials Institute, the Princeton Center for
              Photonics and Opto-Electronic Materials, the University's Environmental
              Initiative, and a proposed joint initiative with Molecular Biology for
              biostructural chemistry. The department is embarking on a series of major
              research initiatives, difficult to accomplish in the original Frick Laboratory.
              Erected in 1926, the facility is inadequate to support advanced research
              activities.  With NSF support, a comprehensive renovation and infrastructure
              upgrade of research space will result in  consolidating hood-intensive
              operations in areas that can be economically upgraded to modern air handling
              standards.  In addition, shared facility space for high filed NMR, molecular
              modeling, and advanced lasers will be developed. The renovation project will
              specifically impact  programs in Physical Chemistry and Laser Spectroscopy,
              Organic and Bio-organic Chemistry, Inorganic and Materials Chemistry, and
              Biostructural Chemistry. The renovations, in conjunction with  the recruitment
              of new faculty, will move the Department into a leadership position by
              providing opportunities in emerging areas that interface with biology, physics,
              materials science and engineering.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
