Title       : Burial and Preservation of Phosphorus in Marine Sediments: Response to Bottom
               Water Oxygenation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9415563

Award Number: 9415563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322407             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellery D. Ingall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9415563  INGALL    This research will study the effect of bottom water oxygen 
              concentration on seafloor diagenetic processes and elemental fluxes  of
              phosphorous in marine sediments.  The focus of the research  stems from
              preliminary data suggesting that the overall burial and  preservation of
              phosphorus in marine sediments is strongly  dependent on the concentration of
              oxygen in waters overlying the  sediments.  These studies indicate that oxygen
              depleted bottom  waters enhance phosphorus regeneration from sediments,
              diminishing  overall burial efficiency.  If this effect can be verified it has 
              important implications for eutrophication in coastal regions and  for  the long
              term cycling of P especially during periods of  widespread ocean anoxia.  Sites
              overlain by anoxic and oxic bottom  waters in the Gulf of Mexico and the
              greater Puget Sound region  will be examined using in situ benthic flux
              chambers, pore water  and sediment measurements. Steady state fluxes of P and
              associated  elements will be determined from in situ benthic chamber 
              experiments. Benthic fluxes will be combined with sediments burial  fluxes in
              order to calculate P burial efficiencies for the  different study sites.  A
              major objective of this research is to  identify  the mechanisms responsible
              for the burial and  preservation of phosphorus and how they may differ in the
              presence  and absence of oxygen.  Particular attention will be paid to 
              processes potentially sensitive to changing redox conditions such  as the
              cycling of P by bacteria and dissolved iron. Data gathered  during the field
              and subsequent lab studies will be integrated into  a numerical transport
              reaction model in order to constrain the  kinetics of early phosphorus
              diagenesis. The results will be used  to evaluate the potential effects of
              variations in sedimentary P  flux on long term global marine productivity.
