Title       : Modernization of Research Space for Mathematics, Computer Science and
               Engineering Programs at Johnson C. Smith University: Renovation and Replacement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9415266

Award Number: 9415266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1398823            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hampton Wright hwright@jcsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Magdy F. Attia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johnson C Smith University
	      100-152 Beatties Ford Rd
	      Charlotte, NC  28216    704/378-1000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              12        Chemistry                               
              20        Mathematics                             
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              50        Engineering                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Johnson C. Smith University (JCSU) is the recipient of funds from the Academic
              Research Infrastructure Program for the replacement and renovation of research
              space for Applied Mathematics Computer Science, Engineering, and Biology and
              Chemistry respectively.  A private liberal arts institution, located in
              Charlotte, North Carolina, JCSU ranks in the top 15 among Historically Black
              Colleges and Universities and continues to motivate students to purse careers
              in the scientific enterprise.  Although faculty engage in research activities,
              undergraduate research is an integral focus of the training program at JCSU. 
              Seniors are required to undertake a research project leading to the publication
              of an investigative paper in the Undergraduate Journal of Research. The
              University has expressed its commitment to the sciences by providing the
              resources for the construction of a new science and technology center that will
              be adjoined to Davis Hall,  a 72 year old science facility.  Currently all
              science is conducted in Davis and Perry Halls.  However over the past years,
              programs in Computer Science and Engineering have had to compete with Biology 
              and Chemistry for dedicated space to conduct research and research training
              activities.   Due to multi-use of laboratory space, research is limited for
              practical and safety reasons.  Laboratories are inadquate to support various
              research activities and lack the proper infrastructural utilities needed.   
              The NSF project will consist of replacing research and research training space
              assigned to computer science, mathematics, and engineering in Davis Hall, and
              the renovation of selected chemistry and biology  laboratories in Davis and
              Perry Halls. The modernization will include upgrading, HVAC, electrical, and
              plumbing systems, installation of fume hoods, cabinetry, counters and computer
              cabling.  The project will provide enhanced research space for faculty, and
              will allow for the expansion of research capabilities,  accommodating  more
              undergraduate and high school students from the city  interested in science and
              technology issues.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
