Title       : Renovations to the Chemistry Research Laboratories on the Camden Campus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1994 
File        : a9415020

Award Number: 9415020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354201             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luke A. Burke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jing Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin M. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karin S. Akerfeldt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Georgia A. Arbuckle-Keil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will provide funding for the renovation of aging chemistry research
              facilities on the  Camden Campus of Rutgers, the State University of New
              Jersey, the only public institution in the  southern part of the state. The
              Chemistry Department is located in the Science Building,  constructed in 1962,
              which has never been renovated.  The project encompasses repairs to the 
              ventilation, electrical and telecommunication systems, and modernizing research
              space and  support facilities to sustain research efforts in the Materials
              Science component of the Chemistry  Department.  The existing ventilation
              system, installed in 1964, will be upgraded and new fume  hoods installed, to
              support increased research activities.  Demands on electrical power 
              requirements are increasing dramatically as more instruments are being added to
              serve faculty in  conducting investigative studies, thus the existing power
              supply to all research labs will be  upgraded and new circuits will be
              installed.  Computer telecommunication wiring within  research space will be
              replaced by a system able to accommodate the immense volume of high  speed
              requirements of data acquisition devices for the research group.    Since the
              campus is located in area that has experienced rapid population growth, and has
              a large  concentration of chemical and pharmaceutical industries,  the
              department has decided to meet the  demands for a graduate chemistry program. 
              This project will enable the department to offer  facilities crucial for
              graduate study.  The improved facilities will also build upon the strengths of 
              continued excellence in the undergraduate program that serves  a large
              percentage of women and  minority students from the inner city and the outlying
              suburbs of Camden.
