Title       : Relocation of Psychology Laboratories to Bailey Hall
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1994    
File        : a9415047

Award Number: 9415047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne Benack benacks@gar.union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0602000   Facilities - Replacement                
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Benack    Union College is a private liberal arts college known for the
              strengths of its science programs  and its incorporation of engineering into a
              traditional liberal arts curriculum.  The  Psychology Department is one of the
              largest and strongest departments on campus.   Currently the department is
              located in the North Colonnade, a 177 year old structure that was  last
              renovated in 1945.  Research space in this building is grossly inadequate to
              support the  department's research activities.  Space is small, poorly designed
              for experimental work and  in a state of extreme deterioration.  Electrical and
              heating systems are antiquated, making it  impossible for equipment to function
              properly.  Faculty have been forced to abandon some  research areas to conduct
              many research projects in classrooms and offices not suited for  these
              activities.  To correct this situation, the college will relocated the
              department to Bailey  Hall, providing much needed space and first-class
              laboratory facilities.    This award will provide funding for the replacement
              of 2216 nsf of research and research  training space in Bailey Hall currently
              occupied by the psychology department in North  Colonnade.  Space will be
              configured to support research activities and will be made to meet  code and
              access requirements.  Five laboratories will be modernized to form the center
              of a  more vigorous and diverse program of research activities for both faculty
              and students.  With  the provision of dedicated space for data collection with
              multiple subjects, research will be  able to proceed more efficiently.  Most
              importantly the relocation will place the department  in proximity to the other
              sciences, promoting the development of interdisciplinary work, the  sharing of
              facilities, more efficient use of computer facilities, and joint supervision of
              student  with interdepartmental majors.
