Title       : Atmospheric Trace Constituents and Global Climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1998  
File        : a9415336

Award Number: 9415336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anjuli S. Bamzai                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei-Chyung Wang wang@climate.cestm.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9415336  Wang, Wei-Chyung  SUNY Albany  Title: Atmospheric Trace
              Constituents and Global Climate    Atmospheric ozone absorbs incoming solar
              radiation, in particular,  the UV-B radiation and acts as s greenhouse gas by
              absorbing  outgoing longwave radiation.  Recent studies suggest that the 
              observed ozone changes in the stratosphere and troposphere can  substantially
              perturb the radiative forcing with important climate  implications.  However,
              large uncertainties exist, mainly related  to radiative transfer schemes and
              vertical distributions of ozone  and temperature.  In addition, ozone is a
              secondary constituent  formed by chemical reactions in the atmosphere involving
              several  precursors (NOx, hydrocarbons and CO).  The concentrations of these 
              precursors depend on the oxidation process in the atmosphere, which  varies
              strongly with time and space (and thus the climate state)  and depends, in
              addition to the precursors, on the hydrogen  radicals like OH and HO2.  There
              fore, it is necessary to have a  self-consistent chemistry-radiative-dynamical
              model to stimulate  the observed ozone changes and account for the feedbacks in
               computing the radiative forcing.    Concerns have also been raised in recent
              years about the climatic  efffect due to increasing tropospheric sulfate
              aerosols of  anthropogenic origin.  The aerosols are expected to cool the 
              surface by directly backscattering the solar radiation and directly  enhancing
              the cloud albedo due to increased aerosol cloud  condensation nuclei.  However,
              large uncertainties exist in the  calculated radiative forcing, in particular
              the enhancement of the  cloud albedo, and its climatic effect.    This project
              will continue modeling and observational studies of  "global climate and
              atmospheric trace constituents" with focus on  atmospheric ozone and sulfate
              aerosols.  The PI will use an  improved radiation model to address several
              issues related to the  radiative forcing calculations associated with observed
              ozone  changes.  His ma in effort is to use the NCAR/GENESIS (General 
              ENvironmental and Ecological Simulation of Interactive Systems)  global model
              to study the direct climatic effects due to observed  ozone changes and
              increased sulfate aerosols.  For the indirect  climatic effects, two
              exploratory tasks are initiated: the  development of a coupled
              climate-chemistry model through continued  collaboration with Prof. Ivar
              Isaksen at the University Oslo; and  the study of increased cloud albedo
              associated with enhanced number  density of sulfate aerosols and its
              parameterization for use in  GENESIS through collaboration with Dr. Joyce
              Penner at the Lawrence  Livermore National Laboratory.    This research is
              important because it addresses questions of  primary importance to global
              change research.
