Title       : Laboratory Renovation for Biology Curriculum Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1995       
File        : a9415117

Award Number: 9415117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $738168             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Marx bobmarx@grove.iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl S. Luciano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Prezant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Indiana University of Pennsylvania is the recipient of NSF funds for the
              renovation of research and research training space in Carl S. Weyandt Hall,
              constructed in 1965.  The building is the home of the science departments,
              including Biology.  No significant work has been done in the building since its
              erection.  The section of the building that houses biology presents serious
              conditions that impede the conduction of research activities. Some of the rooms
              are not configured appropriately, preventing their use at optimal efficiency. 
              Support facilities are inadequate, and the majority of laboratories lack
              sufficient fume hoods, gas, water, electric and telecommunication utilities for
              modern, instrument-intensive work.  In addition to inadequate utilities, very
              little permanent casework is available for current and future projects, and
              laboratories are not in compliance with ADA  regulations. With the curricular
              changes occurring rapidly in science, the facility is not in operative
              condition to support the research mission of the department.   The renovation
              will enhance the department's tradition of student-faculty research that is
              especially strong in ecology and environmental biology.  Rooms dedicated to
              investigative studies for 11 faculty members are slated for renovation. The
              modifications will include:  installation of new casework, benches, and two
              fume hoods; redesign floor plans to optimize efficiency without loss of
              flexibility; upgrade of water, gas, and electrical utilities; and the
              installation of a cold room and three environmental chambers.  The impact of
              this project will be positive and immediate.  Improved spaces will allow
              research groups to conduct their work more efficiently, by accommodating more
              students, and allowing them to embark on projects that otherwise would be
              impossible due to the limitations that exist in the present building.  A more
              exciting atmosphere will be produced which will contribute to the department's
              ability to recruit students and remain competitive in attracting a diverse and
              broadly represented faculty and student base.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
