Title       : Microscopic Properties of Impurity-Hydrogen Complexes in Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9415404

Award Number: 9415404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242139             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Stavola mjsa@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9415404  Stavola  Hydrogen  is  a common and highly reactive impurity in 
              semiconductors. It has been known for more than a decade  that hydrogen forms
              complexes with  deep  level impurities  and modifies their electrical
              properties, but   these  hydrogen  containing  complexes  have  remained  
              poorly  understood  because  it  has  not been possible  to  obtain  structure
              sensitive  data.  Previously  the  PI  discovered  that  complexes  of hydrogen
               with  transition metal  impurities in silicon  can  be  formed  in sufficient 
              number. This research will take advantage of this  finding  to  use  structure 
              sensitive  methods like  infrared  absorption  and electron   paramagnetic 
              resonance  spectroscopies.  The   microscopic structures  and  electrical
              properties of several  hydrogenated  deeplevel  defects will be investigated
              using these techniques. The  primary goal of this work is to develop a
              fundamental  understanding of several model  systems  that  will  provide  a 
              foundation  for  understanding complexes with deep-level  defects in
              semiconductors.  %%%  Hydrogen  is frequently introduced into semiconductor 
              materials  where it  modifies the electrical properties of  defects an
              impurities.  This is particularly true, for  example, in the polycrystalline or
              amorphous semiconductors  used in solar cell or flat panel display 
              technologies where  the  presence  of  hydrogen is necessary  to  improve 
              material characteristics. It has not been understood at a  fundamental level
              how hydrogen  affects defect properties  because, previously, it  had  been
              difficult  to  determine  the microscopic structures  of  the  hydrogen
              defects. In  this work, structure-sensitive measurements will  be  made  to
              elucidate the properties of several hydrogen containing  defects in Si  that 
              can  be used as models to help  understand how  semiconductor defects interact
              with  hydrogen.  ***
