Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Acoustic and Perceptual Study of the Syllable
               in Tsou
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1995    
File        : a9415498

Award Number: 9415498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9999               (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Keating keating@humnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9415498                        This study will conduct an acoustic and
              perceptual phonetic  investigation of the syllable in Tsou, an Austronesian
              language  spoken in Taiwan. Tsou has been chosen because the range of  syllable
              onset consonant clusters that it permits is rarely  attested in other
              languages. This makes Tsou an ideal language  for the main goal of this study:
              determining the role that  perception plays in shaping syllable structure.     
                    It has been proposed that syllable structure is due in large  part to
              demands that the perceptual system places on language.  It is the hypothesis of
              this study that speakers of Tsou produce  the exceptional syllable onset
              clusters in such a way as to  maximize the cues to the presence of both the
              first and second  consonant.            To test this hypothesis, an acoustic
              and a perceptual study  will be carried out in Taiwan. The acoustic study will
              examine in  detail the characteristics of consonant release bursts and  formant
              transitions of Tsou consonant clusters as well as  singleton consonants.       
                  A set of perceptual experiments will follow up the results  of the acoustic
              studies. The stimuli will be made using digital  editing. The experiments will
              include stimuli made by excising  the first burst in a consonant cluster, and
              splicing a burst from  a cluster into a position preceding a singleton burst.
              The  experiments will use a forced choice paradigm in which the  listeners will
              be asked to identify the stimuli as a word with a  simple onset or a word with
              a cluster onset. The goal of such  experiments is to test the hypothesis that
              the release burst  alone contains sufficient information to alter the percept
              on the  part of the listener. It will also determine the degree to which 
              formant transitions contribute to the consonant percept in onset  clusters.
