Title       : Renovation of Laboratories for Research and Training in Microbial Biodiversity,
               Physiology, and Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1995   
File        : a9415086

Award Number: 9415086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $603000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry B. Dodgson 22314jbd@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1305,9104,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dodgson  NSF-supported renovations within Giltner Hall at Michigan State
              University will  support research and research training activities of the
              Microbiology Department in  microbial diversity, physiology, and genetics.  The
              department is home to the NSF  Science and Technology Center for Microbial
              Ecology (CME).  Giltner Hall was  constructed in 1952; the laboratory
              facilities are considerably outdated for modern  science and inefficiently
              designed for research interactions.  The renovations will  impact nine faculty
              directly and a substantial portion of the Department s more than  70 graduate
              students.  The renovation will involve the basement and floors one through
              three of the central  section of Giltner Hall and will be directed at
              correction of a number of deficiencies.   Laboratory space will be
              re-configured to improve efficiency and to cluster faculty by  major interest
              area.  In addition, the project will reorganize space to reduce safety, 
              security, and accessibility problems that occur with the current mix of general
               classroom space and research space, and it will address major systemic
              problems such  as lack of temperature control and a poor air handling system. 
              A new HVAC system  will be installed to correct problems with space
              overheating, equipment failures and  researcher discomfort.  The new mechanical
              systems will also greatly reduce airborne  contaminants, as circulated air will
              be filtered, and new ceilings will be installed to  cover exposed overhead
              pipes.  New laboratory benches will be added to increase  work surface space, 
              and a new self-contained warm room,  walk-in incubator, and  two new autoclaves
              will be installed.  Two of the nine faculty directly impacted by this
              renovation activity will move from  other campus locations to join fellow
              faculty in research activities which are expected  to provide future benefits
              in biotechnology, global change, and environmental  research.  In addition to
              ongoing laboratory-based research efforts, the department is  managing  the
              Bergey s Manual Trust, and the collection and archival activities of two  major
              bioninformatic projects.
