Title       : Renovation of Chemistry Research Laboratories at the University of Missouri -
               St. Louis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1995       
File        : a9415182

Award Number: 9415182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon K. Anderson ganderson@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Brammer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Welsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9161,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Missouri-St. Louis and NSF will jointly fund the renovation
              of chemistry research laboratory space in 29-year old Benton Hall.  The primary
              objectives of the renovation effort will be the installation of additional fume
              hoods and the replacement of deteriorated cabinet bench space.  Benton Hall 
              was the first building constructed on the St. Louis campus when it was opened
              in 1966 and served a number of purposes:  classrooms, laboratories, faculty
              offices, and the library.  With the recent completion of a research wing
              addition to the building, chemistry has been able to gain more research space,
              but five of the original labs in Benton Hall have not undergone any remodeling.
                 The spaces will be used by 3 faculty and a total of 20 others including post
              doctoral fellows and graduate and undergraduate students.  All are pursuing one
              of three primary research programs:  transition metal organometallic chemistry,
              organometallic research with an emphasis on structural chemistry, and
              computational and polymer chemistry.  Some of the research involves computer
              assisted design and synthesis of polymer and bioactive molecules, including the
              design and optimization of ballistic- and laser- hardened polymers; and the
              synthesis and characterization of biomimetic synthetic analogs of the so-called
              natural antifreeze proteins and deicers and anti-icers.  Upgrading the space in
              Benton Hall will almost complete the University's 1985 goal and subsequent
              efforts to improve research opportunities in chemistry.  During that year, the
              University Board of Curators identified several programs in the Missouri system
              as future Centers of Eminence.  A total of eight programs were selected, and
              the Department of Chemistry at UM-St. Louis was the only one selected on that
              campus, as well as the only chemistry program selected within the system.  The
              NSF-supported renovations will provide additional, safe fume hood space as well
              as replace corroded cabinetry.  The result will be an environment in which and
              chemicals can be used safely.  It will also provide the opportunity for pursuit
              of catalytic chemistry, complementing current work which is confined to
              stoichiometric chemistry.  The physical improvements are expected to increase
              the number of student researchers, (30% of whom are female and 10% of whom are
              minorities) working in organometallic chemistry.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
