Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic K-Theory, Topological Cyclic Homology and
               Crystalline Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1994      
File        : a9415615

Award Number: 9415615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy McCarthy randy@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9415615  McCarthy       One goal of this project is to continue the study of 
              theories closely related to algebraic K-theory but which are more  accessible
              to computation, in particular, topological Hochschild  homology and various
              theories which are generated from it.  A  major focal point for these
              investigations is W(p)(A), which is  the homotopy inverse limit of the fixed
              point spectra of  topological Hochschild homology of a ring A with respect to
              the  subgroups of the circle having order divisible by the prime p,  where the
              structure maps are those arising from the restriction  of equivariant maps to
              their fixed point subspaces.  When A is  commutative, the 0-th homotopy group
              of W(p)(A) consists of the  p-th Witt vectors of A, and there is a natural map
              from K(End(A))  to W(p)(A) which on the 0-th homotopy group is the expected map
               (from work of Almkvist).  If we use W(p)(A) as a generalization  of the p-th
              Witt vectors, one is led to consider the homotopy  fixed point spectrum of
              W(p)(A) (there is a circle action) as a  possible generalization of the p-th
              DeRham-Witt complex.  The  composite map from K(A) to K(End(A)) (by the
              identity  endomorphism) to W(p)(A) factors through the homotopy orbit  spectrum
              of W(p)(A), and it is the investigator's hope that this  is a good modification
              of Bloch's crystalline chern character.       This project treats some of the
              algebraic apparatus that has  been developed with huge success over the past
              several decades  for reducing geometric information to a subject for
              calculation.   The nature of the geometric information involved is the crux of 
              the difficulty.  While questions about lengths, areas, angles,  volumes, and so
              forth virtually cry out to be reduced to  calculations, it is far different
              with what are known as  topological properties of geometric objects.  These are
               properties such as connectedness (being all in one piece),  knottedness,
              having no holes, and so forth.  All systematic study  of such properties, for
              example, how to tell whet her two  geometric objects really differ in respect
              to one of these  properties or are only superficially different, or how to 
              classify the variety of differences that can occur, all these  have only truly
              been comprehended and mastered when they have  been reduced to matters of
              calculation.  The investigator's work  aims to understand better the relations
              among some of the  powerful algebraic tools now available for doing this, the 
              obvious hope being that with better understanding comes the  ability to perfect
              and sharpen them.  The potential value of  something so basic is hard to
              quantify, since topological  properties and questions arise in such widely
              varied mathematical  settings as the differential equations that govern
              satellite  motions and the conditions for equilibrium of models of the 
              ecomomy.  ***
