Title       : The Role of Snow Cover and its Distribution in Governing Heat and Mass Exchange
               in the Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9415386

Award Number: 9415386
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498488             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Sturm msturm@crrel.usace.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glen E. Liston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                        ABSRTACT    A combined program of field measurements and modeling  of 
              the Artic snow cover is proposed as an addition to the Land/  Atmosphere/ Ice/
              Interactions (LAII) component of the Artic  System Science Program.  The
              objective of the proposed  program is to understand the role of the Artic snow
              cover in  governing the winter heat and mass exchange between  the  ground and
              atmosphere.    The justification for studying the Artic snow cover is that  it
              is one of the dominant features of the Artic system and  needs to be accurately
              incorporated in an Artic system  model.  Studies have shown that long-term
              changes in the  depth and thermal properties of the snow that could  accompany
              a change in climate would affect plants under the  snow and the temperature. 
              Furthermore, thawing of carbon-  rich permafrost may release CO2 to the
              atmosphere, providing  a strong feedback mechanism for local and global 
              warming.  Predicting  how the Artic will respond to changing climate  will
              require understanding the role of the winter snow  cover.    The core of the
              proposed program is a series of over-snow  traverses during which extensive
              measurements of the  physical and thermal properties of the snow will be made. 
              Traverse measurements, along with knowledge of the physical  process that
              affect the Artic snow cover, will be used to  develop an Artic snow
              distribution model.  The validated  snow distribution model can be incorporated
              in both climate  and surface process models being developed under other LAII 
              projects.
