Title       : The Impact of Spatial and Temporal Variability of the Landscape on
               Atmosphere-Land Surface Interactions at the Mesoscale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9415441

Award Number: 9415441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roni Avissar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9415441  Avissar    As part of a prior NSF investigation (EAR-9105059),  it was
              demonstrated that subgrid-scale heat and momentum fluxes associated with
              mesoscale circulations generated by horizontal gradients of water availability
              for evapotranspiration, have a significant impact on the atmospheric processes
              simulated with large-scale atmospheric numerical models (e.g., GCMs).  However,
              these fluxes, which can be three times stronger than turbulent (i.e.,
              microscale) fluxes, are not represented in such models.  The research proposed
              here is a continuation of this prior investigation, which concentrates on
              clouds and precipitation generated by landscape discontinuities at the
              mesoscale and their interactions with the horizontal distribution of soil
              moisture, evapotranspiration, and the other surface fluxes.  The proposed
              research includes three major tasks, which are expected to be accomplished
              within three years (one task a year): (i) a sensitivity analysis of which
              parameters are most important in the parameterization of cloud and
              precipitation microphysics relevant to land-atmosphere interactions; (ii) a
              systematic analysis of the impact of water availability for evapotranspiration
              at the ground surface on clouds and precipitation; and (iii) a parameterization
              of mesocale heart fluxes (including moist processes) generated by land-surface
              heterogeneity for large-scale atmospheric models.  To perform efficiently this
              research, which is based on numerical analysis, it is very important to adopt a
              models that has refined parameterizations of cloud physics as well as land
              hydrology.  Furthermore, it should have the flexibility to produce simulations
              on a broad range of spatial scales.  Thus, the Colorado State University (CSU)
              Regional Atmospheric Modeling System (RAMS), a state-of-the-art modeling system
              designed to support basic research in the atmospheric sciences will be used for
              this investigation.  This research, which will provide new insights in the
              complex hydrometeorological processes in volved in land-atmosphere interactions
              at the mesoscale, is expected to be particularly relevant and beneficial for
              the research activity endorsed by GEWEX and  other national and international
              programs.
