Title       : Renovation of the Departments of Psychology and Environmental Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9415110

Award Number: 9415110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200904            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Balsam pbalsam@barnard.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie L. Pfirman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,5219,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Barnard College, founded in 1889, is an independent undergraduate college for
              women affiliated with Columbia University.  Its history is distinguished by the
              accomplishments of its students and by the quality of its undergraduates.  The
              College-s commitment to the sciences is substantial, which is reflected by the
              success of graduates who have pursue the doctorate degree. The Psychology
              Department, one of the prolific producers of women scientists, has an eminent
              tradition of faculty research and an impressive record of educating women
              scientists.  Many of the department-s achievements can be attributed to the
              strengths of the integrative neuroscience program.  Though successful, the
              program is in a  position of losing its momentum.  Present facilities in
              Milbank Hall, built in 1949,  severely limit the present, and threaten the
              future, research and research training programs in the area of cognition,
              perception, memory, learning and behavioral development.  Also home to the
              Environmental Science Department, a more recently established and rapidly
              expanding program, is experiencing dramatic growth despite outmoded facilities.
              Current laboratories prohibit faculty and students from conducting research on
              issues of climatic change and the geochemistry of water and air-born
              pollutants, central to faculty research.  ARI funds will be used to relocate
              and upgrade research labs for the integrative neuroscience program and for
              renovating existing research space occupied by  the Environmental  Department
              in Altschul and Milbank Halls.  Renovations will consist of:  increasing
              electrical power to sustain research needs, improving HVAC and plumbing
              systems, and installing two fume hoods.  With the renovations, Barnard will be
              in a position to maintain and advance the College-s strong research and
              research training record in Psychology; while enabling the Environmental
              Science Department to provide its faculty and students with the facilities
              required to achieve the distinguished record of the other sciences.  These
              improvements will allow Barnard to meet its long-term goals of providing the
              necessary resources for scientific research and of offering undergraduate women
              significant opportunities to conduct research.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
