Title       : Experiments in Deep-Sea Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1998 
File        : a9415371

Award Number: 9415371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Holger W. Jannasch hjannasch@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl O. Wirsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9415371  Jannasch      The principal objective of this project is to study the 
              major growth characteristics of those microorganisms that  are actively growing
              and mineralizing organic carbon in the  deep-sea.  The project will test the
              hypothesis whether  adaptation to in situ temperature and pressure
              (psychrophily  and barophily) of deep-sea bacteria are invariant with 
              nutrition.  More specifically, whether oligotrophy  (adaptation to growth at
              extremely low nutrient levels) and  barophily are metabolically linked in the
              microbial deep-sea  flora.    Earlier observations during the last research
              period with  batch culture studies at various pressures and with  continuos
              culture studies at 1 Atm, resulted in data that  clearly indicated an effect of
              substrate concentration on  barophilic activity.  The data also demonstrated
              the need  for working with typical oligotrophic bacteria in the  presence of
              substrate concentrations lower than those  inherent to batch culture and the
              need to carry out growth  experiments in steady state cultures under pressure. 
              To  this end a new pressurizable chemostat has been designed and  constructed.
              This project will employ existing pressure  equipment in combination with the
              new capability to enrich  for deep-sea bacteria at low substrate levels in the 
              pressurized chemostat. The pressurizable chemostat   will be  used to obtain
              deep-sea samples in the absence of  decompression for the isolation of truly
              oligotrophic  barophiles. The significance of this work lies in the fact  that
              the microbial turnover of the largest portion of  dissolved organic carbon in
              the biosphere, the oceanic  portion, is unknown.  Data clarifying the metabolic
               strategies of the adapted deep-sea bacteria will  be of  great value for
              calculation of the global carbon cycle.  ***
