Title       : Dissertation Research: Settlement Organization and Sociopolitical Evolution in
               China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9415394

Award Number: 9415394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patty Jo Watson pjwatson@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Watson    Under the direction of Dr. Patty Jo Watson, Mr. Jimmy Railey will 
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Mr. Railey has worked  with Chinese
              archaeologists in the survey and excavation of  archaeological sites in the
              southern Yuanqu basin, located in the  middle Yellow River in China. The team
              has found a series of  settlements which encompass both the Neolithic and early
              Bronze  Age periods and thus document the emergence of complex stratified 
              societies in this region. With National Science Foundation  support, Mr. Railey
              will continue this work. He will participate  in on-going excavations at three
              sites in the Basin and also  conduct a survey of the surrounding area. Spatial
              analyses of the  data he collects will provide information on the long-term
              trends  in regional demography and settlement patterns. It will document 
              changes in the size and internal organization of specific  communities over
              time and shed light on the organization of  production and distribution of
              ceramics. He will conduct a  detailed analysis of ceramic materials recovered
              and also examine  floral and faunal remains recovered from the sites.   
              Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies arose  since these form
              the basic social structure within which we live  today. To gain insight into
              the underlying processes involved, it  is necessary to utilize a comparative
              method and examine a number  of individual instances in which this
              transformation took place.  Only in this way can general trends be separated
              from historical  particulars. In this context the Yellow River region of China
              is  extremely important because this was one of the independent  cradles of
              world civilization. Mr. Railey works on sites which  span this transition. The
              research will also provide data of  interest to many archaeologists, further
              scientific cooperation  between the United States and the Peoples Republic of
              China and  help to train a promising young scientist.
