Title       : Regulation of Toxicity in the Dinoflagellate Alexandrium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9415536

Award Number: 9415536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Anderson danderson@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9415536  Anderson                          PROJECT ABSTRACT           Blooms of
              toxic dinoflagellates in the genus  Alexandrium result in outbreaks of
              paralytic shellfish  poisoning (PSP), one of the more serious of the global 
              marine phenomena collectively termed "red tides".  The  economic,  public
              health, and ecosystem impacts of PSP  outbreaks take a variety of forms, and
              include human  intoxications and death from contaminated shellfish or fish, 
              stages of fisheries species, and death of marine mammals,  fish, and seabirds. 
              These impacts are caused by the  saxitoxins, a family of neurotoxins produced
              by the  dinoflagellates and accumulated in zooplankton, shellfish,  or fish
              during feeding.         The overall objective of this project is to identify 
              genes involved in toxin production in Alexandrium spp. and  other
              saxitoxin-producing organisms and to study the manner  in which they are
              regulated.  The approach will use  differential display to identify messenger
              RNA differences  between cells that differ in their ability to make toxin. 
              Differentially expressed sequences can then be used to  screen for the putative
              toxin genes in a wide range of toxic  and non-toxic species of dinoflagellates
              and cyanobacteria.  Other indirect evidence for the toxin-specificity of the 
              identified genes will derive from manipulations of  dinoflagellate metabolism
              using inhibitors that block toxin  biosynthesis at different levels.  If the
              differential  display approach is not successful because the toxin genes  are
              not regulated at the transcriptional level, traditional  methods of
              two-dimensional protein electrophoresis will be  applied to extracts of
              Alexandrium from different cell cycle  stages to address the remaining
              possibility of  translational/post-translational regulation.  This in turn 
              will lead to the identification and isolation of genes  implicated in toxin
              production.  Both of the above  approaches will provide genetic tools needed to
              conduct  regulatory studies to determine the mechanisms  by which  these genes
              are turned on and off.   The information gained  will aid in deciphering some
              of the long-standing mysteries  surrounding the metabolic role of saxitoxin in 
              dinoflagellates and the toxin variability observed in  different isolates or in
              individual isolates under different  environmental conditions.
