Title       : Renovation of the Willis H. Booth Building for the Center for Advanced Computing
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1998  
File        : a9415032

Award Number: 9415032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1367500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Messina messina@ccsf.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The California Institute of Technology is the recipient of funds from the
              Academic Research  Infrastructure Program for the renovation of the Willis H.
              Booth Building, constructed in 1962.  The modernization of the facility is a
              crucial step in forming a new multidisciplinary effort, the Center for Advanced
              Computing Research (CACR).  The Caltech Concurrent Supercomputing Facilities
              (CCSF) will be transformed into the CACR, shifting the original emphasis of the
              CCSF from leading-edge parallel computing to a greater emphasis on conducting
              multidisciplinary research collaborations to achieve breakthrough scientific
              and engineering computations.  In order to create an intellectual environment
              that stimulates advances in computational science and engineering research, the
              physical space requires modernization. The space must catalyze face to face and
              remote collaborations, and provide access to a host of advanced computing
              communication and information technologies. Presently, CCSF staff and their
              research collaborators are dispersed in both the Booth Building and other
              buildings on campus.  The renovation will consolidate research space in a
              centralized location, fostering interaction among research personnel and
              students.  ARI funds will be used to renovate the interior structure of the
              basement, first, and second floors to create cyberspaces that will eliminate
              barriers to the physical location of researchers and information.  Cyberspaces
              are environments created by computers, networks, and hypermedia and multimedia
              technologies that provide access to located and remote sources of information
              and data, simulation capabilities, and real-time visualization of simulation
              results.  In addition, mechanical and electrical systems will be replaced, and
              fire protection devices and network infrastructure will be installed.  By
              providing a campus-wide focal point  for multidisicplinary computational
              science and engineering activities, the renovation of the Booth Building will
              enhance research by creating an atmosphere that stimulates interactions
              involving additional application scientists and engineers, computer scientists,
              and applied mathematicians.  Hence, the project will  propagate the benefits of
              high-performance computing, communications, and multimedia technologies to
              scientific and engineering research areas while simultaneously creating new
              generations of computational scientists and engineers.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
