Title       : Renovation of UTSA Animal Research Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1997       
File        : a9415195

Award Number: 9415195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Neal Guentzel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) is the recipient of ARI funds
              for the renovation of the Animal Research Facility (ARF), constructed in 1974. 
              Presently, one room within the ARF is available to researchers employing minor
              research procedures required for developmental neuroscience, endocrinology, 
              cell and molecular biology and behavioral science investigations.  Although
              faculty have been productive, the kinds and quality of research that can be
              performed at the institution are limited due to inefficient space, location,
              and physical constraints. The research environment lacks adequate services such
              as gas and air, and fixed furnishings including benches, cabinets, and
              ventilated hoods.  The ventilation system does not comply with accepted
              standards for housing laboratory animals and cannot accommodate the special
              needs to isolate animals with known biohazards or with unknown health
              conditions.  Due to the impediments, investigators must transport  animals to 
              individual labs or to other facilities on the main campus.  At times the
              investigators are forced to house or use animals at other institutions because
              of limited space and facilities at UTSA.    As part of a comprehensive
              expansion and renovation effort supported by the University of Texas System,
              the NSF project will  include renovating space for aquatic and semi-aquatic
              animals, creating a multipurpose laboratory, sterile preparation rooms,  and
              utility and storage rooms.  The plumbing and HVAC systems in current space will
              also be replaced.    Once completed, the renovated space will  give researchers
              the capabilities required to conduct different types of research in various
              fields of science, and will help broaden the base and diversity of the biology
              program. Thus students are exposed to a wide range of techniques applicable to
              many different areas of science. Not only has UTSA recently been authorized to
              offer a Ph.D. program in biology, but the institution prepares a considerable
              large percentage of Hispanic students for careers in science. Modernization of
              the facility is essential for the department's expanding biological research
              and research training programs, including the preparation of minority
              scientists for the scientific challenges of the 21st century.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
