Title       : Processes Affecting Material Transport to the Oceans from Arctic-Subarctic
               Watershed, from Direct Groundwater Discharge and through Lagoonal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1997   
File        : a9415789

Award Number: 9415789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert L. Windom herb@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2453

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9415789  WINDOM    Processes affecting material transport to the oceans from
              Arctic-  Subarctic Watersheds, from direct groundwater discharge and through 
              Lagoon Systems    A number of gaps exist in the understanding of biogeochemical
               processes associated with the transport of material across the  land-sea
              boundary. Among these gaps are lack of data on: 1) small  watersheds of
              different morphoclimatic zones and their  ability/efficiency, relative to
              larger watersheds, to transport  materials to the oceans, 2) transport of
              material through lagoonal  estuarine systems, the mixing rates of which are
              slow and the  mixing zones large, and 3) inputs of material to coastal waters
              in  groundwater.    Research is proposed to address these gaps through
              investigations  on three types of under-studied systems with the following 
              objectives:    A) To obtain a better understanding of products resulting from 
              arctic-subarctic weathering, the fate of these materials (primary  trace
              elements) in the freshwater-seawater mixing zone and relative  contribution of
              fluxes to the ocean from smaller rivers of this  morphoclimatic zone.  These
              studies will be carried out in the  Anadyr river-estuary system in Northeastern
              Russia.    B) To identify the major biogeochemical interactions that control 
              trace element fluxes through a lagoonal estuary, taking advantage  of the slow
              mixing rate/long residence times of materials in such  systems to obtain better
              resolution of solute-master variable  relationships during mixing in the low
              salinity region.  The Patos  Lagoons, in Southern Brazil will provide the field
              site for these  investigators.    C) To determine the composition and
              concentrations of subterranean  weathering products associated with the
              Floridan Aquifer and to  investigate biogeochemical processes that influence
              the fate of  trace elements upon entering the marine environment. Freshwater 
              springs, which discharge directly into coastal waters of the West  Florida
              shelf, and the adjacent coastal waters will pr ovide the  site for these
              studies.
