Title       : Renovation of Research Facilities in the Department of Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1995     
File        : a9415022

Award Number: 9415022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $896200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger L. McMacken   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9155,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The NSF award to John Hopkins University will be utilized to redesign and 
              completely renovate facilities for the Biochemistry Department in the School of
               Hygiene and Public Health, east Baltimore, MD.  The School, the first public
              health  school in the Unites States, offers multiple programs in the basic
              biological and  environmental sciences and provides leadership in biochemical
              and biotechnological  research and education. The Biochemistry department is
              oriented towards studies of  fundamental biological problems which are carried
              out at the interface of biology and  chemistry.  Fundamental chemical,
              biochemical, molecular biological, structure,  biophysical and genetic
              approaches are stressed in order to understand the  mechanisms of biological
              processes in experimentally-accessible systems.         NSF support will be
              matched with institutional funds to redesign and renovate  decaying
              laboratories on three floors of the Hygiene building, the core of which was 
              constructed in 1926.  Building additions were constructed in 1963 and 1968. 
              The  original building was last renovated approximately 40 years ago; the
              additions have  not been renovated since construction.  The three-year
              renovation project will correct  research space which is poorly configured in
              very small laboratories, inhibiting  spontaneous interactions, communication
              and intellectual exchange among researchers.   Centralized instrumentation
              rooms facilities will be constructed.  Ten additional  chemical fume hoods, a
              cold room, and vented solvent cabinets will be installed, as  will new
              casework, including benchtops which are resistant to concentrated acids and 
              bases, organic solvents, and radioactive fluids.         The renovations will
              have immediate impact on the ten current faculty and will  be a major resource
              in attracting two new faculty.  The new laboratories will facilitate  more
              training opportunities for graduate students, as bench space will be greatly 
              increased through the redesign effort.  Over the next f ive years, the
              department will  have 65 graduate students, 50 postdoctoral fellows and 15
              undergraduates who will be  part of a critical mass of researchers working in
              the area of enzyme mechanisms and  protein structure and function -- areas
              critical to leadership in the next stage of  biotechnology.
