Title       : Replacement of Research and Research Support Space in Biology and Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9415111

Award Number: 9415111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1723627            (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert N. Thompson athompso@spelman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Etta Z. Falconer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Flanigan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Spelman College
	      350 Spelman Lane S W
	      Atlanta, GA  303144346    404/681-3643

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Spelman College is one of the premier institutions charged with educating
              African American  women.  The College is the leading educator of African
              American women scientists in the nation. Integral to the institution's science
              program is a strong emphasis in research and research training.  Faculty
              members are currently undertaking research  in such areas as analytical
              chemistry, bioinorganic chemistry, spectroscopy, environmental biology,
              neurobiology cell and molecular biology, and atomic physics, all having far
              reaching implications for society.  Each faculty member supervises an average
              of four undergraduate research assistants.  Opportunities to collaborate with
              faculty on directed research projects are further complemented by a wide range
              of sponsored research training programs that provide early exposure and
              hands-on training to over 150 undergraduate students. However, the ability of
              Spelman to maintain this momentum is impeded by obsolete and inadequate
              research facilities in Tapley Hall, the 70 year old science building.  The
              building cannot support the current level of faculty and student investigations
              or provide a safe environment to conduct such activities.   To insure the
              continued vigor of the science at Spelman, the College will construct a new
              science complex that will include a facility dedicated to research, research
              training and teaching laboratories in Biology, Chemistry, and Physics.  NSF
              funds will be used to replace  current space dedicated to research and research
              training, and laboratory support facilities including instrumentation and cold
              rooms.  A renovated Tapely Hall will serve as a classroom and instructional
              laboratory facility, for five science disciples including research and research
              training space for mathematics and computer science. This replacement project
              will be instrumental in supporting the efforts of this historically Black
              institution as it continues to address the challenge of African American women
              participation in the  science.  It will also enhance the research program
              required for early exposure and advanced training to the next generation of
              women scientists who will contribute to the nation's research and development 
              potential.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
