Title       : Renovation and Modernization of Facilities for GIS and Remote Sensing Research
               at Oklahoma State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1997   
File        : a9415160

Award Number: 9415160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Wikle geogtaw@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Waits  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Stadler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,1325,9155,9198,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As a recipient of ARI funds, Oklahoma State University  (OSU) will renovate and
              modernize its research  facilities used for geographic information systems
              (GIS) and remote sensing research located in the  Geography Building on the
              Stillwater campus.  The multi-use facility has a growing reputation in the 
              region as a center for geographic research. Examples of research conducted in
              the Department include:  investigations of the diffusion of language
              innovations, modeling spatial correlation between  landscape and atmospheric
              conditions, and integrating remote sensing and geographic information system 
              technologies for optimizing crop yields.  Geography faculty  collaborate with
              faculty in other  departments on campus as well as professionals affiliated
              with academe and industry in institutions  throughout the country.  In addition
              to performing high quality research, the GIS remote sensing  faculty at OSU has
              made a major commitment to increasing the number and quality of students who
              are  involved with geographic research in Oklahoma, especially among
              populations that are traditionally  under-represented in the field.  This
              project will provide the critical research infrastructure that  will allow the
              program to continue to perform cutting edge geographical research into the
              twenty-first  century. Deficiencies that require immediate attention are the
              following:  inadequate electrical power  and grounding, safety problems
              associated with exposed gas and electrical conduits, inadequate heating  and
              air conditioning and wall alterations to improve the efficiency of space used
              for research and  research training. Once completed, the project will support
              critical investigations in the areas of  global change and environmental
              research.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
