Title       : Efficient Method of Discharge Measurements in Rivers and Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1996 
File        : a9415862

Award Number: 9415862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chao-Lin Chiu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9415862  Chiu  The flow in rivers and streams is a major component of the
              hydrologic cycle on earth.  To study and forecast the flow and various
              processes such as the transport of sediment and pollutants in rivers and
              streams, an essential hydrologic variable that must be measured or estimated is
              the discharge.  To determine the discharge, conventional methods require a
              great amount of velocity measurement and are, therefore, too time-consuming,
              inefficient and costly for applications in many situations of critical
              importance.    The proposed project will develop an efficient method of
              discharge measurements, which will have a sound, theoretical basis, and will
              require only a small amount of velocity measurement.  The method can also
              enchance a modern, velocity-profile measuring device, such as an Acoustic
              Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP) which,for technical reasons, misses velocity
              data near the bed and water surface.  The method to be developed can fill the
              missed data and quickly translate a velocity profile measured by the device
              into the cross-sectional mean velocity and, hence, the discharge.  Therefore,
              it should be applicable even to flows in rivers and streams that change rapidly
              with time, such as flows under the effects of ice, wind, and tides.  It is also
              applicable to rivers connecting two lakes, in which even the flow direction
              changes periodically.  Another important application of the method is to
              determine the discharge for (Kalman) filtering schemes, that can be designed to
              sequentially update the flow resistance by using the monitored discharge and
              water level, to reduce the uncertainty in flow forecasting.  The method will be
              based on a velocity distribution model capable of representing various velocity
              distribution patterns, from the channel bed to the water surface, regardless of
              whether the maximum velocity occurs on or below the water surface.  The model
              is based on the probability and entropy concepts, coupled with a geometrical
              technique using a curvilinear coordinate s ystem.
