Title       : Heavy Quark Physics at the Fermilab/D0 Collider Experiment University of Delhi
               Participation, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1995     
File        : a9415561

Award Number: 9415561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R.K. Shivpuri   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delhi
	      
	      New Delhi, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9415561  Shivpuri    Description:  This project provides funds, for  one year,
              to allow three Indian graduate  students and an Indian professor, Dr. Ram 
              Shivpuri from Delhi University, to participate  in a joint project at Fermi
              National  Accelerator Laboratory.  The U.S. Team is  headed by Dr. John
              Peoples, Director of  Fermilab, and Dr. Paul D. Grannis from the  University of
              Rochester, Rochester, NY.  The  scientist and graduate students from Delhi 
              University will participate in the D0 research  program at Fermilab.  This will
              consist in part  in running the experiment during the data-  taking periods,
              taking responsibility for  operation of specific detector systems during  the
              run, analyzing data from the run and  preparing physics results.  The Delhi
              group is  expected to provide needed expertise to the  design of software
              systems needed for offline  computer analysis of data, design and  maintenance
              of the databases characterizing the  detector elements, run conditions and
              analysis  parameters, sorting these data into the  requisite 'streams', and
              serving them to  individual physicist users.  They also will be  responsible
              for specific projects directed at  the upgrade phase of the D0 experiment.   
              Scope:  This collaborative project brings  technical man-power capabilities
              from India, as  well as equipment provided from Indian sources,  to participate
              with American scientists in the  particle physics studies carried out at 
              Fermilab.  It meets the objectives of INT by  supporting cooperative
              activities.   ***
