Title       : Renovation of the Guggenheim Computing Research Facilities at Georgia Tech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1995        
File        : a9415190

Award Number: 9415190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $615000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suresh Menon menon@falcon.ae.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James I. Craig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley C. Bailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              51        Engineering-Aeronautical                
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 With the support of NSF, the School of Aerospace Engineering at Georgia Tech
              will develop a highly flexible, readily expandable, and low-cost Heterogeneous
              Computer Environment for Parallel Processing (HCEPP) to provide the primary
              computational resources for the majority of computational engineering research
              within the School.  The facility will be developed on three floors of the
              62-year old Guggenheim Building and is being undertaken in conjunction with
              building-wide renovations financed by the institution.  For over 60 years, the
              School of Aerospace Engineering at Georgia Tech has been a  national leader in
              engineering research and research training including activities in fluid
              dynamics, materials, diagnostics, turbulence, combustion, design optimization,
              concurrent engineering, and multimedia and complex aerospace system simulation.
               For several decades, this activity has relied on the use of powerful mainframe
              computers located in central campus facilities.  However, computing technology
              has provided geometrically expanding computational capabilities in increasingly
              smaller systems, and these developments have obsoleted the mainframe computer
              in favor of networked high- performance workstations operating in tightly
              clustered groups.   NSF support will renovate research space within the
              Guggenheim Building to create an environment for the integration of local
              computers and high-speed network communications.  Funds will be used to develop
              high-speed FDDI Hubs with Ethernet Switching Hubs for the Ethernet-equipped
              workstations.  Renovations supported under this grant will also provide a
              pro-rata share of improvements to the building infrastructure including
              installation of new HVAC capability, and installation of appropriate electrical
              and fire protection systems.  Increased, and dedicated, HVAC capability will be
              added to meet the specific needs associated with the HCEPP facilities which are
              in discipline-specific computational labs distributed throughout the three
              floor environment.   The renovated facilities will offer opportunities for new
              research endeavors including the integration of design, simulation, and
              large-scale computation involved in multidisciplinary efforts such as the High
              Speed Civil Transport (HSCT); the modeling and simulation of
              turbulence/chemistry interactions in entire engines; airframe and engine
              integration and fluid-structure interactions in new aerospace vehicles; and
              modeling of pollutant dispersion in the atmosphere.  Additional students will
              be able to participate in the research activities through the reconfiguration
              and rehabilitation of existing space.  Currently 76 are enrolled in the
              program; it is anticipated that research and research training capacity will
              increase to 158 students (a 107% increase) with completion of the new
              facilities.  Students, including program participants from  Clark-Atlanta
              University, will work with 8 faculty members to explore capabilities in
              concurrent engineering -- integrating state-of-the-art scientific computational
              tools interacting automatically with optimization tools, geometrical engines,
              and tools for analyzing manufacturability and maintainability of products.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
