Title       : Renovation of Laboratories in Meyer Hall
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1995       
File        : a9415173

Award Number: 9415173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424490             (Estimated)
Investigator: John U. Trefny jtrefny@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy R. Ohno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Furtak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Don L. Williamson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              13        Physics                                 
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Meyer Hall, constructed in 1963, is home to the Department of Physics on the 
              campus of the Colorado School of the Mines.  Primarily designed as a facility
              for the delivery of introductory courses to non-physics science and engineering
              undergraduates, the facility is inadequate to support the voluminous research
              activities currently being conducted by 20 faculty members, 40 graduate
              students, and 100 undergraduate students.  Two major emphases of research in
              the department are in condensed matter physics and materials science.  As
              experimental work in these areas has increased, the use of toxic chemicals and
              hazardous processing procedures has greatly expanded and the facility is unable
              to accommodate research.  Currently, these activities are dispersed throughout
              the building, often located near classrooms, instructional laboratories, or
              offices.  Since there are no areas in the building designed specifically to
              accommodate the safe handling of such materials, the situation has rapidly
              become intolerable.  The marginal facility is poorly ventilated, and includes a
              number of temporary safety structures.  With advances in condensed matter
              science, sample preparation capabilities are important and needed, especially
              in semiconductor device physics and in surface science.  To rectify and improve
              this condition, the Colorado School of the Mines will receive funds from the
              Academic Research Infrastructure Program to renovate an area located on the
              fourth floor as a dedicated facility for the safe handling of toxic chemical
              and hazardous materials. The renovation will consists of reconfiguring space
              and improving infrastructural utilities, in addition to installing fume hoods,
              benches, cabinets, and glove boxes.  chemical storage facilities and a small
              clean room will be created as well.  Renovation of the materials handling and
              processing laboratories will provide the department with modern facilities
              crucial in supporting research in optical properties of metals, semiconductor
              processing, thin film growth,  and the characterization of amorphous silicon. 
              The facility will not only benefit research programs in the Physics Department,
              but  several research projects conducted by researchers affiliated with
              Colorado Advanced Materials Institute, a  State materials program involved with
              promoting research and economic development  in selected technologies, will be
              enhanced.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
