Title       : Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical
               Sciences-"Probability, Algorithms, and Combinatorial Optimization" July 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1994   
File        : a9415060

Award Number: 9415060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anant P. Godbole   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              GodboleNSF-CBMS Regional Conference Proposal #9415060  ABSTRACT: "Probability,
              Algorithms and Combinatorial  Optimization"This proposal "NSF-CBMS Regional
              Conference in  the Mathematical  Sciences - Probability, Algorithms and 
              Combinatorial Optimization" is  being written with the  conviction that the
              Principal Lecturer (PL),  J. Michael  Steele of the University of Pennsylvania,
              will deliver ten  successful and timely lectures on topics in an important, 
              rapidly  growing and sharply focused area of the  Mathematical Sciences.  We 
              believe that a better choice of  Principal Lecturer simply cannot be  made. 
              Michael Steele  is a world-renowned authority in the areas of  Probability, 
              Algorithms and Combinatorial Optimization; a  spokesperson  for the field of
              Applied Probability; a renaissance  mathematician who has contributed much to
              the understanding  of  several fields (and the glue that binds them together); 
              and widely  regarded as a superb lecturer and expositor.We  are confident that
              the conference participants, drawn from a  pool  of established researchers and
              new entrants to the  field; women,  minorities and graduate students; people
              with  primary interests in  other branches of the Mathematical  Sciences and
              those from smaller  non research-intensive  schools; will each be able to
              develop  professionally, make  critically important long-term contacts, and 
              succeed in  making significant contributions of their own, as a result  of
              attendance at this conference.The conference lectures  will survey major ideas
              and recent results,  while  suggesting important future directions; they will
              be  delivered  during the third or fourth week of July 1995 on  the campus of 
              Michigan Technological University (MTU)  in  Houghton, Michigan.  The 
              organizational details and local  arrangements will be taken care of  by the
              Principal  Investigator (PI), Anant P. Godbole, who, along with  several of his
              colleagues at MTU, maintains a vital interest  in the  areas represented by the
              conference.  The PL  will  deliver to the CBMS  a monograph entitled
              "Probability,  Algorithms and Combinatorial  Optimization" by February 1, 
              1996; it will subsequently be published  either by IMS/ASA  or SIAM.  The
              Principal Lecturer will deliver two  lectures  during each of five days. 
              Several formal and informal  discussion sessions will be planned, so as to
              maximize the  amount of  quality time spent together by the participants. 
              Michael Steele's  lectures will be delivered in the ultra-  modern Room U115 of
              the  Materials and Minerals (M\&M)  Building overlooking Portage Lake.  Two  or
              three rooms will  be set aside in Fisher Hall, a short distance  away, for 
              group discussions.  Another classroom will be converted  into a coffee
              room/lounge.  Participants will be housed in  Wadsworth  Hall, on the campus of
              MTU.  Participants will  have access to all the  athletic and library
              facilities at  MTU, and will have accounts in the  Mathematical Sciences 
              Department NeXT Workstation Lab.  Several  organized social  activities will be
              planned, and a conference banquet  will  be held during the middle of the week.
