Title       : Primary Production in Arctic Ecosystems: Interacting Mechanisms of Adjustment to
               Climate Change"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a9415411

Award Number: 9415411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1125125            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gaius R. Shaver gshaver@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward B. Rastetter  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5219,9251,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this research is to analyze the role of temperature, light, and
              nutrient availability in regulating primary production of arctic tundra
              ecosytems at  several levels of ecological organization and at different time
              scales.  The research is organized around  three general hypotheses about the
              mechanisms reeulating adjustments of primary production in response to short-
              and long-term variation in climate.  The basic idea is that different
              mechanisms control the responses to climate at different levels of ecological
              organization and at different time scales.  In order to obtain useful 
              predictions of the effects of climate change on primary production, a better
              understanding of relationships between these interacting mechanisms of
              adjustment to climate change is needed.     To test the three general
              hypotheses, this five-year program of research will focus on an integrated
              series of field experiments in moist tussock tundra at Toolik Lake, Alaska. 
              The mechanisms to be studied include those operating at the physiological level
              (e.g., photosynthesis), the whole-plant level (storage and recycling, changes
              in allocation and biomass turnover), the species and ecotype levels
              (constraints on nutrient use eficiency and growth rates), and the
              whole-ecosystem level (climate controls on soil nutrient supply).   This
              project is part of International Tundra Experiment (ITEX).  It is funded within
              the Arctic System Science (ARCSS)  Program.  Collaboration with other ecologist
               working at Toolik Lake and at other arctic  sites as part of the Long-Term
              Ecological research (LTER) and Global Change in Terrestrial Ecosystems (GCTE)
              programs will increase the application and impact of this research.
