Title       : Renovation of Chemistry and Biochemistry Research Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1997      
File        : a9415016

Award Number: 9415016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446500             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Larrabee larrabee@middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              P. Frank Winkler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Founded in 1800, Middlebury College, located in western Vermont, has committed
              itself to  academic excellence in all disciplines, including the sciences. 
              Research by undergraduate  students, working in close collaboration with
              faculty mentors, is the centerpiece of science  education at Middlebury. 
              Nowhere is this more evident than in the Department of Chemistry and 
              Biochemistry.  The commitment of faculty, in carrying out significant research
              in the setting of  an undergraduate institution,  has increased of the number
              of students pursuing chemistry,  biochemistry and molecular biology.  Success
              has come in spite of antiquated facilities for  research and research training.
               Recognizing this need the college will renovate laboratory space  in the
              Science Center for chemical and biochemical research with support from the
              Academic  Research Infrastructure Program.  Present conditions of research
              space dedicated to the department are inappropriate and poorly  configured to
              support research activities.  Renovations will include consolidating research
              space  that is currently dispersed throughout the building.  Instrumentation
              rooms will be created for all  major analytical instruments.  New fume hoods
              and ventilated storage cabinets  will be located in  all laboratories,
              improving laboratory safety.  The renovated laboratories will provide access to
               modern research space for more undergraduate students and will substantially
              improve the  environment for student-faculty research.  These modifications
              will facilitate the substantial flow  of scientific results from Middlebury
              faculty and students, and will contribute to the recruitment  and training of
              future scientists.
