Title       : Renovation of Mechanical Engineering Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1997        
File        : a9415199

Award Number: 9415199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keshav S. Varde   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Mechanical Engineering, at the University of
              Michigan-Dearborn, is the recipient of  funds from the National Science
              Foundation to renovate engineering laboratory space to meet research  needs of
              students and faculty in the areas of combustion engines and fuels, and
              lightweight materials.  Research activities involving combustion engines,
              alternative fuels, and emissions have allowed  talented minority high school
              students, undergraduates and graduate students to work independently or  with
              faculty members in the discipline.  Although research activities are performed,
              existing  laboratories lack proper environmental controls and safety mechanisms
              required to effectively operate  the facility throughout the year.  Due to the
              lack of air conditioning and humidity controls,  emissions  equipment and other
              diagnostic instrumentation are inoperable in the summer months. The  test cell
              gas detection system frequently malfunctions because of its age, thereby
              causing  interruptions during experiments.  Proper facilities for research in
              lightweight materials such as  plastics and composites are not available. 
              While scholarly activities in the discipline have been  expanding, the lack of
              space devoted to plastics and composites research has limited student 
              participation in experimental research and design in the field.  The renovation
              plan entails:  consolidating the existing foundry and metals processing
              laboratories to provide clean space for  plastics and composite research,
              providing climate and humidity controls for renovated labs, and  installing a
              new gas detection system to detect poisonous and flammable gases that build up
              in the  test cells.  The renovation of the engine test cells and the foundry
              area will increase research and  design productivity of faculty and students by
              increasing research training opportunities, sponsored  research activities in
              the department, and contributing to the needs of industry.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
