Title       : Renovation of Materials Chemistry/Physics Facility at SUNY -Binghamton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1998   
File        : a9415193

Award Number: 9415193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $815000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Stanley Whittingham STANWHIT@BINGHAMTON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence J. Roma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9155,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Whittingham       The NSF award will provide support for renovation of the
              Materials  Chemistry/Physics Facility in the Science II building at the State
              University of New  York (SUNY) Binghamton.  Science II was constructed in 1967
              and has not  undergone any renovation since.  Project funding will provide a
              substantial  improvement for cross-disciplinary activities between chemistry
              and physics in the  areas of materials chemistry and condensed matter physics. 
              The effort will benefit 6  faculty members, 22 graduate students and
              approximately 14 undergraduate  researchers.         The NSF-funded project to
              renovate interior laboratories will complement  institutional efforts  for
              major mechanical and roofing improvements.  Laboratories  and instrumentation
              facilities are located on the ground floor of Science II, and  renovation
              activities will include consolidation and reorganization of space, 
              installation of fume hoods, addition of air conditioning units for individual 
              temperature control,  installation of a Helium liquefier, upgrades to the
              electrical  system, installation of a delivery system for gaseous nitrogen, and
              installation of new  laboratory casework.         The project will
              substantially improve research facilities for Electronics  Packaging and
              Materials Research which have been selected by the University as  areas of
              programmatic emphasis.  University identification of these priorities includes 
              resource investment in faculty recruitment, seed funding for development of two
               organized research centers, and substantial start-up funds for conduct of
              research.***  Stevenson       The NSF and the New York Botanical Garden (NYBG)
              will jointly support the  renovation of approximately 131 square research
              meters for the enhancement of  laboratory facilities in systematic and economic
              botany.  The impacted laboratories  have not been renovated since their
              original construction in 1957.  As a result, they  are not configured, or
              mechanically served, for molecular plant systematics, and t hey  do not meet
              modern health and safety standards.  Faculty and graduate students have  been
              unable to conduct on-site research and training and have had to travel to local
               affiliated laboratories and, on occasion, to laboratories located out of
              state.         Renovations will include replacement of two antiquated fume
              hoods,  installation of new electrical wiring with ground fault receptacles,
              upgrading of water  delivery  and drainage systems, installation of
              thermostatic controls, replacement of  traps and valves on steam radiators,
              removal of unused steam lines, and refurbishment  of laboratory cabinets,
              floors, walls, ceilings, and lab bench tops.         The renovation of
              laboratories for use in molecular systematics will add new  impetus to the
              research and research training program at  NYBG and will directly  benefit five
              research scientists, three post doctoral students, and fifteen graduate 
              students in molecular biology.  The molecular research program allows
              researchers to  track the evolution of the same gene in species from widely
              different groups of  organisms, which in turn provides new insight on plant
              evolutionary history.  The  Garden is also used by visiting scientists, many of
              whom travel from Latin America  for study and has cooperative programs with
              three local universities.
