Title       : Dissertation Research: The Role of Selection in Diversifi- cation of Herbivorous
               Insects: An Analysis of Mechanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1993   
File        : a9224286

Award Number: 9224286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Futuyma futuyma@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Funk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Species proliferation must occur through the evolution                         
              of reproductive isolation.  However, few studies of                            
              evolutionary radiation explore the mechanisms by which                         
              biological innovations may facilitate speciation.  The                         
              high diversities of the relatively few herbivorous                             
              insect taxa suggest that herbivory represents an                               
              innovation fostering radiation.  Host-plant                                    
              specialization, furthermore, may plausibly promote                             
              reproductive isolation, as host plants: 1) are patchily                        
              distributed, yielding geographic isolation, and 2)                             
              exert strong selection pressures, yielding adaptive                            
              divergence.  The student will investigate speciation in                        
              the leaf-feeding beetle genus Neochlamisus.                                    
                                                                                             
              Three geographically isolated populations of N.                                
              bebbianae, two sharing the same host, will be the focus                        
              of microevolutionary study.  The degree of reproductive                        
              isolation exhibited by the same-host population pair                           
              will be compared to that for a different-host pair for                         
              a variety of potential components of isolation.                                
              Greater observed isolation between the different-host                          
              populations would support the hypothesis that                                  
              speciation is driven by selection rather than by random                        
              genetic drift.  A DNA sequence-based phylogenetic study                        
              will be performed and use to infer host-associations of                        
              ancestral ferns.
