Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics and Biogeography of Mentzelia (Loasaceae): A
               North and South American Desert Disjunct
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1993   
File        : a9224185

Award Number: 9224185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice L. Hempel  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Mentzelia, one of the few New World amphitropical plant                        
              disjuncts proposed to have originated in North America,                        
              will be examined for genetic divergence and                                    
              phylogenetic relationships by graduate student Alice                           
              Hempel, under the supervision of adviser Robert Jansen                         
              at the University of Texas.  Examination of such New                           
              World disjunctions using DNA restriction site                                  
              information has not been done previously.  The use of                          
              chloroplast DNA, nuclear ribosomal DNA and                                     
              morphological data will generate three independent data                        
              sets to investigate the potential processes leading to                         
              the current distribution such as long distance                                 
              dispersal, vicariance events, relict distributions and                         
              convergent evolution.  Disjunct species and genera have                        
              been comparatively well documented between the arid                            
              lands of North America and South America, but no robust                        
              phylogenies exist for these taxa to interpret the                              
              biogeographical processes.  This project is designed to                        
              answer systematics questions such as the relationships                         
              between the three Loasaceae subfamilies, the sections                          
              in Mentzelia and species within sect.  Mentzelia, which                        
              contains the majority of South American species.  A                            
              revision of sect. Mentzelia, including molecular,                              
              chromosomal and SEM seed coat data is needed to                                
              complete a modern revision of the genus.  Morphological                        
              and molecular data will be analyzed both separately and                        
              integrated, using parsimony methods.  The resulting                            
              phylogenetic trees and measures of genetic divergence                          
              will be used to evaluate the hypotheses regarding the                          
              present distribution of Mentzelia.
