Title       : SGER: Collaborative Research: Hurricane Andrew Effects on Forest Composition in
               the Everglades
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9224776

Award Number: 9224776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven F. Oberbauer oberbaue@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne Koptur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   When Hurricane Andrew slammed into Everglades National Park               
              with wind gust over 170 mph, it deciminated the local forest                   
              while leaving areas of open wetlands largely unharmed.  Trees                  
              were stripped of al their leaves, most branches were broken off,               
              and m any trees were toppled or shattered.  Only a few trees                   
              remained standing in some mangrove forests.  Evergreen woodlands               
              were transformed from lush forest to brown tangles of leafless                 
              debris.  Bald cypress and slash pine forest were also heavily                  
              damaged.  Although Andrew was a natural disaster of enormous                   
              scale, hurricanes in the region have been frequent in the past                 
              and must have been an important force shaping these forests.  As               
              the first major hurricane to directly strike the Park in over 25               
              years, Hurricane Andrew presents a rare opportunity to                         
              investigate the speed and patterns of forest recovery.  This                   
              information is important because forests make up critical fish                 
              and wildlife habitats and recreational areas with the Everglades,              
              even though the Everglades are commonly thought of as open                     
              wetlands.                                                                      
                   Both the degree of damage and the speed with which trees can              
              regrow will determine which species make up a post-hurricane                   
              forest.  The native tree species within the Park appear to differ              
              greatly in their abilities both to withstand hurricane-force                   
              winds and to regrow after hurricane damage.  The recovering                    
              forest should be composed of those tree species that were damaged              
              the least, those that can resprout the fastest, as well as those               
              that can invade open areas.  Research will focus on the extent of              
              damage to the trees species within mangrove, tropical hardwood,                
              pine, and cypress forests in Everglades National Park.  Data will              
              also be taken on which species recover from damage, how fast they              
              recover, and which species colonize open areas in the forests                  
              left by the hurricane.  This information will help to predict                  
              what the recovered forests should look like as well as understand              
              how hurricanes have affected these forests in the past.
