Title       : Assessing Human Responses to Hurricane Andrew
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1992 
File        : a9224872

Award Number: 9224872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41691              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Zeigler djz100F@hamlet.bal.odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                      Major disasters repeatedly focus attention on the need for             
              thorough assessment of the ways that people (both individually                 
              and collectively) assess threats beforehand and respond to                     
              disruptions during and after catastrophic events.  Geographers                 
              have focused their attention in recent years on locational                     
              factors and on the interactions among a broad range of variables               
              that affect human perceptions of and responses to catastrophic                 
              events.  This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will provide                
              support for a team of experienced scientists who will explore                  
              different facets of the response of people in southern Florida to              
              the ravages of Hurricane Andrew in August 1992.  Through field                 
              observation, acquisition and analysis of data, and elicitation of              
              reactions through focus-group discussions, the scientists will                 
              investigate a number of related factors, including (1) decision-               
              making processes related to the evacuation, return, and                        
              relocation of residents; (2) dissatisfaction with governmental                 
              planning and responsiveness; (3) geographic patterns of                        
              evacuation; and (4) comparisons of evacuation and other coping                 
              strategies used by individuals.                                                
                      This project will provide valuable new insights in a number            
              of different yet complementary ways.  Because the proposed                     
              project is effectively grounded in current theoretical                         
              understandings of risk assessment and risk response, it has great              
              potential for providing a more complete basis for assessment of                
              general principles governing human behavior in extremely                       
              stressful and disrupted situations.  The project also should                   
              provide valuable new insights about the strengths and liabilities              
              of a number of different emergency-response strategies.  This                  
              policy-relevant knowledge should enable governments at all levels              
              and other organizations to make sounder judgments regarding                    
              planning for future catastrophes and management of activities                  
              during and after disruptive events.
