Title       : Dissertation Research: Metallurgy at Titelberg, Luxembourg
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1993   
File        : a9224914

Award Number: 9224914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11355              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Hamilton  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Bernard Wailes, MS Elizabeth Hamilton               
              will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Using both                    
              metallographic (optical and SEM) and compositional (PIXE)                      
              analysis, she will analyze a series of objects recovered from the              
              site of Titelberg which is located in Luxembourg. The site                     
              contains well excavated and clearly stratified deposits which                  
              cover the period of ca. 150 B.C. to A.D. 300. It is unusual                    
              because it is one of the few in Western Europe which spans the                 
              transition from "Celtic" or pre-Roman culture through Gallo-Roman              
              times when this region of Europe was assimilated into the Roman                
              empire. The underlying question which MS Hamilton wishes to                    
              address involves culture contact and change. The goal is to                    
              discover the extent to which, in cases such as this one, cultural              
              change occurs on a more than superficial level. To what extent                 
              are basic patterns of behavior altered? MS Hamilton will address               
              this through a study of metal objects which were produced at                   
              Titelberg. She will compare pre and post-contact materials both                
              stylistically and technologically. While it is clear that some                 
              stylistic change did occur, to what extent was more basic                      
              technology affected. Did change at this more profound level take               
              place?                                                                         
                                                                                             
              To reconstruct the past archaeologists rely heavily on material                
              culture because most often it is objects of stone, ceramics or                 
              metal which are most resistant to decay and thus recovered                     
              through excavation. In recent years researchers have come to                   
              realize that it is as interesting - and often more fruitful - to               
              look at how things are made rather than what their final form                  
              might be. Although there is relatively little exchange of                      
              information this change in emphasis can be seen in the analysis                
              of not only metals but also lithic and ceramic remains. As yet it              
              is unclear how ultimate form and technology interrelate and MS                 
              Hamilton's project is important because she will be able to                    
              examine this interaction at a well excavated and securely dated                
              site in a relatively well understood recent past. The work is                  
              important not only for what it may show about Western Europe but               
              also because it will examine a basic methodological issue. The                 
              project is also valuable because it will assist in the training                
              of a promising young scientist.
