Title       : Dissertation Research: Frequency, Distribution and Maintenance of t Haplotypes
               in Mus domesticus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1993   
File        : a9224171

Award Number: 9224171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristin G. Ardlie  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With increasing genetic knowledge of a wide range of                           
              organisms, there has been a surge of interest in the                           
              potential for conflicts of interest within the genome.                         
              Examples include 'imprinted genes', whose expression                           
              depends on whether they were inherited from mother or                          
              father, transposable genes that can "jump" around the                          
              genome, and increase their representation by inserting                         
              copies of themselves in other genes, and "selfish"                             
              meiotic drive genes that can increase their own                                
              inheritance by destroying their homologous                                     
              counterparts.  Little is known of how common such                              
              conflicts are, or how strong a role they play in the                           
              dynamics and evolution of the genome.  t haplotypes in                         
              mice are one of the best studied examples of meiotic                           
              drive.  Much is known about how drive occurs                                   
              genetically, yet very little is known about its                                
              ecological or evolutionary dynamics in wild mice                               
              populations.  This study will contribute significantly                         
              to this knowledge by (1) surveying how widespread t                            
              haplotypes are in wild mice, and (2) examining the role                        
              that population structure and gene flow play on the                            
              persistence and spread of t haplotypes, through                                
              experimental introductions of t haplotypes to an island                        
              and barn population of mice.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Knowledge gained from such detailed studies of mice                            
              populations may additionally be useful to studies of                           
              the biological control of mice.  Mice are still an                             
              expensive pest animal in most farming regions of                               
              America, particularly in fed storage and in large scale                        
              automated operations such as poultry farming.                                  
              Moreover, in some countries, such as the cereal growing                        
              regions of Australia and China, they still show                                
              periodic outbursts reaching plague proportions.                                
              Biological methods of control that have been attempted                         
              to prevent these outbursts include introducing t                               
              haplotypes, which carry lethal alleles, to mice                                
              populations, and through introductions of parasites to                         
              mice.  The effectiveness of such methods often depends                         
              on knowledge of the rates of transmission and on                               
              knowledge of social structure and gene flow.
