Title       : Economic Chaos and the Fragility of Democracy and Capitalism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9224475

Award Number: 9224475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49693              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond M. Duch rduch@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The last two decades will be noted in history as a period in which             
              many nations have abandoned authoritarian institutions and command             
              economies, replacing them with fledgling liberal democracies and               
              market institutions.  As has been evident, the transition to free              
              market economies can put a significant burden on citizens.  Many               
              scholars have argued that the economic chaos that accompanies these            
              changes seriously undermines the successful transition to democracy            
              and free markets.  This investigation explores whether in fact                 
              there is a linkage between economic performance and support for                
              these fledgling democratic and capitalist institutions.                        
              The challenge of transition to democracy and free markets is one               
              faced by many nations in the last couple of decades.  The Latin                
              American countries have been confronted with the dilemma of                    
              institutionalizing democratic reforms while simultaneously                     
              confronting the serious problems associated with reform of their               
              economic sectors.  Additionally, the former Communist regimes of               
              the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and Eastern and                   
              Central Europe have faced the simultaneous challenges of economic              
              chaos, market reform and democratization.  Hence, many scholars                
              have argued that nascent democratic regimes falter when the mass               
              public is burdened with a deteriorating economic situation.                    
              The major impetus for the proposed investigation is the fact that              
              this broadly held presumption does not fit with the limited                    
              empirical evidence that we have at the individual level.  Recent               
              exploration of the link between economic deterioration and support             
              for democratic and free market institutions suggests no consistent             
              relationship.  Individuals in the European portion of the former               
              Soviet Union do not seem to ground their support for democratic                
              institutions on the assessments of the government's economic                   
              performance and the economy seems to be only weakly related to                 
              support for free market institutions.                                          
              The purpose of this project is to expand the analysis beyond this              
              specific context in order to determine how general the Soviet                  
              findings actually are.  The goal is to test these propositions in              
              a number of different national contexts where the society is                   
              confronted with the simultaneous challenges of implementing radical            
              economic plans that threaten the well-being of the average citizen             
              and also of building democratic institutions.                                  
              The project will be composed of the following four components:  a)             
              to assemble recent public opinion survey data from Eastern and                 
              Central Europe and from Latin America that include questions on                
              support for the free market and for democratic institutions; b)                
              within each nation to explore the link between individual                      
              assessments of economic performance and support for democratic                 
              institutions; c) to investigate whether these relationships vary in            
              any systematic way from one nation to another; and, d) to promote              
              closer cooperation among the world academic communities interested             
              in these issues.
