Title       : Miniemulsion Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9224813

Award Number: 9224813
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209323             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Joseph Schork joseph.schork@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Miniemulsion polymerization is used to describe heterogeneous                  
              polymerization in those systems in which monomer droplets are                  
              substantially smaller than found in a typical conventional                     
              emulsion polymerization.  These polymerizations exhibit some                   
              characteristics of suspension and emulsion polymerization                      
              systems.  In each type of polymerization, monomer droplets are                 
              dispersed in a continuous aqueous phase in which the monomer                   
              is insoluble or only slightly soluble.  Surfactants and other                  
              colloidal stabilizers are used to stabilize the droplets and                   
              prevent particle agglomeration.  While both suspension and                     
              emulsion polymerizations are free radical reactions, each                      
              proceeds by a unique mechanism.  Initiators for free radical                   
              suspension reactions are oil-soluble.  The monomer droplets                    
              are approximately 1 mm in diameter and each behaves as a small                 
              batch reactor, with the monomer reacting to produce polymer.                   
              Since the number of free radicals per particle is quite high,                  
              the kinetics are those of a bulk free radical polymerization.                  
                                                                                             
              In conventional emulsion polymerization moderate shear in the                  
              presence of surfactant leads to the formation of a stable                      
              emulsion containing 10 micron monomer droplets and surfactant                  
              micelles about 0.01 micron in diameter.  These micelles are                    
              formed from excess surfactant in the continuous phase and                      
              contains a small amount of monomer.  Because of their relative                 
              size and number, the total surface area of micelles is much                    
              greater than the total surface area of the droplets.  Thus                     
              free radicals in the aqueous phase enter micelles much more                    
              frequently than droplets, resulting in particle nucleation                     
              primarily from micelles.  The primary locus of polymerization                  
              is the polymer particles thus formed.  The particles                           
              eventually grow to a size of about 0.10 micron forming a final                 
              product, referred to as a latex which is a stable dispersion                   
              of polymer particles in the continuous aqueous phase.  In                      
              miniemulsion polymerization, high shear is used in combination                 
              with surfactants and cosurfactants to produce a fine emulsion                  
              of monomer droplets.  The monomer droplets are substantially                   
              smaller than those found in a typical emulsion polymerization.                 
              Reduction of the monomer droplet diameter causes a                             
              corresponding increase in the total droplet surface area.                      
              This has the effect of making the monomer droplets competitive                 
              with the micelles for radical capture since radical absorption                 
              is competitive on the basis of relative surface area.                          
                                                                                             
              The objective of this research is to investigate applications                  
              of miniemulsions to: (i) produce current latex products with a                 
              higher level of efficiency and uniformity, and (ii) develop                    
              new latex products based on miniemulsion technology.  Specific                 
              areas which will be investigated are: (1) the use of polymer                   
              as a cosurfactant; (2) the use of droplet nucleation to effect                 
              more robust particle nucleation in systems in which micellar                   
              nucleation tends to be unstable with respect to impurities;                    
              (3) the use of the miniemulsion process to produce polymers of                 
              narrow copolymer composition distribution from monomers which                  
              are highly water-insoluble; (4) the use of simultaneous                        
              micellar and droplet nucleation to produce lattices with                       
              unique particle size distributions; and (5) the impact of                      
              "accidental" cosurfactants such as dodecyl mercaptan on                        
              conventional emulsion polymerization processes.
