Title       : Dissertation Research: The Ecological Implications of HabitFragmentation: A
               Field Manipulation of Patch Size and Connectivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1993   
File        : a9224067

Award Number: 9224067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon K. Collinge  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The phenomenon of habitat fragmentation, when remnants                         
              of native vegetation are reduced in size and separated                         
              from adjacent, continuous habitat, is extremely                                
              widespread and poses one of the most serious threats to                        
              the earth's biological diversity.  Ecological                                  
              observations of habitat fragments have shown that in                           
              general, species diversity decreases as patch size                             
              decreases.  Vegetated connections between fragments are                        
              often used by animals, and are presumed to increase the                        
              probability of species' persistence in fragments.                              
              However, studies published to date have several major                          
              limitations: Patches are typically not measured prior                          
              to isolation; it has rarely been shown that animals                            
              preferentially use connections between patches; and                            
              organisms' basic life history characteristics are often                        
              not examined in relation to their numerical response to                        
              habitat fragmentation.  No studies are published which                         
              have experimentally manipulated both fragment size and                         
              connectivity under field conditions and compared                               
              species' responses in the manipulated plots to those in                        
              adjacent control plots.                                                        
                                                                                             
              The research proposed here, to be done in native mixed-                        
              grass prairie near Boulder, Colorado, USA, involves                            
              experimentally creating habitat patches of three sizes                         
              and manipulating presence or absence of connectivity to                        
              adjacent, continuous habitat.  The research will also                          
              simulate the spatial configurations in four basic                              
              sequences of land transformation and fragmentation:                            
              edge strip sequence, corridor sequence, dispersed patch                        
              sequence, dispersed patch sequence and four nuclei                             
              sequence.  The four sequences will simultaneously                              
              convert equal areas of grassland from intact to cleared                        
              habitat, but the spatial configuration of the intact                           
              habitat will vary among sequences.  By studying insect                         
              dynamics, he will be able to examine the extent to                             
              which animal populations are impeded or enhanced by                            
              fragmentation processes.  In addition to examining                             
              overall patterns of plant and insect species richness                          
              and diversity in experimental and control plots, he                            
              will compare the movement responses of three focal                             
              insect species which exhibit different degrees of                              
              vagility and modes of feeding.  The results will                               
              contribute to their understanding of the ecological                            
              implications of particular spatial configurations, and                         
              will potentially guide ecologists as well as designers                         
              and planners in their decisions regarding land use                             
              projects.
