Title       : Dissertation Research: Testing the Co-Adaptation Hypothesis:The
               Thermotregulatory Behavior and Thermal Physiology of theRibber Boa, a Nocturnal
               Snake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1993      
File        : a9224230

Award Number: 9224230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7639               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Dorcas  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Idaho State University
	      
	      Pocatello, ID  83209    208/236-3277

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A major goal of evolutionary biology is to develop concepts that               
              can be used to address specific questions. An important concept in             
              evolutionary biology is that the characteristics of organisms are              
              well matched (i.e., co-adapted) to each other. For example, the                
              thermoregulatory behavior of reptiles with bacterial infections                
              matches the temperature at which their immune systems function                 
              best. The purpose of this study is to determine to what extent the             
              concept of co-adaptation can be applied to the thermal biology of              
              reptiles. Because reptiles obtain most of their  body heat from the            
              environment, describing their temperature relationships is critical            
              to understanding their ecology. We will address the relationship               
              between the nocturnal snakes that exhibit unusually low body                   
              temperature during activity. We will surgically implant                        
              temperature-sensitive radiotransmitters in snakes to determine                 
              their body temperatures in the field. In the laboratory, we will               
              study the effects of variation in body temperature on snake                    
              physiology (e.g., digestive rate, metabolism, crawling speed).                 
              Through statistical comparisons of body temperatures and their                 
              effects on physiology, we will determine the extent of co-                     
              adaptation in rubber boas. Our analytical methods also will provide            
              a framework for future studies of co-adaptation.
