Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: A Transformation-Based Order-Sorted
               Higher-Order Unification Algorithm in Combinatory Logic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1993       
File        : a9224443

Award Number: 9224443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Johann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Travel Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research abroad at research                                
              centers of proven excellence.  The program's                                   
              awards provide opportunities for joint                                         
              research, and the use of unique or                                             
              complementary facilities, expertise and                                        
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support an eight-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Patricia                                    
              Johann to the University of Saarlands to work                                  
              with Dr. Jorg Siekmann.                                                        
                                                                                             
              They propose to develop and oversee the                                        
              implementation of a complete transformation-                                   
              based unification algorithm for higher-order                                   
              logic expressed in terms of combinatory logic                                  
              and subject to the constraints of a full order-                                
              sorted type structure with term declarations.                                  
              Their algorithm will comprise an important                                     
              component of the first-ever order-sorted                                       
              higher-order resolution theorem prover, MRKP,                                  
              under construction by the research groups of                                   
              Dr. Siekmann in Saarbrucken and Dr. Peter                                      
              Andrews at Carnegie Mellon University.                                         
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds for a                                  
              stipend for eight months.
