Title       : Discovering Motifs in Scientific Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1995     
File        : a9224602

Award Number: 9224602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason Tsong-Li Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Jersey Inst of Tech
	      University Heights
	      Newark, NJ  07102    /   -

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                9224602  Wang    SDB:  Discovering Motifs in Scientific Databases    This is
              the first year funding of a three-year continuing award.   This research is
              carried out in collaboration with Bruce Shapiro,  National Institutes of
              Health. Scientific progress often results  from discovering structural
              commonalities that explain similar  behavior.  For example, in molecular
              biology, a set of proteins or  DNA sequences may express similar functionality
              in nature.  This  project aims to help scientists discover common sequence or 
              topological patterns that explain the similarity.  Pattern  discovery entails
              generating pattern guesses in a systematic way  and testing them.  The tests
              are based on approximate pattern  matching algorithms that yield distance
              metrics.  Thus,  commonalities may be approximate.  The main research
              milestones are  a family of algorithms for pattern discovery, query processing,
               data organization and index manipulation.  The algorithms are to be  tested on
              data drawn from the National Institutes of Health and  from public genome
              databases.  Whereas some of the algorithms are  specific to the combinatorial
              structures present in biology, many  of the techniques should generalize to any
              application that seeks  to find patterns in databases.  This project will help
              scientists  discover patterns in large databases that determine natural 
              behavior.  Such patterns may lead to new drug design or to new  treatments.  
              ***
