Title       : Collaborative Research on Business-to-Business Disputes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9224332

Award Number: 9224332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy H. Rogers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip C. Sorensen  (Principal Investigator former)
              Richard J. Klimoski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Recent research has shown that legal action by businesses against              
              other businesses has increased substantially in recent years,                  
              accompanied by the inevitable losses in productivity and                       
              significant increases in legal costs and court caseloads.  Yet,                
              little is known about how business-to-business disputes emerge and             
              why some become lawsuits while others do not; about how businesses             
              vary in the way that they deal with problems in business                       
              relationships; and about how different approaches to disputing (for            
              example, the involvement of lawyers, the use of alternative dispute            
              resolution processes like mediation) affect the nature of business-            
              to-business disputes and shape their outcomes.  Past research and              
              existing theories focus on how and why individuals drop or pursue              
              grievances and on the ways that individual perceptions and actions             
              regarding grievances change as disputes develop and are processed.             
              This research will examine the disputing behavior of business                  
              organizations -- behavior that differs substantially from that of              
              individuals -- and thus will elaborate and extend existing theory              
              while adding to the limited empirical knowledge about business                 
              disputing.  In addition, the research should have practical                    
              application for the choices that businesses make in organizing                 
              themselves to deal with conflicts with other businesses.                       
                                                                                             
              This research will employ intensive case studies of the disputing              
              behavior of six corporations that differ in their formal dispute               
              resolution policies.  Through repeated interviews with and                     
              observation of the work of corporate counsel staff and business                
              managers and executives, we will develop an inventory of recent and            
              on-going problems in business relationships for each firm.  For                
              each problem, we will gather data about the characteristics of the             
              problem and the relationship as well as the perceptions of key                 
              actors, actions taken, and resources expended at each step as the              
              problem moves toward resolution or litigation.  Using techniques of            
              qualitative and quantitative analysis, we will examine the                     
              characteristics that distinguish disputes that are litigated from              
              those that are not, and describe the impact that differing                     
              approaches to resolving problems and disputes have on their                    
              definition, course, costs and outcome.  In addition, this research             
              will compare the disputing policies and practices of the six                   
              businesses and the ways that they influence corporate disputing                
              behavior.
