Title       : Dissertation Research: Flow-mediated Dispersal in Aquatic Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1993   
File        : a9224214

Award Number: 9224214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7999               (Estimated)
Investigator: Dina M. Fonseca  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this research is to determine the                             
              effect of local flow conditions on the distribution of                         
              a stream insect, emphasizing possible constraints on                           
              settlement from the water current.  Although some                              
              studies have been done on this subject in marine                               
              environments, the consequences of hydrodynamic                                 
              constraints on settlement have not been actively                               
              studied in freshwater systems.  Transport by water                             
              currents in streams and rivers (drift) has been the                            
              object of intense work and debate, but very few studies                        
              have attempted to determine its significance to the                            
              individual organism.  This study will be one of the                            
              first tests of the hypothesis of active drift as a                             
              foraging decision.  This test will be aided by the                             
              development of a foraging model in which the organism                          
              has incomplete information of its environment.  In                             
              itself the model will be an important addition to a                            
              field in which models and critical tests are still                             
              fragmentary.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Black fly larval dispersal in a stream is largely                              
              analogous to the movements of ballooning spiders or                            
              lepidopteran larvae (including gypsy moth larvae), two                         
              groups that have been analyzed from a fluid mechanic                           
              point of view.  What makes this system particularly                            
              interesting is the largely unidirectional nature of the                        
              movement.  This relative simplicity will provide                               
              important insights that may be applied to the ecology                          
              of other organisms that are transported by air or water                        
              currents in some phase of their life cycle.
