Title       : The Impact of Civil Rights Laws on the Economic Welfare of Minorities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9224079

Award Number: 9224079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171946             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Heckman   (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Donohue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Bar Foundation
	      750 North Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606114403    312/988-6589

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The effectiveness of law in producing social change has long been              
              a matter of debate, and there is no more important focus for this              
              debate than the impact of civil rights laws on the economic welfare            
              of minorities.  Many have argued recently that federal civil rights            
              policy has been of little value in enhancing the economic welfare              
              of blacks in American society.  With relative black economic gains             
              largely stalled since the mid-1970's, there is considerable policy             
              interest in determining whether and to what extent past                        
              governmental initiatives have contributed to black progress.  Given            
              the complex and varied economic, social, and governmental                      
              initiatives that were unfolding at the time, it will be a work of              
              major significance to sort out more precisely the factors that                 
              generated large relative economic gains in the decade after 1964.              
              This research will apply a more comprehensive and rigorous research            
              design to assess recent claims that: 1) the Supreme Court's                    
              decision in Brown had no important impact on the civil rights                  
              movement or on the evolution of black economic progress; 2)                    
              employment discrimination law has served little function because               
              virtually all of black economic advance has come from long-term                
              trends of migration and improved education; and 3) the breakthrough            
              of black employment in the textile industry merely represents the              
              removal of Southern segregationist legislation, and that without               
              such legal restrictions competitive markets quickly eradicate any              
              adverse effects of private discrimination.                                     
                                                                                             
              This grant will support a comprehensive assessment of all aspects              
              of the total federal effort directed against a way of life that                
              excluded blacks from many sectors of Southern society in order to              
              capture the impact of civil rights policy, including spillovers to             
              successful employment of challenges to school segregation and                  
              voting exclusion.  The research will demonstrate that a complex                
              pattern of law  -  both segregationist and antidiscrimination  -               
              emerged over time and in different states and regions.  The                    
              investigators will use this temporal and geographic variation in               
              the institutional structure confronting blacks as the basis for                
              explaining the different patterns of black economic growth in                  
              different states and regions.  In addition, the investigators will             
              compile a significant data set on school quality by state and race             
              (where possible) going back to 1890.  Once the investigators have              
              documented the evolving patterns of the educational attainment of              
              blacks and whites and the legal environments promoting or                      
              restricting black opportunities, they will append this information             
              to the data on income and education found in the decennial Census              
              tapes from 1940-1990.  This will permit the investigators to                   
              undertake a comprehensive econometric assessment of the factors                
              that have contributed to black economic advance.
