Title       : Metabolic Adaptations for Extended Fasting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1993      
File        : a9224173

Award Number: 9224173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314022             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph A. Nelson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Stirling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm A. Ramsay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carle Foundation Hosp
	      611 W. Park Street
	      Urbana, IL  618012529    217/333-036

NSF Program : 5211      POLAR BIO & MEDIC ARCTIC RES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Seasonal food shortages constitute an important environmental                  
              challenge for many mammals. Some of the longest fasts undertaken by            
              mammals occur when bears enter dens in autumn and remain there over            
              winter without access to food or water. During their winter fast,              
              bears maintain near normal body temperature, recycle nitrogenous               
              wastes produced by metabolic processes associated with protein                 
              turnover, produce no net urine, and thus, protect body proteins.               
              Unlike other species of bears, polar bears, can adopt these                    
              characteristic protein sparing mechanisms at any time of the year,             
              not just during winter. In consequence, polar bears are one of the             
              most proficient mammals at undertaking extended fasts. In order to             
              meet the challenge of seasonal fasts, many mammals accrete energy              
              as body fat during periods of food abundance, and draw on these                
              stores when food is scarce. The energetic costs associated with the            
              sophisticated protein sparing abilities of bears when fasting are              
              presumably met from breakdown of such lipid stores. Polar bears eat            
              heavily from late April through June, when recently weaned seal                
              pups are available in large numbers. When prey is abundant, polar              
              bears may consume only the blubber of the seals and leave the                  
              muscle mass untouched. During such feasting periods polar bears may            
              have the highest dietary intake of lipids of any mammal and their              
              fatty tissue depots expand rapidly. At times of maximal storage fat            
              tissue depots may constitute more than 50% of the total body mass,             
              but after extended fasting these may be reduced to less than 10% of            
              body mass. The period of feasting may be only 6-8 weeks long; while            
              fasting may exceed 8 months. Using stable-isotope labeled                      
              metabolites as tracers, we propose to carry out detailed, long-term            
              monitoring of metabolic pathways in individual feeding and fasting             
              polar bears throughout their annual cycle. This study will be the              
              first to use state-of-the-art isotopic methodologies to investigate            
              the means whereby free-ranging bears are able to switch so rapidly             
              into a physiological state whereby long-term fasting is possible.              
              This research will add significantly to our knowledge of the                   
              metabolic capabilities of one of the most important predators in               
              the Arctic environment as well as advance our fundamental                      
              biochemical knowledge of feast and fast cycles.
