Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Culture & Communication in India: An Ethnography of the
               English-Language Press in New Delhi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1993    
File        : a9224055

Award Number: 9224055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: William O. Beeman william beeman@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Beeman/Peterson    The aim of this study is to extend the sociology of media
              developed in the United States and Europe to the analysis of journalism in
              Indian by conducting ethnographic fieldwork among the press community in New
              Delhi.    Several questions frame the project: how do journalists bridge the
              tension between Indian concepts of the press as representative of popular
              feeling and as tool for state-guided change?  What routines and practices
              organize news gathering?  What are the basic values and beliefs inculcated by
              journalism schools?  And, are there high order cultural patterns (macro-rules)
              which organize both production and consumption of news?  Answers to these
              questions will be sought through text analysis, participant-observation,
              ethnographic interviews, survey, and elicitation techniques.  This project
              builds upon current models by linking textual and ethnographic analysis, and by
              linking news production and news consumption research.    Research on
              non-Western mass media serves to test sociological models based on studies of
              Western media and expands our understanding of the role mass media play in
              different societies.  Studies of media and public culture allow anthropologist
              to move the locus of anthropological work from the local community to national,
              regional and global levels; to unsettle the concept of culture as a timeless
              and coherent force; and to write about the subject as "modern," as similar to
              rather than different from the West.  ***  & E    & E    & E        v ZY X    
              PSW& 2         & 2           _ X PSQRVWU      ~     F  D  F  D  F  D  F     4 
              3  F      N (    ~        &     u   4       Õ _^ZY X & u     U                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   m   o   I   K   P   U                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 F                           
               ?             ?                 U         U     E    Times New Roman    Symbol
               & Arial  1 Pres Elite  5 Courier New       ?   B         ?           "        
                  h                                     }    beeman peterson thesis award
              thesis award abstract abstract thesis beeman peterson  Raymond Hames Raymond
              Hames                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
