Title       : Dissertation Research: The Genetic Consequences of Self- thinning in Stands of
               Loblolly Pine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1993   
File        : a9224237

Award Number: 9224237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Peet peet@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Loblolly pine (Pinus taeda) dominates the early                                
              successional forests of the North Carolina Piedmont.                           
              Scarcity of resources, especially light, causes the                            
              stands of pine to undergo thinning: as the trees grow                          
              larger, competition for light escalates and the                                
              shorter, shaded individuals suffer high mortality.                             
              Several investigators have found that in some forest                           
              tree species, genetic heterozygosity is low in young                           
              stands and high in older stands.  This trend is the                            
              likely result of the culling of the more homozygous                            
              individuals when the stands undergo thinning.  Research                        
              is proposed to determine whether those individuals with                        
              high heterozygosity are less likely to die, and whether                        
              the average heterozygosity of the survivors in a stand                         
              reflects the intensity of competition for resources as                         
              determined by initial stand density.                                           
                                                                                             
              This research proposes to explore the natural processes                        
              which influence genetic structure in forest stands.                            
              Natural forest stands, as opposed to pine plantations,                         
              may maintain higher genetic diversity as a likely                              
              benefit of heterozygous individuals through thinning of                        
              dense stands.  The genetic effects of natural stand                            
              thinning could have important implications for forest                          
              management efforts aimed at maximizing tree vigor and                          
              forest productivity.
