Title       : Producer Services Development Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1995     
File        : a9224515

Award Number: 9224515
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224999             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Beyers Beyers@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The producer, or intermediate business, services sector has               
              been one of the most dynamic in terms of job growth over the past              
              twenty years, and this trend is expected to continue into the                  
              foreseeable future.  At a national level, previous research has                
              provided insights into aggregate spatial patterns of employment                
              change in the producer services, but work at the level of                      
              individual establishments has been lacking.  Little information                
              exists on how producer services firms have developed in this                   
              period of rapid overall growth.  Current theoretical models of                 
              firm dynamics derive from research on manufacturing sectors of                 
              the economy; there is a paucity of research to indicate whether                
              the producer services behave differently or the same as                        
              industrial firms.  This project will test a number of theoretical              
              hypotheses put forward to explain the growth of these services                 
              through survey research on a geographically and industrially                   
              differentiated sample of establishments.  It will attempt to                   
              clarify the relative importance of externalization processes and               
              the changing division of labor within firms, document changes in               
              technology in the mode of provision of services, examine the role              
              of information technologies, analyze the nature of flexible                    
              production systems, and explain changes in the locations where                 
              services are sold.                                                             
                   Most research on spatial aspects of the restructuring of the              
              US economy have concentrated on industrial sectors.  This                      
              investigation would provide badly needed tests of current                      
              theoretical arguments regarding the bases of development of                    
              producer services.  It would provide basic knowledge of                        
              development processes at the level of the firm, and it would                   
              contribute to formulation of necessary location theory related to              
              services industries.  The results of this project would also                   
              inform public policy regarding the feasibility of services as                  
              substitutes for contracting resource-based industry in smaller                 
              and peripheral locations.
