Title       : RUI: Group Value Versus Self Interest Concern in Fairness Judgements: A Test of
               a Contextual Priming Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1996  
File        : a9224566

Award Number: 9224566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74245              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry B. Heuer LBH3@Columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel Margulies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              Perceptions of justice are a critical factor in citizens' responses            
              to judicial decisions, legal institutions such as juries, and other            
              governmental activities.  Lay perceptions of justice judgments                 
              carry important implications for the legitimacy of institutions and            
              for citizen compliance.  Sociolegal researchers have found evidence            
              for two different but related theories of justice, both of which               
              emphasize that fair procedures and respectful treatment are more               
              important to citizens than particular outcomes.  The Procedural                
              Justice Theory holds that fairness judgments are dependent on the              
              extent to which participants have control over the process and/or              
              the ultimate decision.  The Group Value Theory holds that fairness             
              judgments are influenced by the trustworthiness and neutrality of              
              authorities and whether authorities treat individuals with respect.            
              A recent study showed that group value concerns are considerably               
              more important for fairness judgments than control concerns.  The              
              present study will contribute to theoretical advance by testing the            
              relative validity of these hypotheses under different conditions.              
                                                                                             
              Four studies will be undertaken to investigate the conditions under            
              which individuals' fairness judgments will be influenced by control            
              versus group value concerns.  A contextual priming model is                    
              proposed to explain the conditions under which the two kinds of                
              concerns will influence fairness perceptions.  Because the model               
              suggests that self-interest concerns are more important prior to               
              the resolution of conflict, two field studies examine procedural               
              fairness perceptions before settlement.  Similarly, because the                
              model suggests that self-interest concerns are more important in               
              disputes, both field studies sample exclusively from populations               
              of individuals in disputes (divorce and workplace disputes).  In               
              addition, two laboratory experiments will test the propositions                
              that (a) situational factors influence the importance of control               
              versus group value concerns, and (b) both accessibility and                    
              deservedness judgments are central to procedural fairness                      
              perceptions.
