Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotic Theory for Computationally Intensive
               Statistical Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1995        
File        : a9224868

Award Number: 9224868
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $594095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pressley W. Millar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rudolf J. Beran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah A. Nolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The advent of modern computing power has greatly enlarged                 
              the notion of a practical statistical procedure.  On the other                 
              hand, important advances in statistical theory over the past                   
              decade (e.g. modern semiparametrics, empirical processes,                      
              bootstrap theory) offer extraordinary opportunity for creativity               
              in the invention of effective statistical methods.  This proposal              
              is based upon the fact that a strong theoretical approach,                     
              combined with creative use of computing, can be an effective dual              
              attack on a number of substantive problems.  Specific problems                 
              proposed here include: regression with random coefficients                     
              (Beran, Millar), random sets arising in statistics (Millar,                    
              Nolan), adaptation and model selection (Beran, Nolan),                         
              probability forecasting via martingale methods (Nolan), the local              
              stochastic search method (Millar), directional data (Beran).                   
              Collaboration is intended when more than one investigator is                   
              listed.  Other topics are discussed in the individual proposals.               
              Our apparently disparate statistical topics are related in part                
              by means of the methods with which we intend to solve them.                    
              These methods include: iterated bootstraps, applied empirical                  
              process theory, semiparametrics, minimum distance methods,                     
              Hajek-LeCam asymptotics, and the theory of stochastic procedures.              
                   The team of investigators intends to provide useful                       
              statistical tools for several substantive fields.  For example,                
              our proposed estimation procedures in the random coefficient                   
              regression model are intended for use in econometrics, the                     
              studies of directional data are intended for use in geophysics,                
              several of our proposed procedures in stochastic distance                      
              statistics will be used in the reliability analysis of electrical              
              systems.  Our proposed non-linear variants of the random                       
              coefficient regression model apply to the analysis of patient                  
              response curves to new pharmaceuticals.  Our statistical                       
              applications of random set theory were motivated by problems in                
              optics.  Several of our graduate students will participate in the              
              project; indeed, two of them will incorporate their work on the                
              last two subjects in their forthcoming PhD theses.  The approach               
              taken in this proposal involves both a relatively abstract                     
              analysis and a computer-intensive implementation; consequently,                
              these graduate students will receive a broad and sound training                
              as young statistical scientists.
