Title       : U.S.-Portugal Cooperative Research between INESC Portugal and Cornell ISIS:
               Group-Oriented Distributed Computing.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1993    
File        : a9224493

Award Number: 9224493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jeanne E. Hudson                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Birman ken@cs.cornell.deu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith Marzullo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5914,
Abstract    :
              9224493  Birman    This award will support collaborative research  between
              Kenneth Birman and Keith Marzullo, Cornell  University, and Paulo Verissimo,
              Technical  University of Lisbon.  Professor Verissimo is  associated with
              INESC, the Institute for Systems and  Computer Engineering, and its Navigators
              Group,  whose research focuses on robustness of distributed  systems. Professor
              Birman is associated with the  Isis Project at Cornell; its central idea is to 
              encourage programmers to develop distributed  software using a collection of
              routines that  presents a simple network execution model, virtual  synchrony.  
               At present, the two teams hold state-of-the-art  knowledge which is in some
              points complementary.   Both groups have concluded that by integrating 
              independently developed technologies, a substantial  advance in the ease of use
              and power of the next  generation of distributed computing systems could 
              result. The investigators propose to collaborate on  an effort that will
              integrate a diverse collection  of high reliability distributed computing 
              technologies under the general framework of a new  system for group-oriented
              computing.   The  collaboration will deal with three subjects:  an 
              object-oriented methodology for integration of  varied technologies into a
              group computing  environment; a focus on system architecture issues  drawing on
              the microkernel architectures that are  gaining in importance within the
              operating systems  community; and such protocol and algorithmic  enhancements
              as are needed to realize that vision.  ***
