Title       : Searching Maps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1993  
File        : a9224362

Award Number: 9224362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34959              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Lloyd blloyd@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Recent decades have seen considerable progress in geographic              
              information processing, particularly the application of computer               
              methods to mapping.  Less attention and fewer resources have been              
              devoted to the final part of the cartographic communication                    
              process, the transformation of information from map to map                     
              readers.  Theories that explain how humans visually process                    
              spatial information can lead to future geographical information                
              systems that not only display maps, but also perform visual                    
              processing of information such as searches, identifications,                   
              comparisons, classifications and generalizations.  This research               
              project seeks to examine the cognitive processes that underlie                 
              visual search by map readers, and it will model components of                  
              those human search processes through computer simulations based                
              on neural net principles.  A series of experiments will be                     
              conducted wherein subjects perform search tasks using maps as                  
              stimuli.  These experiments will document the search behavior of               
              human map readers and uncover the cognitive processes that were                
              the basis of their search behavior.  Experimental objects will be              
              constructed using color, shape, size, and orientation.  This will              
              allow for testing of the hypothesis that the spatial distribution              
              of objects on a map affects a person's ability to suppress                     
              information that is not critical in reading the map.                           
                   Symbols on maps attempt to accurately reflect selected                    
              information about the environment, and they are constructed to                 
              present information in an aesthetically pleasing way.  Research                
              on how people read maps will ultimately assist cartographers to                
              construct more efficient maps and enhance the communication                    
              process.  Cognitive experiments are important because they can                 
              extend theory developed with laboratory stimuli to a level that                
              is closer to real world environments.  This theory can then be                 
              the basis of visual processing capabilities in more intelligent                
              geographical information systems.
