Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Inference for Nonlinear Time Series and Spatial Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9224798

Award Number: 9224798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ishwarasa V. Basawa ishwar@stat.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This proposal is concerned with problems related to                       
              statistical inference in nonlinear time series, state-space                    
              models, random fields and spatial point processes.  The emphasis               
              will be on nonlinear and non-Gaussian models.  A unified approach              
              will be used to study the asymptotic efficiency properties of the              
              estimators and tests.  The local asymptotic normality will be                  
              investigated for the  likelihood-based models.  the quasi-                     
              likelihood framework will be used for the cases where the                      
              likelihood function is unavailable.  Empirical Bayes methods will              
              also be investigated.                                                          
                   The statistical analysis and the models to be studied in                  
              this proposal will have an impact on a large number of diverse                 
              applications in Basic Sciences, Engineering, Health Sciences,                  
              Economic and Social Planning, among other.  Statistical data such              
              as the unemployment figures, various economic indicators, stock                
              market fluctuations, opinion polls, currency exchange rates and                
              the like are all subject to inherent random variations, and                    
              possibly trends.  These aspects involving uncertainty can                      
              usefully be represented by appropriate probability models such as              
              the ones proposed here.  Various methods of forecasting and                    
              assessing the precision of the forecasts will also be studied.                 
              Techniques of statistical estimation and methods of testing the                
              validity of the models proposed will be investigated.
