Title       : REU: Natural History of the Hispaniolan Herpetofauna
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1995      
File        : a9224486

Award Number: 9224486
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Powell powellr@mail.avila.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Avila College
	      11901 Wornall Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641451007    816/942-8400

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The award provides Avila College with funds to continue an                     
              exciting summer program providing 9 undergraduates with                        
              research experiences in tropical studies. Participants will                    
              learn and develop skills by interacting with faculty as they                   
              work on projects dealing with herpetological communities on                    
              Hispaniola. To foster student development, a 3-phase program                   
              is planned: orientation--introducing students to research                      
              methodology and ecological studies in the West Indies;                         
              apprenticeship--developing skills; and individual research--                   
              resulting in publication-quality reports. Seminars on                          
              research and graduate studies are included to facilitate                       
              applications of acquired knowledge and skills to                               
              participants' future academic pursuits. Presentations will                     
              be made by scientists in both the United States and                            
              Dominican Republic. Evaluation will be by participants,                        
              their academic advisors, and one outside faculty.                              
                                                                                             
              This program is designed to induce participants to consider                    
              graduate studies favorably and to increase the likelihood of                   
              their choosing careers in science. The faculty will "coach"                    
              students, instilling a vision of research by explaining the                    
              rules and delivering a feeling of the excitement that                          
              comes with addressing questions with conceptual                                
              orientations.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              A focus on frog and lizard communities provides                                
              opportunities to apply theories and methods used in                            
              ecological research while working with organisms that are                      
              abundant, accessible, and remarkably well and visibly                          
              adapted to their environment. Investigations may address                       
              aspects of niche dimensions or parasite infections. Students                   
              may choose projects within these topics or develop                             
              investigations of their own, including, but not limited to,                    
              physiological or ethological studies of selected taxa.
