Title       : Collaborative Research on Spending and Incumbency in Congressional Elections: A
               Game-Theoretic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1996   
File        : a9224787

Award Number: 9224787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rick K. Wilson                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106151             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Palfrey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project investigates the relationships between campaign                   
              spending, incumbency and electoral outcomes in U.S. Congressional              
              elections.  The approach combines formal political/economic                    
              methodologies, statistical modelling, and analysis of empirical                
              data during the period 1970-1990.  The theoretical models are aimed            
              at understanding the strategic factors underlying spending races               
              between challengers and incumbents.  The game-theoretic approach               
              employed emphasizes the importance of looking at both causal                   
              directions in the vote-spending connection.  In one direction,                 
              campaign finance/spending activities affect margins of victory and             
              can be a deciding factor in who wins an election; in the other                 
              direction, candidate and contributor expectations of how close the             
              election is likely to be affect campaign finance/spending                      
              decisions.  Both directons are important, and the jointness or                 
              simultaneity of spending decisions and voting outcomes leads to                
              difficult statistical problems of measurement and estimation, as               
              well as raising a number of challenging theoretical issues.                    
                                                                                             
              Most previous research focuses primarily on one direction (the                 
              first one mentioned above), and attempts to fit a "vote equation"              
              to measure the effect of spending on electoral outcomes.  The                  
              current approach explicitly combines this with an estimation of                
              "spending equations," where the reciprocal effect of anticipated               
              closeness is simultaneously estimated with the effect of spending              
              on the final outcome.  This enables the investigators to                       
              disentangle some complex interactions between the variables of                 
              primary interest:  incumbent spending, challenger spending, and the            
              vote share of the incumbent.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Preliminary results of this investigation suggest substantial                  
              revisions to the central findings of several prior studies, and                
              point to interesting new directions for investigation within the               
              framework of this game-theoretic approach.  Those new directions,              
              both theoretical and empirical, form the agenda of this research               
              project.
