Title       : Chemistry Research Group: Access in Nanoporous Layered Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1995     
File        : a9224102

Award Number: 9224102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1683300            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Pinnavaia pinnavai@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9224102  Pinnavaia        This group award is made in the Advanced Materials and
                Processing Program in support of the collaborative research of   Professors
              Pannavaia, Kanatzidis, Golding, Mahanti and Thorpe   at Michigan State
              University. Support is provided by the   Chemistry Division. One major theme of
              the research is access   in nanoporous layered materials. Specific elements of
              the   research will be control of pore size, structural modification   of the
              layers by pillaring intercalants, and a study of   structural and dynamical
              factors which govern access in micro-   and mesoporous systems.  A full
              complement of synthetic,   characterization and theoretical approaches will be
              employed.   Typical systems which will be studied are smectite clays,   layered
              double hydroxides and nanoporous metal chalcogenides.  A second major theme is
              the design, synthesis and   characterization of layered silicate and silicic
              acid   heterostructures. Layered silicates will be synthesized in   which two
              ions of different solvation energies are segregated   into regularly
              alternating galleries by spontaneous   self-assembly. These ordered
              heterostructures containing   hydrophobic alkyl onium ions and hydrophilic
              inorganic cations   will be well suited for acid catalysis and guest-host  
              chemistry. Another class of materials which will be synthesized   and
              characterized are layered silicic acid derivatives formed   by templated
              intragallery hydrolysis-condensation reactions of   chiral silicates in the
              presence of liquid amines. The nature   of the amine will determine the pore
              structure and size.  These chiral materials will be suitable as catalysts for  
              asymmetric synthesis and for separation of optical isomers.  %%%  Nanoporous
              layered materials are of high technological interest   in catalysis and
              separations and are potentially important in   electronic, optical and
              structural applications.   ***
