Title       : Effect of Ions on Polymer Properties: Perfluorinated Ionomers, Model Compounds
               and Ionomer Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1996     
File        : a9224972

Award Number: 9224972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275068             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shulamith Schlick schlicks@udmercy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Detroit
	      4001 West McNichols Road
	      Detroit, MI  482190900    313/927-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objectives of the proposed research is to study the effect of              
              ionic groups on the structure and dynamics of perfluorinated                   
              ionomer membranes, ionomer solutions and ionomer blends.  The                  
              following experiments are planned.  FIRST, they will study the                 
              dynamics of the polymer chains and counter ions in membranes                   
              swollen by, and dissolved in, polar solvents.  The possibility of              
              a structural change in the transition between membranes and                    
              solutions will be deduced from studies as a function of ionomer                
              concentration.  The experimental studies will be complemented by               
              theoretical modeling of the chain dynamics.  SECOND, they will                 
              assess to what extend reverse micellar systems based on protonated             
              and fluorinated surfactants can be used as model compounds for the             
              more complex perfluorinated ionomers.  THIRD, they                             
              propose to study segmental dynamics and phase structure in ionomer             
              blends, where specific interactions are expected to improve the                
              miscibility of the blend components.  We propose to start with                 
              blends of polyacrylic acid and random and block styreneacrylic acid            
              copolymers with poly(ethylene oxide) and with poly(vinyl                       
              pyrrolidone).  The effect of gradual neutralization of the acid                
              groups with various counter ions will be investigated.  FOURTH, we             
              plan to develop electron-spin-resonance (ESR) imaging as a non-                
              destructive method for the study of diffusion processes in real                
              time in ionomers and other complex polymeric systems, in two and               
              three dimensions.  We propose to use ESR (including                            
              multifrequency ESR, double resonance and imaging) methods for                  
              observing the paramagnetic counter ions and deuteriated reporter               
              molecules, 19F NMR to observe the perfluorinated chains, 2H NMR to             
              visualize the dynamics of deuteriated solvents and DSC to correlate            
              the macroscopic properties with the local information obtained from            
              the spectroscopic measurements.                                                
                                                                                             
              Ionomers are amphiphilic polymers that contain up to 10 mole                   
              percent of ionic groups.  Incorporation of ionic groups in organic             
              polymers is an important method for modifying polymer properties.              
              The presence of these groups causes dramatic changes in the elastic            
              modulus, glass transition temperature Tg and in the permeability of            
              various guests in the polymers, compared to the analogous polymer              
              chains without ions.  Most of these changes have been attributed to            
              the formation of a phase-separated morphology in ionomers,                     
              consisting of ionic domains where the charges are concentrated, and            
              nonpolar domains that include mainly the organic backbone.  This               
              research aims to elucidate the membranes' structure.
