Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topology of Manifolds and Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1993    
File        : a9224464

Award Number: 9224464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Oleg Viro   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9224464  Viro       The first part of this project is devoted to quantum 
              invariants of low dimensional topological objects.  It seeks to  give a purely
              combinatorial construction of known quantum  invariants and to look for
              non-trivial topological quantum field  theories not related to quantum groups;
              to study polynomial link  invariants defined by a construction similar to
              Seifert's  construction for the Alexander module, but with homology replaced 
              by any topological quantum field theory; to develop link theory  in special
              3-manifolds like projective space; to study Vassiliev  invariants and their
              generalizations; and to investigate the  possibility of combinatorial
              construction of 4-manifold  invariants.  The second part is devoted to
              realizing bistellar  transformations of smooth triangulations.  The third part
              is  related to the topology of real algebraic varieties.  It involves 
              investigation of the relationship between special classes of real  algebraic
              varieties and their topological models and an attempt  to study the topology of
              real algebraic knots in 3-dimensional  projective space.       The main idea of
              this project is to develop the topological  side of quantum topology, a theory
              which has flowered recently as  a result of the  introduction of modern physics
              into  low-dimensional topology.  The effect of this progress on  topology needs
              to be better understood.  The new tools deserve  more detailed study and
              systematic application to geometric  problems.  They also provide a new
              opportunity to study  topological properties of real algebraic varieties.  Of
              course,  traditional methods are to be used together with the new ones.  ***
