Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Statistical Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1993      
File        : a9224839

Award Number: 9224839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60006              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kesar Singh kesar@stat.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This proposal contains ten problems related to various                    
              statistical topics which the investigator wishes to study during               
              the period for which this funding is sought.  A dominant topic in              
              this proposal is resampling, i.e., bootstrap, jackknife, etc, an               
              area which has been the author's main focus of research.  Other                
              areas of statistics covered here include: data depth and                       
              multivariate analysis, confidence regions and bands, directional               
              data analysis survival analysis, robustness, ANOVA and                         
              experimental designs.  The proposal includes some proposed                     
              notions and procedures yet to be explored, mathematically and                  
              numerically.                                                                   
                   The proposed research mainly focuses on a relatively new                  
              topic in statistics named the bootstrap.  This new methodology in              
              statistics is computer intensive, it is often more accurate and                
              accessible to more users, since it replaces mathematical labor by              
              computer work.  One of the thrusts of this research is to                      
              investigate how well this methodology can evaluate its own                     
              accuracy.  Among other topics of research proposed here, is the                
              development of a very general approach in the field of survival                
              analysis, which is a key tool in pharmaceutical researches.  The               
              research will also include new concepts of statistical                         
              robustness, an area pertaining to the lack of sensitivity (which               
              is desired) of data-conclusions to a relatively few                            
              unrepresentative data values.
