Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: An Integrated Approach for Producing
               Detailed Thermal and Fluid Histories of Hydrothermal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9224958

Award Number: 9224958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carter D. Hull chull@ocean.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Burnett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a four-month                                           
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Carter D.                                   
              Hull of Florida State University to work with                                  
              Dr. Gudmundur Palmason at Orkustofnun                                          
              (Icelandic National Energy Authority) in                                       
              Iceland.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research project takes an integrated                                      
              approach for producing detailed thermal and                                    
              fluid histories of hydrothermal systems.                                       
              Fluid, vein mineralization, and reservoir rock                                 
              samples from geothermal systems will be                                        
              collected, identified, and analyzed during the                                 
              four month period.  Chemical geothermometers                                   
              will be applied and multicomponent chemical                                    
              equilibrium models developed with the fluid                                    
              analyses.  Light-stable isotopic ratios and the                                
              activities of radionuclides in the 238U and                                    
              232Th decay series will be measured for                                        
              selected fluids and minerals.  Light-stable                                    
              isotopic data can be used to characterize                                      
              fluids and applied in studies of water-rock                                    
              interaction.  The ages of hydrothermal                                         
              minerals, redistributions of radioisotopes, and                                
              residence times of fluids in the reservoir can                                 
              be calculated from disequilibrium in the U-Th                                  
              series.  U-Th disequilibrium and the                                           
              distribution of radionuclides in hydrothermal                                  
              systems can be very useful as natural analogs                                  
              for the transport and sorption of radionuclides                                
              in repositories.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation provides funds for a                                 
              stipend of four months, international travel,                                  
              an allowance for in-country travel, chemicals,                                 
              and excess baggage and an administrative                                       
              allowance for Florida State University.
