Title       : Pre-Impact Preparedness and Post-Impact Restoration Activities Following
               Hurricane Andrew
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1992 
File        : a9224537

Award Number: 9224537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41382              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter G. Peacock   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh Gladwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Preparation for and response to rapid onset physical events such               
              as earthquakes, tornadoes, and hurricanes test the ability of                  
              social systems to provide and meet the survival needs of a human               
              population.  This research will examine household pre-impact                   
              preparedness and post-impact restoration activities in South                   
              Florida following Hurricane Andrew.  The central focus will be an              
              examination of the ethnic differences in household response to                 
              warning and subsequent preparations as well as specific restorative            
              activities undertaken following impact.  Household preparation                 
              activities refer to potential loss of life and damage to property.             
              Household restoration activities include those actions undertaken              
              by households to deal with the emergency situation following impact            
              and short-term actions undertaken to restore some semblance of                 
              normal household function.  The multi-ethnic nature of South                   
              Florida will allow for a more complete examination and assessment              
              of ethnic variation in these activities.  This research will                   
              combine a field survey of approximately 300 households located in              
              heavily impacted areas and telephone surveys of approximately 1000             
              households serviced by Miami media markets and in the hurricane                
              warning zone to assess ethnic variations in preparedness and                   
              restoration activities.                                                        
                                                                                             
              While the literature has often alluded to ethnic variations in                 
              disaster activities, the nature of these variations has yet to be              
              fully research.  Social science literature is replete with                     
              discussions of the importance of race and ethnicity for employment,            
              income, education, socioeconomic status, housing quality and                   
              ownership, access to political power, family organization and                  
              structure, and the like.  All of these factors play critical roles             
              in preparedness and restoration activities.  In addtion, there are             
              often language and other cultural differences among ethnic                     
              populations, such as those of South Florida.  From both a                      
              theoretical and applied perspective, it is important to understand             
              the role of ethnicity in disaster response and management.
