Title       : Capital Utilization and Policy Reform in Dynamic EquilibriumEconomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9224440

Award Number: 9224440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173347             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Cooley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary D. Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              Modern business cycle theory starts with the view that growth and              
              fluctuations are not distinct phenomena to be studied using                    
              separate models.  The first part of this project focuses on                    
              significant differences found in production data between the                   
              properties of output variation at the individual plant level and               
              output variation at the aggregate level.  This project constructs              
              a general equilibrium model economy that is consistent with the                
              features of long run growth observed in aggregate time series,                 
              but in which production takes place at individual plants that                  
              operate in a manner consistent with the micro evidence.  An                    
              aggregate technology is derived that differs from the Cobb-                    
              Douglas production function assumed in standard models in which                
              there are no distinctions between output fluctuations at the                   
              level of the plant, the firm or the aggregate.  The project                    
              studies the properties of the aggregate fluctuations exhibited by              
              the model and compares them with the cyclical properties of a                  
              standard real business cycle model.                                            
                                                                                             
              This research promises both methodological and substantive                     
              contributions to our understanding of economic growth.                         
              Methodologically it improves the microeconomic foundations of the              
              basic model of economic growth.  Substantively, it improves our                
              understanding of the way different micro-level technologies                    
              influence the variability and the level of economic growth.  This              
              basic research eventually could prove significant for the                      
              scientific credibility and the accuracy of studies of the long-                
              term consequences for economic growth of technologies for                      
              mitigating global environmental change.                                        
                                                                                             
              The second part of the project explores the welfare consequences               
              of economic policy reforms in dynamic general equilibrium models.              
              A "base policy" is derived by calibrating the model to features                
              of actual policies.  For the U.S., this means heavy reliance on                
              capital and income taxation.  The next step is to evaluate policy              
              changes from this base regime.  Examples include a shift from                  
              capital income taxation to labor or consumption taxation, a shift              
              to heavier reliance on inflation taxation, and how the government              
              responds in periods of high government consumption (such as wars)              
              or periods of bad technology shocks such as an unexpected                      
              increase in energy costs.  This research will sharpen our                      
              understanding of the welfare gains associated with policy reforms              
              that involve moving from existing policies to optimal or                       
              plausible sub-optimal policies.
