Title       : Dissertation Research: Genetic Effects of Extinction and Recolonization in a
               Host-Parasite System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1994   
File        : a9224949

Award Number: 9224949
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Brown  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gunter P. Wagner gunter.wagner@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce H. Rannala  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The study will determine the roles of a number of                              
              population-level processes, including genetic drift,                           
              migration, and local population extinction and                                 
              recolonization, in determining the patterns of genetic                         
              differentiation among populations in nature.                                   
              Population demographic data will be compared with                              
              genetic data to test theories concerning the effects of                        
              these various factors.  The study animal is the swallow                        
              bug Oeciacus vicarius an ectoparasite exclusively of                           
              cliff swallows in Nebraska.  Populations of swallow                            
              bugs undergo regular cycles of local population growth                         
              and extinction due to the ephemeral use of colony sites                        
              by the cliff swallow host.  They are thus ideally                              
              suited for studies of the population genetic effects of                        
              dynamic factors such as extinction and recolonization.                         
              A longterm (10-year) database is available which                               
              details colony site usage and migration patterns for                           
              the cliff swallow hosts.  The east with which important                        
              population parameters for these bugs may be estimated                          
              makes possible a population genetic unusual in both its                        
              precision and broad scope.  The study will expand basic                        
              understanding of the fundamental process of genetic                            
              differentiation in natural populations, and will                               
              empirically test classical static (equilibrium)                                
              theories of population genetic structure against more                          
              recently proposed dynamic models.  At a practical                              
              level, the study will provide general insights into the                        
              importance of various natural effects, such as local                           
              population extinction, in determining the overall level                        
              of genetic diversity for a species.  This information                          
              is of considerable importance to conservation                                  
              biologists as a guide in formulating effective                                 
              strategies for maintaining species genetic diversity in                        
              the wild.
