Title       : Theory of Quantum Antiferromagnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1996     
File        : a9224290

Award Number: 9224290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subir Sachdev subir.sachdev@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A comprehensive theoretical study will be made of the novel                    
              properties of frustrated, doped, and random quantum                            
              antiferromagnets.  Recent inelastic neutron scattering measurements            
              have provided us with a wealth of information on the spin dynamics             
              of the doped cuprates: a successful unraveling of the nature of the            
              spin fluctuations is clearly important to a deeper understanding of            
              the novel properties of these high temperature superconductors.                
              With the aim of understanding these measurements, we will study the            
              universal properties of two-dimensional antiferromagnets in the                
              vicinity of a zero temperature phase transition at which the long-             
              range magnetic order vanishes.  The effects of doping, quenched                
              randomness, incommensurate spin fluctuations, and incipient phase              
              separation on this phase transition and the quantum disordered                 
              phase will be examined.  Other frustrated, layered antiferromagnets            
              have also been studied in recent years: in particular, the kagome              
              lattice is a strong, experimentally realizable candidate for                   
              displaying a disordered ground state.  We will undertake a                     
              theoretical study of these systems: the nature of quantum phase                
              transitions and the quantum disordered phases of antiferromagnets              
              on frustrated two-dimensional lattices will be studied by a duality            
              analysis and mappings to dimer models.  Finally, the low                       
              temperature magnetic propoerties of the metallic and insulating                
              phases of doped semiconductors will be studied: these materials are            
              well described by a strongly random Hubbard model which will be                
              examined by numerical and analytic approaches.                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              Theoretical research will be conducted on magnetic models which are            
              at the core of problems related to strongly interacting physical               
              systems such as the high temperature superconductors.  These                   
              problems are at the forefront of present research in condensed                 
              matter physics.
