Title       : Workshop: Assessing the Science of Inland Aquatic Ecosystems: Research,
               Education, and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1995  
File        : a9224974

Award Number: 9224974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Parker sdparker@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9224974  Dwoskin   The Water Science and Technology Board (WSTB) of the National
              Research Council (NRC) will assess the science of inland aquatic ecosystems,
              especially as it relates to interdisciplinary education and research and its
              application to the management of aquatic ecosystem.   The study results from an
               increased awareness by the water science community that there is a growing
              need for fundamental advances in interdisciplinary water science, particularly
              of the ecosystem perspective the interactive role of physics, chemistry, and
              biology in the support of living communities.  Continued development of this
              knowledge base calls for review of the educational and research issues in this
              area.  The study would be carried out by a committee of  approximately 15
              scientists and engineers from various fields including  limnology,
              environmental engineering, ground water science, ecology, aquatic , chemistry,
              hydrology, environmental fluid mechanics, fisheries biology, landscape ecology,
              and geomorphology.  The committee will use case studies to consider how the
              application of the ecosystem perspective improves the management, protection
              and restoration of inland waters.  The study would take two years to complete
              and would result in a report laying out recommendations for future improvements
              in research and education in the science of inland aquatic ecosystems and its
              application to protection, management, and restoration of aquatic ecosystems. 
              %%%  Society needs to predict how aquatic ecosystems change as a consequence of
               human activities such as physical manipulation of water bodies, flow
              manipulation, changes in land use, chemical inputs, introduction of exotic
              species, climate changes, and restoration efforts.  These activities will
              affect water availability and quality, habitat conservation, and aquatic
              ecosystem integrity.  The ability to make these predications rests on continued
              progress in the science of inland aquatic ecosystems.
