Title       : U.S.-Iceland Cooperative Research on the Evolutionary Response of the Plant,
               Nardus Stricta, to Naturally Elevated Levels of Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1993    
File        : a9224941

Award Number: 9224941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter C. Oechel oechel@sunstroke.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea C. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              45        Ecology                                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 5914,
Abstract    :
              9224941  Oechel  This award supports Professor Walter C. Oechel and a graduate 
              student from San Diego State University to collaborate in  physiological
              ecology with Professor Bjartmar Sveinbjornsson and  others of the Institute of
              Biology of the University of Iceland.   They will study the long-term effects
              of elevated carbon dioxide  (CO2) on an arctic plant species (Nardus stricta)
              which is thought  to have evolved for thousands of years exposed to an elevated
              CO2  atmosphere near certain mineral springs in Iceland.  They will 
              characterize the physical environment around the springs and measure  a large
              number of physiological, organismal, and community level  features over time. 
              The U.S. team brings particular expertise in  studying physiological and
              ecosystem-level responses of plants to  CO2, and Dr. Oechel has extensive field
              experience in the arctic  regions of Alaska.  Dr. Sveinbjornsson is an expert
              in mosses and  has studied the effects of nutrient levels and water stress on 
              plants in arctic ecosystems.  Environmental measurements will be a  shared
              responsibility; studies of Nardus stricta will be done  principally by the U.S.
              participants, and complementary studies of a  moss species will be carried out
              by the Icelandic scientists.  The  collaborative nature of this project is
              essential to its success,  since no single research group has the necessary
              site access and  biological expertise.    The concentration of CO2 is
              increasing in the atmosphere due to the  burning of fossil fuels and
              deforestation.  Experimental research to  examine its effects on plant growth
              suggest that short-term exposure  to higher CO2 can stimulate growth, which has
              encouraged a number of  observers.  However, other more recent studies have
              demonstrated  that long term exposure (over a year) may have little or no
              positive  effect, and may even accelerate the depletion of other nutrients 
              needed by plants.  The mineral springs of Iceland make an excellent  and
              possibly unique model system for studying the  long-term effects  of elevated
              CO2 on vegetation in a natural environment with minimal  manipulation.  The
              proposed research has the potential to answer  important questions about how
              human-induced CO2 elevation will  affect world vegetation and carbon balance in
              the arctic.  ***
