Title       : FASEB Summer Conference on Chromatin and Transcription, June 27-July 2, 1993,
               Copper Mountain, Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9224356

Award Number: 9224356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Wolffe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              This second conference on Chromatin and Transcription is to be held            
              under the auspices of the Federation of American Societies of                  
              Experimental Biology (FASEB) June 27-July 2 in Copper Mountain,                
              Colorado.  Participation will be limited to 150 scientists                     
              (including speakers and moderators), selected on the basis of their            
              expertise and interest in this area and their expected contribution            
              to the success of the program.  It will be the second meeting                  
              entirely devoted to Chromatin and Transcription:  the critical                 
              analysis of our current understanding of how nuclear organization              
              contributes to gene regulation and the evaluation of the most                  
              fruitful avenues for further investigation.  The Conference will               
              consist of nine sessions, each with three or four speakers and a               
              discussion leader, selected among investigators who have made                  
              seminal contributions to the field and from younger investigators              
              in the program.  The participation of established and promising                
              female scientists and minority scientists will be actively                     
              encouraged.  This meeting on "Chromatin and Transcription" should              
              serve as a catalyst for stimulating the interest of scientists who             
              may already have the tools in hand to approach gene regulation in              
              the context of nuclear structure, with focus upon those young                  
              scientists who are yet to initiate a major area of independent                 
              research.                                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              This meeting of scientists will discuss how the molecular structure            
              of genes is involved in the cellular production of enzymes and                 
              other proteins.  It is important to know what is different in the              
              structure of genes that are actively producing blueprints for the              
              production of proteins versus other genes that are not active in               
              this manner.  Understanding the chromatin structure is considered              
              a key aspect in this field.  This area of genetics has rapidly                 
              progressed over the past few years and this conference will bring              
              the best talent available for the exchange of information.
