Title       : Study of Solar Oscillations, Phase II: Global Oscillation, Analysis and
               Publication, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1996   
File        : a9224433

Award Number: 9224433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $672895             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arvind Bhatnagar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : udaipur Sol Observ
	      Udaipur 313001
	      Udaipur, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,4300,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project provides funds to                                   
              allow for a collaborative effort by the                                        
              National Optical Astronomy Observatories (NOAO)                                
              and the Udaipur Solar Observatory (USO).  The                                  
              effort is part of a Global Oscillation Network                                 
              Group (GONG) research to make observations,                                    
              from different sites around the globe, of the                                  
              oscillations at the surface of the sun, the                                    
              earth's nearest star.  Helioseismology, the                                    
              study of these solar oscillations, has been                                    
              developed as a new powerful tool that can probe                                
              the solar interior with great precision similar                                
              to the way that terrestrial seismology reveals                                 
              information about the interior of the earth.                                   
              During this phase the U.S. side, led by Dr.                                    
              John Leibacher, will assist the Indian team,                                   
              led by Dr. Arvind Bhatnagar, in preparing the                                  
              site, setting up the equipment and testing the                                 
              instrumentation and beginning the observations.                                
                                                                                             
              Scope:  Under the GONG program, NOAO will                                      
              operate four of the six planned stations, in                                   
              Australia, Chile, Hawaii, and California.  The                                 
              fifth station, in the Canary Islands, will be                                  
              operated by the Institute de Astrofisica de                                    
              Canarias, Tenerife under a US-Spain cooperative                                
              program.  The staff of USO and of the Tata                                     
              Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR) will                                  
              operate the station at Udaipur.  They have the                                 
              necessary scientific qualifications and the                                    
              experience in solar observations, as well as                                   
              the necessary backing of the Government of                                     
              India, an important element in ensuring the                                    
              success of this long term joint research.                                      
              Visits are planned by the U.S. scientists to                                   
              Udaipur, and by the Indian scientists to the                                   
              NOAO and to other observatories in the U.S. for                                
              training and preparation for the planned                                       
              research.
