Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Custom-Designed Confidence Set Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1993        
File        : a9224370

Award Number: 9224370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Hayter ajh@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this project is to improve the quality of                
              statistical inference methods available to an experimenter                     
              through the use of improved and custom-designed confidence sets.               
              While it is clear that confidence bounds on a set of parameters                
              are more informative to an experimenter than the answer to a                   
              hypothesis test formulation of the problem, there are many                     
              essentially basic statistical inference problems where current                 
              techniques for confidence set construction are either crude,                   
              inefficient or nonexistent.                                                    
                   This may be because of a complicated distributional set-up,               
              because the real parameters of interest are functions of other                 
              basic parameters, or because the experimenter has chosen to                    
              emphasize certain kinds of information such as directional                     
              decisions.  In many settings, the experimenter has some clearly                
              defined objectives which can rightly and sensibly be used to                   
              determine a sensitive and powerful inference method, yet will                  
              find out that confidence sets are currently only available for                 
              standard less specific inference approaches. The construction of               
              custom-designed confidence sets associated with these specific                 
              inference procedures will enable the experimenter to make a                    
              fuller and more complete inference than is often currently                     
              possible.  It is important to develop these techniques and to                  
              make them widely available since many decisions type inference                 
              are currently being made, such as in comparative drug trials, in               
              which the decision results are being reported (e.g., drug A is                 
              more effective than drug B) and where, in fact, additional free                
              information (such as a confidence interval for the difference in               
              the efficacies of drugs A and B) is also available but is not                  
              being utilized.                                                                
                   This research will consider ways to improve current data                  
              analysis techniques.  The measurement of data and the subsequent               
              analysis of such data inevitably involves some uncertainty, and                
              the objective of this research is to develop improved ways of                  
              dealing with this uncertainty through the science of statistical               
              inference.  This investigation will consider both the design of                
              experiments or data collection schemes, together with the                      
              analysis of the data.  The main thrust of the research will be to              
              develop new ways of presenting the results of statistical                      
              analyses which are designed to be clear and intiutively                        
              comprehensible to the lay person.  Moreover, these methods must                
              be accurate and they must efficiently summarize all the available              
              information.   These new techniques will be useful for                         
              researchers and experimenters in areas such as engineering,                    
              quality control, clinical trials, medical studies and other                    
              important fields.
