Title       : International Group Travel Grant: German Summer Program for Undergraduate
               Students in Separations, Interfacial, and Transport Phenomena (June - August
               1993)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1994     
File        : a9224387

Award Number: 9224387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles A. Garris                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52799              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. McGrath mcgrath@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald K. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This international, group travel grant supports six American                   
              Undergraduate engineering students who will complete a                         
              coordinated program of academic and industrial research in                     
              Germany.  The nominal model consists of a three month period                   
              during the summer of 1993.  The first two months of the                        
              program will consist of research at a German University.                       
              Normally, the research will be of an experimental nature.  The                 
              third month will be devoted to engineering research and                        
              development activities in a company in Germany.  The German                    
              company is expected to pay for living costs associated with                    
              the work experience during the third month.  It is anticipated                 
              that these relatively short experiences will encourage                         
              students to become involved in longer term commitments related                 
              to US/German engineering collaborative exchanges, possibly                     
              work for an American Subsidiary in German.  The technical                      
              focus of all the undergraduate research projects will be:                      
              Problems in Separations, Interfacial, and Transport Phenomena.                 
              Applicants will be sought throughout the U.S. Applications                     
              must describe the cooperation and support of an American                       
              faculty member and a German faculty member, as well as the                     
              participating industry.  The highest priority for travel                       
              awards are given to Chemical and Mechanical Engineering                        
              undergraduate students with the strongest combination of a                     
              detailed program plan, academic excellence, German language                    
              skills, and past experience in industry or international                       
              relations.
