Title       : Raman Scattering of Solid and Liquid Clusters and Ultrathin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1994  
File        : a9224165

Award Number: 9224165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Lannin jsl@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Enhanced Raman scattering methods will be used for in situ ultra-              
              high vacuum studies of clusters and ultra-thin films deposited on              
              surfaces.  Information about the phonon states and their changes               
              with cluster size and temperature will be obtained.  Emphasis will             
              be places on the semiconducting and semimetallic group IV (C and               
              Sn) and V (Bi and Sb) elements in amorphous or nanocrystalline                 
              states.  Raman scattering will also be applied to liquid clusters              
              from this group to obtain dynamical information on the phase                   
              transformations from the solid to liquid state.  Sputtering and                
              laser assisted deposition methods will be employed for cluster and             
              ultra-thin film growth.  Photoemission and high resolution electron            
              energy loss methods will provide complementary information on                  
              changes in electronic and vibrational states and the role of atomic            
              hydrogen bonding on surfaces.                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              This research will focus on both near surface and bulk properties              
              of ulrathin and thin films with different nanostructures.  Emphasis            
              will be placed on studies of semiconductor or semimetal cluster                
              structures in which both the relatively small number of atoms and              
              the large surface to volume ratio allow modified material                      
              properties to be achieved.  Both solid as well as liquid state                 
              cluster properties will be explored.  The preparation of these                 
              materials will employ a diverse range of ultrahigh vacuum                      
              deposition methods, including magnetron sputtering, evaporation and            
              laser assisted deposition.  The physical properties and                        
              characterization of these materials will employ a range of in situ             
              ultrahigh vacuum spectroscopic methods.  This will provide                     
              information on the electronic state and vibrational dynamics of                
              disordered amorphous and nanocrystalline solids and will explore               
              the role of bonding and structural disorder changes in the                     
              processing of ultrathin films.  Additional ex situ transmission                
              electron microscopy studies of cluster size distributions will be              
              obtained and related to synthesis methods.  Laser assisted                     
              deposition of amorphous carbon and other diamond-like materials                
              will involve university-industry collaborations.
