Title       : RUI: Systematics and Biological Studies of Balansieae (Ascomycetes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1993       
File        : a9224647

Award Number: 9224647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118056             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. White   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn Univ Montgomery
	      Atlanta Highway
	      Montgomery, AL  36117    205/271-9300

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9229,
Abstract    :
                   The Balansieae are widespread fungal associates of grass                  
              plants.  All grass communities are likely to contain at least some             
              individuals that are infected by members of the Balansieae group,              
              and many communities in North America are composed of predominantly            
              Balansieae-infected plants.  Some of these fungi have been shown to            
              enhance insect resistance, drought tolerance, and in some cases                
              vegetative growth of host plants.  Endophytic Balansieae are now               
              routinely employed in turfgrass breeding programs to improve                   
              hardiness of commercial varieties and reduce turf requirements for             
              water and pesticides.  Balansieae also have major impacts on the               
              livestock industry worldwide.  Toxic syndromes affecting cattle                
              grazed on endophyte-infected tall fescue frequently occur in the               
              United States, while sheep grazed on endophyte-infected perennial              
              ryegrass experience toxic syndromes in New Zealand.                            
              %%%                                                                            
                   Taxonomic knowledge of the ascomycetous fungi grouped in                  
              Balansieae is rudimentary, and classification schemes are based                
              upon very few and potentially unreliable morphological features.               
              Representative samples of species of the genera Balansia and                   
              Epichloe are being collected from North and South America, in order            
              to determine more reliable morphological markers of the species and            
              to correlate these with mating patterns in the laboratory.                     
              Reproductive compatibility groups, where correlated with                       
              morphological features, provide the basis for discriminating                   
              species.  These basic taxonomic studies will prepare for future                
              determination of phylogenetic relationships among the fungal taxa              
              and the analysis of possible coevolution with host grasses.
