Title       : Locks with Constrained Sharing: A Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9004998

Award Number: 9004998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ron Ashany                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amr El Abbadi amr@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Divyakant Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6855,
Abstract    :
              This research address the problem of providing efficient                       
              transactional access to distributed databases.  A new mode of                  
              locks, termed ordered-shared mode, is proposed that permits data               
              sharing in a constrained manner.  A family of locking-based                    
              concurrency control protocols is developed by using three modes                
              of locks: shared, ordered-shared, and non-shared.  The strictest               
              protocol in this family is the two phase locking protocol for                  
              databases, while the most permissive recognizes all conflict-                  
              preserving serializable histories.  This is the first locking-                 
              based concurrency protocol that recognizes the entire class of                 
              conflict-preserving serializable histories.  Theoretical and                   
              empirical studies of these protocols will be conducted during                  
              this project. The theoretical comparison is based on the analysis              
              of sets of histories produced by the protocols.  The empirical                 
              analysis involves building a performance model and a database                  
              system test-bed.  Distributed database concurrency control                     
              protocols based on ordered-shared locks will be developed and                  
              implemented on a distributed database test-bed.  Finally, the                  
              new mode of locks will be used to develop protocols for database               
              system recovery, nested transactions, and abstract data types.
