Title       : Regulation of Tubulin Gene Expression During Soybean Internode Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1992       
File        : a9004693

Award Number: 9004693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Fosket   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Fosket has isolated and sequenced two soybean beta-tubulin                 
              genes (SB1 and SB2) which exhibit different patterns of                        
              developmental and organ specific expression. However, both genes               
              are expressed in elongating internodes and they are strongly and               
              rapidly down regulated at the transcriptional level when                       
              etiolated seedlings are exposed to light. He will determine the                
              nature of the cis-acting elements controlling the internodal                   
              expression of SB1 and SB2. Constructs in which a promoterless E.               
              coli beta-glucosidase (GUS) reporter gene is driven by the SB1                 
              and SB2 promoters have been made and transferred to tobacco by                 
              Agrobacterium mediated transformation, and the chimeric genes are              
              expressed in the transgenic tobacco plants. The effect of                      
              deletions and mutations of the putative promoter regions of SB1                
              and SB2 on the expression of the GUS reporter gene in                          
              transgenic tobacco will be determined to identify the regulatory               
              elements responsible both for their expression in elongating                   
              internodes and for their light induced down regulation. GUS                    
              enzymatic activity assays and S1 nuclease protection experiments               
              will be used to verify that GUS enzymatic activity is a                        
              reflection of the transcriptional activity of the chimeric genes.              
              The precise cellular localization of GUS activity in the                       
              transgenic tobacco plants will be determined histochemically,                  
              while the cell specific expression of the SB1 and SB2 genes in                 
              soybean internodes will be  will be determined by means of in                  
              situ hybridizations, using labeled, gene specific probes.                      
              Additionally, SB1 and SB2 specific antibodies will be generated                
              and used to ascertain which microtubule arrays contain these                   
              tubulins. The trans-acting factors regulating the transcription                
              of the SB1 and SB2 tubulin genes in soybean internodal tissues                 
              will be identified by means of footprinting and gel retardation                
              assays. These DNA binding regulatory proteins will be isolated by              
              affinity chromatography and the nature of their interaction with               
              SB1 and SB2 promoter elements will be studied. Antibodies raised               
              to these DNA binding proteins will be used to isolate cDNAs                    
              encoding them from a lambda gt11 expression library. The cDNAs                 
              will be used as probes to examine the regulation of expression of              
              the genes encoding these DNA binding proteins.                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              In plants microtubules are an important subcellular component                  
              involved in determining how cells expand and as a consequence,                 
              how tissues grow. This study will elucidate how the expression of              
              a microtubule protein is expressed during plant growth and in                  
              response to light.
