Title       : Dinosaur Evolutionary Dynamics and Habitat Bottlenecks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1991      
File        : a9004458

Award Number: 9004458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101335             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Weishampel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Recent research by The Johns Hopkins University in the St.                
              Mary River and Willow Creek formation of northwestern Montana has              
              contributed important information about dinosaur faunas from                   
              upper coastal plain environments not otherwise available from                  
              most other regions that have yielded Late Cretaceous faunas.                   
              These new data are critical to the larger issues of their effects              
              on extinction and speciation of large-bodied terrestrial                       
              vertebrates.                                                                   
                   Further field and laboratory work is essential for a better               
              understanding of the faunal components of this upper coastal                   
              plain habitat and the effects of severe reduction in terrestrial               
              environments through marine transgressions (i.e. habitat                       
              bottlenecks) and their release.  With these goals in mind, the                 
              field work will be devoted to collecting specimens, mapping                    
              localities and detailing the stratigraphy of the St. Mary River                
              and Willow Creek sites.  Laboratory research will focus on the                 
              paleoecologic and evolutionary interpretation of the St. Mary                  
              River fauna necessary for a critical understanding of these                    
              habitat bottlenecks.  This work includes 1) new approaches to the              
              analysis of ontogenetic stages and evolution of St. Mary River                 
              taxa using landmark-based morphometrics, 2) new analyses of the                
              feeding and locomotion of the St. Mary River animals on the                    
              kinematics of the jaws and teeth, and the kinematics and cross-                
              sectional geometry of the limbs, and 3) interpretation of these                
              data in terms of the evolutionary dynamics of St. Mary River taxa              
              to the opening of terrestrial habitats through the regression of               
              the Bearpaw Sea.                                                               
                   This study will fill a significant void in our knowledge of               
              an important component of Late Cretaceous ecosystems (life in                  
              upper coastal plain environments) at a time critical to the                    
              history of dinosaurs and other vertebrates (the Edmontonian Land               
              Mammal Age at the close of the Cretaceous).  In doing so, it will              
              contribute to our understanding of how major environmental crises              
              such as extensive transgressions and regressions relate to the                 
              evolutionary dynamics of large-bodied vertebrates.
