Title       : U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research: The Role of Peptide Fragments of Proteins in
               Folding and Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1993  
File        : a9004111

Award Number: 9004111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16490              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold A. Scheraga has5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Nemethy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5920      ITALY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,
Abstract    :
              This award will support Professor Harold Scheraga of Cornell                   
              University and Professor George Nemethy of the Mount Sinai                     
              School of Medicine in a research collaboration with Professor                  
              Adriana Zagari of the University of Naples, Italy.  The                        
              purpose of the collaboration is the determination of the                       
              preferred conformations of several short peptides that form                    
              structurally and functionally important parts of proteins.                     
              Two specific problems will be investigated.  The first                         
              problem is that of the nonhelical telopeptides of collagen.                    
              These peptides play an important role in directing and                         
              stabilizing the particular manner of assembly of collagen, by                  
              means of specific interactions with neighboring molecules in                   
              aggregates.  The second problem concerns several peptides                      
              that occur in bovine pancreatic and seminal ribonucleases                      
              and have been proposed to play a role in the folding process                   
              of these molecules.  The aim of both of these investigations                   
              is to establish the nature of the interactions of the                          
              peptides with the rest of the protein molecule and thereby                     
              understand their role in the folding and assembly of native                    
              proteins.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Preferred conformations of the peptides will be determined by                  
              conformational energy computations, X-ray crystallography,                     
              and NMR and fluorescence measurements.  Interatomic inter-                     
              actions between molecules in aggregates will be modeled by                     
              energy computations.  Peptide synthesis and solution                           
              physicochemical measurements will be carried out in Scheraga's                 
              laboratory at Cornell.  Crystallization and X-ray structural                   
              determination will be done by Zagari in Napoli.  Conformational                
              energy computations will be carried out by all three groups,                   
              coordinated by Nemethy at Mount Sinai.  The planning of the                    
              project and the interpretation of the results will require                     
              the combination of theoretical and experimental approaches.
