Title       : PRF/M: Fitness Consequences of Genetic Recombination in Natural Populations of
               Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1990    
File        : a9004278

Award Number: 9004278
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40381              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin D. Parker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                   These experiments will examine the evolutionary dynamics of               
              genetically variable Bacillus subtilis populations in soil                     
              microcosms and examine the biological and physical factors which               
              facilitate recombination.  The experiments will be performed                   
              during a sabbatical leave in the laboratory of Dr.C.A. Istock at               
              the University of Arizona.  These questions will be addressed:                 
              1) Do natural genotypes of B. subtilis differ in fitness?  2) Do               
              relative fitnesses of genotypes change as a function of biotic or              
              physical environmental conditions?  3) Is recombination frequency              
              correlated with specific habitat conditions?  4) Are genetically               
              variable soil populations of B. subtilis more resistant to                     
              bacteriophage predators than are monomorphic cultures?  5) Is                  
              there a genetic cost to sexual reproduction in B. subtilis?  The               
              basic procedure in these experiments will be to 1) inoculate soil              
              microcosms with heat-shock spores or vegetative cells of one or                
              more isogenic strains of B. subtilis, 2) sample these populations              
              at intervals, 3) estimate the density of vegetative cells and                  
              spores, and 4) determine genotype/recombination frequencies by                 
              protein, antibiotic resistance, colony morph, and DNA                          
              restriction fragment polymorphisms.  Additionally, to address                  
              question 5 the PI will transform competent B. subtilis in broth                
              culture using prepared donor DNA.  These results will illuminate               
              the relative costs, benefits, and ecological and evolutionary                  
              consequences of genetic recombination and diversity in a species               
              with a primitively asexual breeding system.
