Title       : The Genetics and Ecology of Toxic Yeasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1992     
File        : a9004841

Award Number: 9004841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229999             (Estimated)
Investigator: William T. Starmer wstarmer@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,9145,
Abstract    :
                   Deadly Toxic yeasts secrete proteins that are toxic to other              
              yeasts. The P.I.s interested in evaluating the role of toxic                   
              yeasts in the organization of natural communities of yeasts                    
              species.  The investigators past work has shown that these yeasts              
              are relatively common in nature with at least one species present              
              in all communities examined (i.e. the distinct yeasts communities              
              associated with stem necroses of various cacti, slime fluxes of                
              trees and decaying tissue of fruits).  The P.I.'s will                         
              investigate two different yeasts, Pichia Kluyveri and P.                       
              thermotolerans, that occur in rotting fruits and decaying stems                
              of cactus respectively.  The system of Toxic P. Kluveri is                     
              especially interesting since it has a very flexible genetic                    
              system that displays species specific killing genotypes.  In                   
              order to understand and link the knowledge on both the genetics                
              and ecology the investigators will do an in depth ecological                   
              survey that assays genotypes of P. Kluyveri in conjunction with                
              he resistance phenotypes of associated yeast species.  This work,              
              in parallel with detailed laboratory genetic analysis and                      
              field/laboratory experiments designed to reveal the adaptive                   
              significance of specific killer genotypes should allow the                     
              evaluation of the importance of toxin production to the                        
              organization of the community.  The proposed work with P.                      
              thermotoloerans will provide comparative information from a                    
              relative different system; an system that is restricted terms of               
              hosts (saguaro cactus) and geography (Sonoran Desert).  The                    
              overall goal is to understand the fundamental reasons for                      
              community structure.  Deadly toxins in yeasts represent an                     
              opportunity to study a case where the mechanism of interference                
              competition is clear and unambiguous.
