Title       : Science in Developing Countries Workshop on Modern Light Microscopy and Video
               Analysis, Mendoza, Argentina, Nov. 12-18, 1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1990  
File        : a9004662

Award Number: 9004662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17420              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shinya Inoue   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1115,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports an international workshop on modern light                  
              microscopy to be held in Mendoza, Argentina from November 12-                  
              18, 1990.  The U.S. organizer is Dr. Shinya Inoue of the                       
              Woods Hole Marine Biological Laboratory in Massachusetts.                      
              His Argentinean counterpart is Dr. Mario Burgos of the                         
              National University of Cuyo in Mendoza.  The speakers consist                  
              of four experienced microscopists from each country, the U.S.                  
              and Argentina.  Video microscopy is a powerful tool for                        
              biology, medicine and materials science.  For this reason,                     
              this workshop assumes greater importance than just discussions                 
              of equipment or techniques.  The three general areas to be                     
              covered are:  (A) foundations of light microscopy, including                   
              analysis of image resolution and contrast, impact of                           
              illumination, and principles and applications of phase                         
              contrast, differential interference contrast, polarization                     
              microscopy, confocal imaging, and optical sectioning; (B)                      
              fluorescence microscopy, including target-specific probes,                     
              instruments, and ratio imaging; and (C) video microscopy and                   
              digital image processing and analysis, including video                         
              principles, contrast and feature enhancement, noise integra-                   
              tion, and examples of applications.                                            
                                                                                             
              The workshop will bring together Latin American and U.S.                       
              scientists to explore future collaborations.  Also they will                   
              share with academic and industrial investigators, including                    
              advanced graduate students in Latin America, the forefronts                    
              of this emerging field in order to encourage applications in                   
              research.  The mornings will generally be devoted to lectures                  
              and discussions, and the afternoons to laboratory demonstra-                   
              tions with extensive opportunities for hands-on experience                     
              with modern optical and video equipment.  The lecturers are                    
              well-experienced, having participated in similar workshops                     
              before at the Marine Biological Laboratory, in Woods Hole,                     
              Massachusetts.
