Title       : Genetic and Molecular Studies of the Kismet Locus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1990  
File        : a9004491

Award Number: 9004491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas E. Brady                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Tamkun tamkun@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr.Tamkun's research is focused on the genetic and molecular                   
              mechanisms controlling the development of Drosophila                           
              melanogaster.  This proposal concerns a new homeotic gene,                     
              kismet, identified by virtue of its genetic interactions with                  
              homeotic mutations.  Genetic studies of the kismet locus have                  
              suggested that it is a target, or encodes a cofactor, of the                   
              Antennapedia gene product.  Dr.Tamkun proposes to continue                     
              concurrent genetic and molecular analyses of kismet to determine               
              its precise role in the determination of segmental identities                  
              during development.  This will be accomplished through the use of              
              germ-line and somatic clonal analyses, the continued                           
              characterization of genetic interactions between kismet and the                
              homeotic loci of the Antennapedia and bithorax complexes, and the              
              molecular cloning of kismet. Antibodies directed against the                   
              kismet protein will be generated and used to determine its                     
              subcellular distribution.  The spatial and temporal expression of              
              kismet during development will be followed using nucleic acid                  
              and antibody probes.  The effect of various  homeotic mutations                
              on the expression of the kismet mRNA and  protein will be                      
              examined to determine if this locus is a target  of homeotic gene              
              regulation.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              The determination of body segment identity in fruit flies is an                
              excellent system for studying the control of pattern formation in              
              multicellular organisms. Mutations in one class of genes can                   
              result in the transformation of one body segment into the                      
              likeness of another, such as the transformation of an antenna                  
              into a leg. This work will further our understanding of how this               
              class of genes functions.
