Title       : Salmon Pituitary Hormones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1993    
File        : a9004332

Award Number: 9004332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walton W. Dickhoff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Penny Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Reproduction of fish, as in other vertebrates, is controlled by the            
              brain through the endocrine system.  The pituitary gland plays a major         
              role in initiating reproductive maturation (puberty), maintaining              
              production of sperm and eggs by the gonads, and inducing final                 
              maturation and gamete release (spawning).  In tetrapod vertebrates, two        
              pituitary hormones regulate reproduction; follicle-stimulating hormone         
              (FSH), which stimulates early stages of gametogenesis, and luteinizing         
              hormone, which induces ovulation and corpus luteum formation in the            
              female, for example.  Until recently, it was generally believed that           
              the pituitary gland of fish produced only one hormone that controlled          
              all aspects of reproduction.  It is now established that in salmon             
              there are two pituitary hormones, gonadotropin I and gonadotropin II,          
              that may control reproduction.  The proposed research will study the           
              functions of these two gonadotropins in salmon.  The study will also           
              address when the two gonadotropins first appear in the pituitary gland         
              and blood, and how the brain controls their synthesis and release.             
                                                                                             
              This work is significant in that it should advance our knowledge of how        
              salmon reproduction is controlled.  Since it is well-established that          
              reproduction in tetrapod vertebrates is controlled by two pituitary            
              hormones, comparison of fish can be made with mammals, birds,                  
              amphibians and reptiles.  This information should give us a better             
              perspective on vertebrate reproduction in general.  Futhermore, a              
              better understanding of the control of fish reproduction will allow the        
              rational development of techniques to manage reproduction of captive           
              broodstock in fish aquaculture.
