Title       : Structure/Function Analysis of a Bacterial Protein Kinase Phosphoprotein
               Phosphatase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1990     
File        : a9004048

Award Number: 9004048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander J. Ninfa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Over 20 different bacterial adaptive responses to                              
              environmental stimuli are regulated by a family of proteins,                   
              response regulators, sharing a conserved amino terminal                        
              domain.  The activity of these response regulators is                          
              controlled by a second family of proteins sharing a conserved                  
              domain, usually located at the carboxyl terminus.  Recent                      
              experiments with the purified signal transduction proteins                     
              that control nitrogen assimilation (NTR regulon), chemotaxis                   
              (Che) and osmoregulation (OMP regulon) indicate that the                       
              proteins of this second family are protein kinases and, in                     
              some cases, phosphoprotein phosphatases that regulate the                      
              adaptive responses by controlling the level of                                 
              phosphorylation of the response regulators.  Of these protein                  
              kinases, the best understood is NRII which regulates nitrogen                  
              assimilation by catalyzing the phosphorylation and                             
              dephosphorylation of the enhancer-binding transcription                        
              factor NRI. In this proposal, the PI presents experiments                      
              designed to further elucidate the mechanisms of the kinase                     
              and phosphatase reactions catalyzed by NRII The results of                     
              these experiments will probably be applicable to all of the                    
              homologous protein kinases.  NRII has three activities: in                     
              the presence of ATP, NRII is autophosphorylated on a                           
              histidine residue.  This phosphoryl group is then transferred                  
              to an aspartyl residue within the N-terminal domain of the                     
              response regulator NRI.  Finally, in the presence of the                       
              signal transduction protein PII and ATP, NRII catalyzes                        
              the dephosphorylation of P-NRI.  Genetic experiments are                       
              proposed that should define the requirements for nucleotide                    
              binding and the autokinase, phosphotransferase. and                            
              phosphatase activities by isolating or constructing mutants                    
              specifically deficient in these activities.  In addition,                      
              experiments are proposed that should directly elucidate the                    
              identity of the autophosphorylated histidine residue, the                      
              stoichiometry of autophosphorylation, and the sites of                         
              nucleotide binding.
