Title       : Mechanisms of Mitochondrial Distribution in Mitosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1992       
File        : a9004719

Award Number: 9004719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288784             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Yaffe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The distribution of mitochondria and other subcellular organelles              
              during cell division is an essential process for the proliferation of          
              eukaryotic cells, yet the mechanisms facilitating and controlling this         
              process are unknown.  The goal of this study is to analyze the                 
              molecular basis for the distribution of mitochondria during mitosis.  A        
              primary aim is to identify proteins and subcellular structures which           
              mediate this transport process.  A second goal is to characterize the          
              specific roles of these components in intracellular mitochondrial              
              movements.  A long-term objective is to understand how the distribution        
              of mitochondria and other organelles is coordinated with other                 
              essential events of the cell division cycle.  Mechanisms that distribute       
              mitochondria during mitosis will be studied using a combined                   
              biochemical and genetic approach.  This approach will focus on a               
              characterization of mutant cells of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae         
              which are defective in the segreation of mitochondria.  These mutants,         
              which were isolated previously, first will be analyzed morphologically         
              to examine the effect of the mutations on cellular structures and events       
              of the cell cycle.  The mutants will be used next to clone genes that          
              encode components which facilitate mitochondrial distribution, and             
              information from gene analysis will guide the production of antisera           
              against the gene products.  These antibodies will be used to identify          
              and localize the proteins, and to examine changes in cellular                  
              distribution of the proteins during the cell cycle.  Binding studies           
              will be employed to characterize the interaction of these MDM                  
              (mitochondrial distribution and morphology) proteins with mitochondria         
              or other subcellular structures.  In a latter stage on the                     
              investigation, additional components that interact with MDM proteins           
              will be identified by both biochemical and genetic approaches, and the         
              function of these new components will be examined.  Additionally,              
              proteins that mediate mitochondrial movement will be investigated in           
              cells that divide by a different mitotic pattern, fission.                     
                                                                                             
              These studies of mitochondiral movement should reveal new details of           
              cellular organization and cell division, and provide a foundation for          
              understanding the changes in cellular structure that accompany                 
              differentiation.
