Title       : RUI: Biochemistry of Nitrogen-limited Growth of Wood Decaying Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1993  
File        : a9004085

Award Number: 9004085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walt W. Lilly wlilly@biology.semo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southeast Missouri State U
	      900 Normal
	      Cape Girardeau, MO  637014753    314/651-2000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              This research elucidates mechanisms of sustained mycelial growth               
              of the wood-decaying fungus, Schizophyllum commune.  The first                 
              phase of the project involves characterization of proteolytic                  
              enzyme systems involved in intramycelial protein turnover and                  
              recycling during nitrogen-limited growth.  This problem is being               
              addressed by purifying several proteases found in control and                  
              nitrogen-starved colonies.  Subsequent classification of these                 
              enzymes is being based on biochemical characteristics, substrate               
              and inhibitor specificity, and subcellular localization.  An                   
              investigation for potential ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis also                
              is being performed.  The second phase provides initial data for                
              studying the regulation of the nitrogen-stress response.                       
              Antibodies are being generated to specific proteases which are                 
              differentially expressed.  These antibodies are to be used to                  
              assess levels of expression during nitrogen-stress and to analyze              
              mutants for deficiencies in specific protease production.  In                  
              vivo and in vitro translation products for control and nitrogen-               
              stressed colonies are being analyzed.  In addition, the potential              
              for using heterologous cDNA probes for some specific protease                  
              messages is being investigated.  This project complements other                
              Schizophyllum research and provides a fungal system in which                   
              nutrient-stress related autolysis can be studied in the absence                
              of sexual differentiation.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Schizophyllum commune is a model system for studying biological                
              processes in basidiomycetes and other fungi.  Because it is a                  
              wood-decayer in nature, results from the proposed research should              
              lead to a better understanding of other, more economically                     
              important wood-decaying fungi.  Such fungi are of interest either              
              because of their capability to destroy wood building materials or              
              for their potential in biomass conversion of agricultural waste                
              materials.  It is thought that nitrogen is the limiting factor in              
              the natural growth substrate for wood-decayers, thus our                       
              understanding of nitrogen nutrition of these organisms may lead                
              to better methods for their control in the first instance or                   
              better methods and/or genetically engineered strains for                       
              cultivation in the latter.
