Title       : Ontogeny of Immunity in Frogs/Effects of Metamorphosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1993  
File        : a9004666

Award Number: 9004666
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321067             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise A. Rollins-Smith louise.rollins-smith@mcmail.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt U Med Ctr
	      Office of Biomedical Sciences
	      Nashville, TN  372322103    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The immune response pattern of tadpoles of the South African                   
              clawed frog, Xenopus laevis, is distinct from that of the adult.               
              Metamorphosis is a transitional period that separates the two                  
              patterns.  The objectives of this research are to examine the                  
              hypothesis that development of the adult immune system requires                
              metamorphosis and is characterized by the loss of a major                      
              population of larval lymphocytes and replacement with new, adult-              
              type lymphocytes.  To prove or disprove the hypothesis, larval                 
              thymus or spleen cell populations will be cytogenetically                      
              labelled, and their fate during and after metamorphosis will be                
              followed.  By implanting triploid thymus or spleen into diploid                
              hosts and blocking metamorphosis in some of them, it will be                   
              determined whether renewal of T and B cell populations at                      
              metamorphosis is dependent on thyroid hormones.  Because                       
              metamorphosis is regulated by thyroid hormones whose effects may               
              be modulated by corticosteroid hormones, the direct effects of                 
              thyroid hormones and corticosteroid hormones in promoting                      
              metamorphosis-dependent changes in the immune system will be                   
              analyzed.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              These studies will contribute to a better understanding of the                 
              ontogeny of the immune system of amphibians, the mechanisms that               
              regulate production of lymphocytes during ontogeny, the                        
              neuroendocrine regulation of development of the immune system,                 
              and how immunological tolerance to "self" develops.
