Title       : Molecular Genetics of Auxin Action in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1992       
File        : a9004991

Award Number: 9004991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222584             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Estelle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The plant hormone auxin is required for many aspects of plant                  
              development.  Auxin appears to stimulate cell elongation and cell              
              division in intact plants.  Auxin is thought to be essential for plant         
              cell growth because it is absolutely required for growth of plant cells        
              in culture.  Despite its importance, very little is known about the            
              mechanism of auxin action.  This research proposes to better determine         
              the molecular details of how auxin regulates cellular events as a basis        
              for understanding auxin regulation of development at the level of the          
              whole plant.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The focus of this research is Arabidopsis thaliana because it is               
              particularly well suited to both molecular and classical genetic               
              studies.  Genes involved in auxin action will be identified from               
              mutants which do not respond normally to applied auxin.  One of the            
              mutants isolated in this way is called auxin resistant 1 or axr1.              
              Certain axr1 mutant plants have been characterized in the PI's                 
              laboratory and the mutants display a number of defects which suggest           
              defective auxin responses.  The AXR1 gene will be cloned and the               
              nucleotide sequence determined.  Genetic studies have shown that the           
              gene lies on chromosome one, very close to a previously isolated               
              fragment of DNA.  This fragment of DNA will be used to isolate the AXR1        
              gene using a technique called chromosome walking.  Once cloned, the            
              gene will be introduced into axr1 mutant plants using plant                    
              transformation procedures developed for Arabidopsis.  Loss of auxin            
              resistance in the transformed plants will confirm that the AXR1 gene           
              has been correctly cloned.  The DNA sequence of the AXR1 gene will be          
              determined and used to deduce the amino acid sequence of the gene              
              product and will be compared with the sequences of other previously            
              isolated genes.  The isolated gene will also allow determination of            
              which cells in the plant are making the AXR1 gene product.  The                
              molecular characterization of the AXR1 gene should lead to important           
              new insights into the role of auxin in plant development.
