Title       : Evolution of Intradiol Dioxygenase Genes in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9004839

Award Number: 9004839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286000             (Estimated)
Investigator: L.Nicholas Ornston nicholas.ornston@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              The research program is designed to explore how the properties of              
              genes and the stability of regions within genes are influenced by              
              neighboring DNA sequences.  Bacterial intradiol dioxygenase                    
              genes, the subjects of the investigation, share common ancestry                
              and have undergone numerous rearrangements during their                        
              evolutionary divergence.  Rearrangements might be expected to                  
              lead to the physical separation of independently transcribed                   
              genes, but the chromosomal position of divergent oxygenase genes               
              has been conserved within different supraoperonic clusters.                    
              Selective forces favoring the clustering of genes will be                      
              explored by examining the physiological and genetic consequences               
              of directed transposition of oxygenase genes from one cluster to               
              another.  Transposition can lead to genetic instability, and a                 
              possible source of instability is sequence-directed mutation, a                
              process that can lead to deletions between regions of DNA                      
              sequence repetition.  The extent to which sequence-directed                    
              mutations occur will be explored by comparison of the DNA                      
              sequences of genes that have undergone spontaneous mutation                    
              either in their normal location or after transposition to a                    
              different cluster.  Processes that lead to sequence-directed                   
              mutation also might contribute to genetic repair, and this                     
              possibility will be explored by analysis of DNA sequence of                    
              mutations that revert readily.  Enzymatic activation of oxygen is              
              a fundamental biological process, and the genetic analysis of                  
              oxygenases will increase our understanding of biochemical steps                
              that direct the assimilation of molecular oxygen into organic                  
              substrates.  We plan to isolate mutant oxygenases that are                     
              functional but altered in substrate specificity or in catalytic                
              efficiency,.  Analysis of these proteins is likely to provide                  
              novel insight into interactions between oxygenases and their                   
              substrates.
