Title       : PRF/M: Molecular Evolutionary Systematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1990    
File        : a9004461

Award Number: 9004461
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lowell E. Urbatsch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1122,
Abstract    :
                   The Mid-Career Fellowship will provide the PI with the                    
              opportunity to learn the methodology of molecular evolutionary                 
              systematics.  The PI will work in the laboratory of Dr. Robert K.              
              Jansen, University of Connecticut to learn the methods of                      
              restriction site mapping of chloroplast and nuclear ribosomal DNA              
              for phylogeny reconstruction.  Procedures to be learned include                
              DNA extraction, restriction endonuclease digestions, gel                       
              electrophoresis, filter hybridizations and the maintenance of                  
              clone banks.  Familiarity with the appropriate literature and                  
              with the methodology of restriction site mapping and phylogenetic              
              analysis of restriction site data will be accomplished.  The                   
              organisms to investigated include the coneflower genera Dracopis,              
              Echinacea, Ratibida, and Rudbeckia and probable related genera in              
              Asteraceae tribe Heliantheae.  The objectives of the                           
              investigations, in addition to the training aspects, are to                    
              solve the status of problematic taxa within genera, achieve                    
              phylogenetic insights among species and genera of the study                    
              organisms, and determine the affinities of the coneflowers with                
              other genera of the Heliantheae.  Dr. Jansen is the leading                    
              authority on the evolutionary systematics of the Asteraceae and                
              the PI will also have the opportunity to collaborate with Dr. KI-              
              Joong Kim who has done considerable work on the tribe                          
              Heliantheae.
