Title       : Juvenile Hormone (JH) Receptors in a Cockroach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1992  
File        : a9004609

Award Number: 9004609
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Franz Engelmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              One of the most active and currently vigorously pursued research area          
              in endocrinology in the identification of the receptors for the various        
              hormones.  An understanding of the role of hormones receptors in               
              activation of specific genes will further our knowledge regarding the          
              specifically of hormone action.  The overall aim of this research              
              proposal is to gain an indepth understanding of one of the primary             
              actions of the insect juvenile hormone:  The induction of the yolk             
              protein precursor, Vitellogenin (Vg).  Juvenile hormone is a                   
              sesquiterpenoid molecule and as such chemically unique among animal            
              hormones.  It is hypothethized that also here receptors mediate the            
              hormonal message in analogy to the findings for vertebrate steroid and         
              thyroid hormones.  The fundamental importance to endocrinology in              
              general is implied.                                                            
              In order to achieve this goal, the receptor for JH (so far                     
              physiologically identified) will be purified to homogeneity.                   
              Polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies to this receptor will be generated        
              and used to monitor the stage and sex specific occurrence of this              
              receptor.  In addition, the Vg gene will be isolated and the hormone           
              responsive element (HRE) will be identified.  Since species such as            
              cockroaches date evolutionarily back to more than 200 M years,                 
              analogous findings to those from certain vertebrate hormones will gain         
              significance in evolutionary terms.  Cockroach species have been               
              amenable for basic research.  Many of the aspects regarding the control        
              of insect reproduction have been worked out on appropriate cockroach           
              species first.  The easy manipulation of these animals and their cost          
              efficiency make them perhaps the animals of choice for certain basic           
              research in biology.  Furthermore, the identification and                      
              characterization of the receptor for JH may lead to the design of new          
              chemicals that can be used in control of agriculturally and medically          
              injurious insect species, since hormone receptors are the key to               
              hormone action.
