Title       : Aging of the Male Reproductive System in Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1992    
File        : a9004806

Award Number: 9004806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165793             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick S. vom Saal   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wade V. Welshons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Venkataseshu K. Ganjam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Vom Saal will use two research strategies to examine the hypothesis        
              that the levels of sex steroids to which male mice (Mus musculus               
              domesticus) are exposed during fetal life play a major role in                 
              influencing aging, particularly of the reproductive system.  The first         
              approach involves using a naturally-occurring phenomenon, the                  
              intrauterine position phenomenon.  Males occupying different                   
              intrauterine positions are naturally exposed to different endogenous           
              blood steroid levels during fetal life due to being randomly positioned        
              in utero between 2 male fetuses (these males have elevated serum levels        
              of testosterone) or between 2 female fetuses (these males have elevated        
              serum levels of estradiol).  The intrauterine position of males will be        
              identified at cesarean delivery, and they will be raised for                   
              examination during later life.  The second approach will involve               
              treating pregnant females with either estradiol or testosterone to             
              slightly increase serum concentrations of these steroids during sexual         
              differentiation in all male fetuses of treated mothers.  He will               
              examine lifespan, the incidence of tumors in old age, fertility (the           
              capacity to successfully mate with females and sire young), and                
              functioning of the prostate and seminal vesicles (as assessed by enzyme        
              activity and capacity to bind hormones) during aging in male mice.             
                                                                                             
              During the fetal period of differentiation of the brain and                    
              reproductive system, individuals in all mammalian species may be               
              exposed to markedly different levels of sex steroid hormones due to a          
              variety of reasons.  While it is known that individual differences in          
              many characteristics relating to reproduction in young-adult animals           
              are determined by levels of sex hormones during fetal life, no one has         
              examined whether  lifespan of the pattern of reproductive aging in             
              males might be predicted by fetal sex hormone levels.  In most                 
              mammalian species, including man, there are a few aged males who retain        
              the capacity to reproduce, while the majority of males become                  
              reproductively inactive in old age. The proposed experiments should            
              provide important information concerning why such dramatic differences         
              in reproductive capacity and lifespan are observed between individual          
              males.
