Title       : Cellular Regulation of Actin-Membrane Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1990   
File        : a9004942

Award Number: 9004942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary C. Beckerle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
                 The broad-scale goal of this research is to characterize the                
              structure and function of a novel 82 kD protein which was                      
              recently identified in this laboratory as a component of adhesion              
              plaques and zonulae adherens of cultured cells.  The specific aim              
              of this project is to define the structural features of the 82 kD              
              protein.  The primary sequence will be determined by molecular                 
              cloning and sequencing techniques.  Secondary structure will be                
              predicted and conserved structural motifs and functional domains               
              will be identified.  Sequences that are required to address the                
              82 kD protein to adherens junctions will be defined in transient               
              transfection experiments.  Previous work from this laboratory has              
              suggested that multiple isoforms of the protein are present in                 
              smooth muscle.  The biochemical basis for differences among these              
              isoforms (e.g., post-translational modifications) will be                      
              investigated.  In addition, rotary shadowing will be used to                   
              characterize the molecular shape of the protein.                               
                                                                                             
              The adherens junctions represent a specialized class of cell-cell              
              and cell-matrix associations that are characterized by the                     
              presence of filamentous actin on the cytoplasmic face of the                   
              junctional membrane.  These include the focal contacts or                      
              adhesion plaques of cultured cells, the zonulae adherens (or                   
              "belt desmosomes") found in the apical junctional complexes of                 
              epithelial cells, the dense plaques of smooth muscle, the fascia               
              adherens of cardiac muscle, and the myotendinous junction.  These              
              junctions share in common a number of structural features, though              
              they also exhibit a degree of molecular heterogeneity.  The                    
              finding of a novel 82 kD protein which is localized specifically               
              to these junctions is particularly interesting.  The detailed                  
              studies to be performed with this award should lead to an                      
              understanding of how these junctions are organized and regulated               
              in living cells.
