Title       : Relate NMR Relaxation Times of Pure Components and Mixtures with Viscosities and
               Diffusion through Application of Corresponding States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1993       
File        : a9004067

Award Number: 9004067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Riki Kobayashi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A versatile NMR probe has been designed and constructed.  This                 
              probe is capable of performing low signal to noise spin-                       
              lattice relaxation and diffusion coefficient measurements at                   
              pressures up to 600 atm over a temperature range of -20 to                     
              200oC.  The probe is also configured so that vapor liquid                      
              equilibrium can be established in the sample at these                          
              temperatures and pressures.  In the immediate future the probe                 
              will be used to measure relaxation times (T1) and self                         
              diffusion coefficients in 13CO2 as a function of temperature                   
              and pressure.  The only T1 measurements on this important                      
              fluid are the four isochores measured by Smith and coworkers                   
              (1986).  Several investigators have measured the self-                         
              diffusion coefficient of CO2 over the temperature range                        
              accessible to the probe, but the measurements are confined to                  
              pressures less than 200 atm.  After the pure CO2 measurements,                 
              mixtures of CO2 and n-hexadecane will be studied.  This data                   
              will then be correlated with classical transport properties.                   
              This type of correlation remains relatively unexplored for                     
              mixtures.  A global corresponding states treatment will also                   
              be attempted throughout this project.                                          
                                                                                             
              NMR can supply a wealth of information about the motions of                    
              molecules in all phases of matter.  From the relaxation times,                 
              the rotational and translational motions may be investigated.                  
              The diffusion coefficients, measured by the spin-echo method,                  
              provide a means to investigate translational motions.  In the                  
              past several years NMR imaging has been established as a                       
              valuable tool in the investigation of fluid flow in porous                     
              media.  A major challenge in the usefulness of this technique                  
              lies in relating the NMR measurables to traditional                            
              thermodynamic and transport properties.  The interrelationship                 
              is shown in Figure 1.  The purpose of our current NMR program,                 
              is to further develop and quantify some of the relationships                   
              between NMR measurables, transport properties, and state                       
              variables.  One area which would benefit greatly from the                      
              development of these relationships is the interpretation and                   
              quantification of NMR images.  Practical use of NMR imaging                    
              requires a correlation to bridge the NMR data with traditional                 
              engineering analysis.
