Title       : Immuno-ultrastructural Analysis of the Splicing Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9004860

Award Number: 9004860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann L. Beyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                This laboratory uses an unusual in vivo ultrastructural                      
              approach, the "Miller chromatin spreading technique," to                       
              visualize transcriptionally active genes in the electron                       
              microscope and to analyze the co-transcriptional RNA processing                
              events on nascent pre-mRNA transcripts, including                              
              ribonucleoprotein (RNP) formation, splice site selection,                      
              constitutive splicing, and alternative splicing.  In order to                  
              extend observations from the level of ultrastructural                          
              phenomenology to biochemical identification of specific proteins,              
              there is a need to be able to identify the proteins at specific                
              sites on the transcripts and in specific structures.  The                      
              technique of immuno-electron microscopy would allow this                       
              analysis, but has not yet been perfected for use on Miller                     
              chromatin spreads.  The proposed project will take a systematic                
              and logical approach to the development of such a technique.                   
              Some of the desired monoclonal antibodies are already in hand,                 
              which will be used in conjunction with colloidal gold markers for              
              EM visualization.Immediate applications of such a technique                    
              include localization on nascent RNA of specific snRNPs, specific               
              hnRNP proteins, general splicing factors, and proteins implicated              
              in splicing regulation.  The technique would be more generally                 
              useful, however, and could be used to localize proteins involved               
              in chromatin structure, replication, transcription regulation,                 
              attenuation, and polyadenylation to specific sites or structures               
              on the genetic material.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The development of this technique would thus make possible a                   
              deeper understanding of how proteins interact with DNA and RNA                 
              to effect and regulate gene expression.
