Title       : Potassium Transport Across the Plasma Membrane of Arabidopsis Thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1991       
File        : a9004068

Award Number: 9004068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Sussman msussman@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In higher plants, the mechanism by which potassium is                          
              transported across the plasma membrane is uncertain.  Results                  
              from electrophysiological and biochemical studies suggest a                    
              model in which a proton pump (H+ -ATPase) generates a proton                   
              electrochemical gradient which drives potassium uptake                         
              through potassium carriers and channels.  By isolating and                     
              characterizing mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana with altered                    
              potassium transport, this model is being tested.  Preliminary                  
              experiments indicate that cesium is a phytotoxic competitive                   
              inhibitor of potassium uptake in A. thaliana seedlings.  From                  
              100,000 M2 seed, several dozen cesium-resistant A. thaliana                    
              mutant plants were isolated and many display a defect in                       
              potassium transport.  The mutants showed two broad phenotypic                  
              groupings, one which is pleiotropic in that potassium and                      
              phosphate transport are both affected, and a second in which                   
              a specific alteration has occurred in the affinity of the                      
              transport system for potassium.  The second set of mutants is                  
              being characterized genetically.  In order to clone and                        
              sequence genes encoding plasma membrane potassium                              
              transporters, a chromosome walk to loci of uptake mutants                      
              with altered affinities for potassium is being performed.                      
                                                                                             
              Potassium plays a special role in the life of plant cells.                     
              The accumulation of high concentrations of this ion drives                     
              the uptake of water without an increase in cell volume                         
              because the plasma membrane is restrained in its expansion by                  
              a rigid cell wall.  Thus, the main function for accumulated                    
              potassium appears to be the generation and maintenance of a                    
              large turgor pressure.  In higher plants this pressure plays                   
              an especially important role in providing the driving force                    
              for erect plant growth through cell elongation.  The                           
              concentration of potassium in the cytoplasm of cells is                        
              maintained even when the extracellular concentration is                        
              reduced to extremely low levels.  It has long been recognized                  
              that the generation and maintenance of this large potassium                    
              gradient requires metabolic energy.  This research explores                    
              the molecular mechanism for potassium transport across the                     
              plasma membrane of plants in order to gain a better                            
              understanding of how this important plant mineral functions                    
              in plant growth and development.***//
