Title       : The Ediacaran-Cambrian Transition of South Australia: Faunas and Facies, Fact
               and Artifact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1990       
File        : a9004442

Award Number: 9004442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey F. Mount mount@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The research will document how regional shifts in                         
              paleoenvironmental conditions during the Proterozoic-Cambrian                  
              transition may have influenced the record of extinctions and                   
              radiations of early Metazoa.  Recent work in South Australia has               
              shown that the inferred gap between the last appearance of                     
              complex vendozoans or the Ediacaran fauna and the first                        
              appearance of Cambrian-aspect traces is, in part, artifactual.                 
              It is suggested that the two faunas are in close stratigraphic                 
              and, by influence, close temporal proximity.  In order to test                 
              this observation, detailed stratigraphic and paleontologic                     
              analyses will focus on the exceptional exposures of the                        
              Ediacaran-Cambrian transition in the Flinders Rangers, South                   
              Australia.  Two principal data sets will be developed: 1) genetic              
              stratigraphic sequence reconstructions of the intervl comprising               
              the Upper Rawnsley Quartzite/Ediacara Member of the Pound                      
              Subgroup (uppermost Proterozoic?), Uratanna Formation (uppermost               
              Proterozoic?-Lower Cambrian) and Parachilna Formation (Lower                   
              Cambrian); and 2) fossil/lithofacies associations of Ediacaran                 
              and earliest Cambrian trace and body fossils.  Integration of                  
              these two data sets will allow the reconstruction of time-                     
              environment histories of faunal occurrences and a test of the                  
              role that ancient environments have played in biasing this                     
              record.                                                                        
                   By attempting to separate artifactual from factual                        
              signatures within the record, this research will have important                
              implications for efforts to establish the causes and timing of                 
              the apparent demise of the Ediacara fauna and the dramatic                     
              subsequent radiation of the Cambrian fauna.  The results of this               
              work will contritube to on-going efforts to determine if there is              
              a link between latest Proterozoic/Early Cambrian faunal turnover               
              and a variety of geochemical and lithostratigraphic anomalies in               
              the rock record.  In addition, this research will improve our                  
              current understanding of the stratigraphy of a globally-                       
              significant Precambrian-Cambrian boundary section.
