Title       : The Bell Island Pluton, S.E. Alaska: Paleomagnetic Analysis of a Tilted Pluton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1990       
File        : a9004147

Award Number: 9004147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas O. Wright                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : October 31,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34922              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Butler butler@pmag.geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Gehrels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Discordant Cretaceous paleomagnetic directions observed in                
              plutons of the North Cascades and the Coast Mountains Batholith                
              indicate major tectonic disturbance subsequent to magnetization.               
              Several lines of geological evidence suggest that consistent and               
              large-scale tilting has affected intrusive rocks of this Mesozoic              
              plutonic welt along the western margin of North America from the               
              North Cascades to southeast Alaska.  This may be a fundamental                 
              tectonic process the scope of which has not been previously                    
              appreciated.  The Bell Island pluton is a 90 Ma pluton on the                  
              western flank of the Coast Mountain Batholith north of Ketchikan               
              in southeast Alaska.  Extensive structural, petrologic, and                    
              isotopic data indicate that the Bell Island pluton experienced                 
              25o of northeast-side-up tilting in the 90 Ma to 50 Ma                         
              interval.  This pluton provides an excellent opportunity to study              
              the paleomagnetic and geologic record resulting from tilting of a              
              large panel of crust and the tectonic processes involved in                    
              regional-scale tilting.  This study is a combined geologic and                 
              paleomagnetic investigation along a southwest to northeast                     
              transect across the Bell Island pluton.  The research could                    
              provide crucial information towards:  (1) resolution of the                    
              northwards transport - versus - crustal tilting debate regarding               
              discordant Cretaceous paleomagnetic directions (and therefore                  
              determination of a Cretaceous paleogeography for North America);               
              and (2) determination of the importance of tilting of crustal                  
              panels in the tectonic evolution of North America.
