Title       : Collab Study: Tectonomagmatic and Event-Stratigraphic sig- nificant of Lower
               Paleozoic K-bentonites in the Iapetus Region of North America and Northwestern
               Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1990       
File        : a9004559

Award Number: 9004559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stig M. Bergstrom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    PIs will investigate the tectonic setting, magmatic origin               
              and stratigraphic significance of altered volcanic ash beds (K-                
              bentonites) in the Middle and Upper Ordovician strata of                       
              Baltoscandia and to compare these data with similar data from                  
              North America.  Preliminary studies strongly suggest these K-                  
              bentonite beds on both sides of lapetus had a common source and a              
              common tectonic setting.  If this indication proves correct, the               
              most widespread of these beds will have profound event-                        
              stratigraphic implications for the Ordovician, and our                         
              understanding of Laurentia and Baltica plate positions during the              
              Taconian orogeny will be substantially improved.  Similarly, the               
              abundance of Silurian K-bentonites throughout Baltoscandia and                 
              the UK indicates ongoing plate-margin volcanism from Llandovery                
              through Ludlow time.  PIs will collect samples of the most                     
              extensive beds from cores and outcrops in Estonia, Sweden and                  
              Norway.  They will add to existing information on the                          
              biostratigraphic position of these beds and use chemical                       
              fingerprinting of both bulk samples and selected phenocrysts to                
              make accurate correlations with North American beds.  These will               
              be compared with trans-Atlantic stratigraphic relations of K-                  
              bentonites suggested by traditional biostratigraphy and by                     
              graphic correlation using conodonts.  We will also obtain high-                
              resolution Ar age spectra and U-Pb dates from biotite and zircon               
              separates from biostratigraphically well-constrained K-bentonites              
              that will add key ages to the Ordovician time scale.  Trace                    
              element data will be plotted on discrimination diagrams to                     
              interpret the tectonic and magmatic settings of these beds.
