Title       : Experimental Models for Hydrodynamic Transport of Conodonts (Chordata) in
               Shallow Marine Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1990      
File        : a9004300

Award Number: 9004300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Broadhead "  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven G. Driese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Conodonts have been utilized, especially during the last 50               
              years, as principal biologic indices of geologic age.                          
              Paleoecologic interpretations of observed distributions have been              
              attributed largely to life habits of conodont animals, and only                
              general mention has been made of the potential for post-mortem                 
              disruption of death assemblages.  The effects of post-mortem                   
              transport processes on distributions of conodont elements in                   
              shallow-marine carbonate environments will be investigated by                  
              means of laboratory settling and flume experiments.  Because of                
              the highly variable sizes and shapes of these phosphatic grains,               
              significant differences exist in terminal settling velocity in a               
              static fluid and are suggested for (1) critical conditions (mean               
              flow velocity) for initiation of movement, (2) transport within                
              migrating small bedforms, (3) differential sorting of elements                 
              along a transport path, and (4) amount of breakage during fluid                
              transport.  These hydrodynamic differences are extremely                       
              important because they would have strongly influenced the                      
              distribution of discrete conodont elements, particularly in                    
              moderate to high energy regimes.  Quantification of these factors              
              can then be used to constrain the paleoecologic interpretation of              
              preserved assemblages of conodonts in peritidal carbonate rocks.               
              This will permit a quantitative approach to determining the                    
              amount of post-mortem transport experienced by conodont elements               
              prior to their burial and will also allow for direct statistical               
              comparison of the composition of different samples, when                       
              taphonomic effects are factored.  Quantification of post-mortem                
              transport broadly enhances the interpretation of biostratigraphic              
              and paleoenvironmental data of conodonts, with implications for                
              the study of other skeletal allochems, by providing models for                 
              the interpretation of physical environmental processes that                    
              played a major role in the formation of fossiliferous deposits.
