Title       : Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of Specific LexA Cleavage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1994    
File        : a9004455

Award Number: 9004455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Little   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of the project is a structural and functional                 
              analysis of the LexA protein of Escherichia coli.  This protein                
              undergoes a self-cleavage reaction, termed autodigestion, which                
              inactivates its repressor function.  In vivo, cleavage requires                
              an activated form of another protein, RecA.  In vito data                      
              indicate that RecA acts, not as a classical protease, but by                   
              stimulating LexA autodigestion.  The proposed research will                    
              analyze further the mechanism of autodigestion and the role of                 
              RecA in stimulating this reaction, using a combination of                      
              genetics, biochemistry, and protein chemistry.  Mutations in lexA              
              and recA will be isolated which affect either the interaction                  
              between the two proteins, or the rates of one or both cleavage                 
              reactions.  In particular, mutant proteins which cleave faster                 
              than wild-type LexA will be studied, with the goal of identifying              
              and analyzing the rate-limiting step(s) in cleavage.  It is                    
              planned to isolate crystals of LexA and of complexes with the                  
              operator and with activated RecA for use in x-ray                              
              crystallographic analysis.  Structural information gained from                 
              this analysis can be correlated with the genetic and biochemical               
              data.  These studies are of general interest for the insights                  
              they offer into self-processing reactions, which are observed in               
              a wide range of important biological molecules, including self-                
              splicing RNA, growth factor receptors, viral polyproteins, and                 
              oncogene products.
