Title       : Dynamics of the 1902 Eruptions of Montagne Pelee Determined from Size, Shape,
               and Textures of Vitric Pyroclasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1992      
File        : a9004790

Award Number: 9004790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley N. Williams atsnw@asuvm.inre.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate juvenile glassy tephra from the                  
              nuee-ardente deposits produced the cataclysmic eruptions on                    
              Montagne Pelee in 1902, as a basis for interpretation of the role              
              of hydrovolcanism in the eruption dynamics of this cycle of                    
              activity.  The research is undertaken specifically to provide                  
              sharper insights into the physical processes responsible for such              
              large and devastating explosive eruptions.  Electron microprobe                
              (EMP), scanning electron microscope (SEM), image analysis, and                 
              size distribution analysis will be the main techniques used to                 
              investigate tephra deposits left by the passage of successive                  
              nuees ardentes or sediment gravity flows in the vicinity of St.                
              Pierre, Martinique.  Internal and surficial textural information               
              observed on juvenile vitric fragments from the nuee ardente                    
              deposits will shed light on (1) processes of magma                             
              vesiculavesiculation and fragmentamentation as a result of sion                
              of juvenile magmatic volatiles; (2) the role and timing of                     
              hydromagmatism during the eruption; (3) the genesis of nuee                    
              ardentes; and (4) the mechanics of particle-particle interaction               
              during transtransport and deposition of nuee-ardente tephra.                   
              Grain size distribution analysis using the new model of                        
              sequential fragmentation and transport will allow the                          
              identification of maturity of fragmentation and transportation                 
              processes to be evaluated for various parts of the nuees at                    
              various distances from the source.  This information should be                 
              extremely useful in the evaluation of volcanic hazards at                      
              volcanoes with a history of large expolosions such as those of                 
              Montagne Pelee.
