Title       : RUI: Reactivation of the Sperm Nucleus at Fertilization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9004170

Award Number: 9004170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dominic L. Poccia dlpoccia@amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal will test two working models which explain the                   
              relationship between phosphorylation of the two sperm specific                 
              basic nuclear proteins (Sp histones) of the sea urchin, chromatin              
              structural alterations and male nuclear decondensation. The first              
              model postulates that the phosphorylation of specific                          
              tetrapeptide sites in these proteins alters physical properties                
              such as thermal stability, nuclease accessibility, average                     
              nucleosomal repeat length and histone DNA binding affinities that              
              reveal how the histones and DNA are arranged. The experiments                  
              are designed to assess the contribution of each Sp histone                     
              separately. Measurements will be made on chromatin reconstituted               
              from purified histones and DNA in the absence of complicating                  
              factors present in the living cell. The results will elucidate                 
              some of the alterations on first order chromatin structure                     
              observed in vivo. The second model addresses the potential                     
              consequences of Sp histone phosphorylation upon male chromatin                 
              decondensation and postulates at least two requirements for                    
              decondensation: phosphorylation and activation of a factor(s)                  
              sensitive to the drug 6-dimethylaminopurine. Using                             
              microinjection of condensed nuclei differing in their degree of                
              phosphorylation, several factors will be evaluated including the               
              role of Sp histone phosphorylation in decondensation, and the                  
              role of other metabolic activities. The factors absent in                      
              immature oocytes will be investigated, and an assay will be                    
              developed for the decondensation factor(s) which are sensitive to              
              the drug. The consequences of phosphorylation at the specific                  
              tetrapeptide sites are unlikely to be restricted to sea urchin                 
              male germ cells. Similar sites are known in most H1 histones and               
              in several nucleic acid packaging proteins and regulators,                     
              emphasizing the general importance of studying their                           
              phosphorylation.                                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              The long term objective of this research is an understanding of                
              the inactivation/activation of the sperm nucleus which occurs                  
              during spermatogenesis and following fertilization. The                        
              successful genetic reactivation of the dormant sperm nucleus by                
              egg cytoplasm, following fertilization, is essential to                        
              successful biparental embryonic development.
