Title       : Genetics of the Mitochondrial Translational Machinery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1992      
File        : a9004030

Award Number: 9004030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander A. Tzagoloff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Mitochondria, whether in lower or higher eukaryotes, are                       
              endowed with the capability to translate a small number of                     
              proteins encoded by their genomes.  With the exception of the                  
              transfer and ribosomal RNAs, and a single ribosomal protein,                   
              whose genes are located in mitochondrial DNA, all other                        
              components of the translational machinery are derived from                     
              nuclear genes.  During the past grant period, nuclear respiratory              
              deficient mutants of yeast affected in various aspects of                      
              mitochondrial metabolism have been isolated and characterized.                 
              Among this collection, approximately 55 complementation groups                 
              have been ascertained to be impaired in mitochondrial protein                  
              synthesis.  This subset of mutants has allowed characterization                
              of different mitochondrial aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, ribosomal               
              proteins, and translational initiation and elongation factions.                
              The analysis of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase genes have been                  
              particularly fruitful in revealing new and unsuspected                         
              evolutionary relationships between different members of this                   
              enzyme family.The studies embodied in the present proposal will                
              provide addition insights into the nature of the mitochondrial                 
              translation system through continued biochemical and genetic                   
              analyses of respiratory deficient yeast mutants.  Several                      
              objectives will be pursued in the course of these investigations.              
              First, the PI intends to complete the characterization of other                
              mitochondrial aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases and to start                          
              structural studies on the lysyl-tRNA synthetase.  This                         
              information will be used to further assess the evolutionary                    
              derivation of this multigene family.  A second important goal is               
              to delineate the factors responsible for regulating the                        
              expression of mitochondrial synthetases and to clarify the                     
              biochemical rationale for the existence of separate genes for                  
              some of the mitochondrial and cytoplasmic homologues.  Finally                 
              they expect to work out an in vitro system of mitochondrial                    
              protein synthesis which will permit more incisive studies on the               
              mechanism by which the products of nuclear genes such as CBP6,                 
              CBP7 (CBS2), and CBS1 facilitate translation of the cytochrome b               
              mRNA and pre-mRNA.
