Title       : PRF/M: Ecological Genetics of Cuticle Permeability and Epi-cuticular Hydrocarbon
               Composition in Drosophila buzzatii and Thermobiology of Australian Cicadas
               (Homoptera:Cicadidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1990    
File        : a9004284

Award Number: 9004284
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : April 30,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42638              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric C. Toolson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                   The primary purpose of the sabbatical is to allow the                     
              principal investigator to collaborate with Dr. Stuart Barker                   
              (University of New England, Armidale, Australia) on an                         
              ecological genetic analysis of cuticular permeability and                      
              epicuticular hydrocarbon composition in Australian populations of              
              the cactiphilic fly, Drosophila buzzatii.  Within and among                    
              population genetic variation for the two traits--and for their                 
              plastic response to variation in ambient temperature and humidity              
              regimes--will be quantified using a half-sib experimental                      
              design.  This analysis will repeated three times--during the                   
              annual summer population bottleneck, during recovery from the                  
              bottleneck, and when population sizes are maximal--to assess                   
              possible temporal changed in G-matrices.  Mate choice experiments              
              will assess the role of epicuticular hydrocarbons in the mating                
              system of D. buzzatii.  Ancillary experiments will quantify the                
              impact of dehydration on reproductive performance of D. buzzatii.              
              The sabbatical with Dr. Barker will provide the principal                      
              investigator with conceptual background and genetic techniques                 
              required to conduct his own program of research into the                       
              evolution of physiological adaptations and acclimation responses               
              to environmental variation.                                                    
                   A second project--field and laboratory studies o australian               
              cicada thermobiology--will augment the principal investigator's                
              work with U.S. species and lead to phylogenetic analysis of                    
              patterns of body temperature regulation in  cicadas.
