Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships of Pelycosaurs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  1990   
File        : a9004171

Award Number: 9004171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117170             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Berman bermand@carnegiemuseums.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Reisz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst
	      4400 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152134080    412/622-3241

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The evolution of synapsids is documented by an unusually rich                  
              fossil record, extending over 300 million years.  Primitive                    
              synapsids, the pelycosaurs, are the most conspicuous terrestrial               
              vertebrates of their time, and their fossil remains record the                 
              earliest successful adaptive radiation of amniotes to a broad                  
              array of herbivorous and predators modes of life.  The PIs will                
              undertake a thorough reassessment of the phylogenetic                          
              relationships of pelycosaurs by combining detailed anatomical                  
              studies of specimens with a cladistic analysis that considers a                
              large suite of characters.  Their first hand knowledge of this                 
              group, previous studies of numerous pelycosaur taxa, and                       
              availability of representative specimens of three outgroups for                
              direct osteological comparisons will eliminate the need to rely                
              heavily on outdated literature.  In addition to providing an                   
              assessment of the ingroup relationships of pelycosaurs, the                    
              present study will assess the relationship of pelycosaurs to                   
              other Paleozoic vertebrates, including their therapsid                         
              descendants.  Computer algorithms that utilize cladistic                       
              techniques will be used to analyze phylogenetic relationships.                 
              This project will provide a solid basis for the analysis of the                
              paleoecology and paleobiogeography of pelycosaurs.  The PIs also               
              expect to be able to construct a macroevolutionary model of the                
              group and to address the perplexing problem of the origin of                   
              amniotes (higher vertebrates that include recent reptiles, birds,              
              and mammals).
