Title       : Structure and Economy of Temperate Europe's First Cities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1993     
File        : a9004164

Award Number: 9004164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123443             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Wells   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota St Paul
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554552000    612/625-2435

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The late Iron Age site of Kelheim, located at the confluence of                
              the Altmuhl and Danube rivers in Bavaria, Germany, covers an area              
              of approximately 600 hectares of land and is enclosed by a wall                
              about 3300 meters long.  It provides mute testimony to the size                
              and complexity of European "cities" which existed before Julius                
              Caesar and his Roman legions marched northward and conquered                   
              large portions of Western Europe.  While archaeologists have                   
              known for some time that such indigenous sites existed little is               
              understood about how they developed and functioned.  This                      
              project, under the direction of Dr. Peter Wells, will shed new                 
              light on this process.                                                         
                                                                                             
              Following a preliminary season of excavation, Dr. Wells and his                
              colleagues will now conduct an additional two field seasons of                 
              work at Kelheim.  They will open broad horizontal areas to expose              
              structural and artifactual remains.  They will analyze the                     
              artifacts they recover, as well as associated floral and faunal                
              materials.  Large heaps of iron slag indicate that large scale                 
              metal production was carried out, and the team's research will                 
              also focus on this.  Slag and iron samples will be collected and               
              subjected to laboratory analysis to provide insight into the                   
              manufacturing process.  Archaeologists wish to know how these                  
              early sites were organized and the extent to which a strong                    
              central authority existed.  By examination of the spatial                      
              distribution of activities across the site as well as the degree               
              of standardization of manufactured remains, this question can be               
              addressed.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              additional information on a little-understood aspect of European               
              prehistory.  It will shed new light on how complex societies such              
              as our own first arose and were maintained.  Finally, it will                  
              contribute to the training of several graduate students.
