Title       : Regulation of Gene Expression by Ethylene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1992      
File        : a9004353

Award Number: 9004353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Fischer rfischer@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The long term objective of this research is to understand the                  
              molecular and cellular processes by which ethylene controls fruit              
              ripening and gene expression. The model system is Lycopersicon                 
              esculentum (tomato). By analyzing the effect of promoter                       
              deletions on gene expression in fruit from transformed plants,                 
              and in a recently developed microprojectile transient assay                    
              system, 5'-flanking regions that control gene expression in a                  
              positive and negative manner have been identified. Sites that                  
              react with developmentally regulated DNA-binding activities have               
              been delineated, and a clone encoding a DNA-binding protein has                
              been isolated. The specific goal is to elucidate the mechanisms                
              of ethylene action at the gene level. Ethylene-inducible promoter              
              fine structure will be analyzed by determining the effect of                   
              promoter mutations on gene expression in a transient gene                      
              expression system and in transgenic fruit. Specific mutations                  
              will include deletion of sites that react with DNA binding                     
              proteins, and alterations of binding site position and                         
              orientation within the promoter. Factors that regulate ethylene                
              inducible gene expression will be studied by cloning DNA binding               
              proteins that bind to critical DNA regulatory sequences. The                   
              cloned gene will be used to generate specific antibodies and                   
              these tools will be used to determine the mechanism that                       
              regulates DNA binding activity. DNA binding protein function will              
              be elucidated genetically by analyzing the phenotype of                        
              transgenic plants with reduced levels of DNA binding activity due              
              to the expression of an antisense DNA binding protein gene. The                
              interaction of the DNA binding protein with ethylene and/or other              
              nuclear proteins will be analyzed.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The plant hormone, ethylene, controls fruit ripening. This                     
              project is an investigation, at the molecular and genetic level,               
              of how that control is carried out.
