Title       : Genetic Analysis of Alpha-Tubulin Function in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9004477

Award Number: 9004477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Matthews matthewk@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Tubulin plays a crucial role in morphogenesis as the primary                   
              component of microtubules.  We propose to address two basic                    
              questions about these important structural proteins using the four             
              a-tubulins of Drosophila: are any of the a-tubulin isotypes                    
              functionally specialized, and what regulatory mechanisms are                   
              responsible for achieving the correct ratios and concentrations of             
              a-tubulins isotypes in each cell type?  The multifunctionality of              
              each a-tubulin isotype will be tested by determining the ability               
              of one isotype to rescue developmental defects associated with                 
              mutations in another isotype.  Transgenic strains carrying ectopic             
              copies of each a-tubulin gene and mutations in two of the a-                   
              tubulins are available.  An attempt will be made to generate                   
              mutations in the two remaining genes using P-element mutagenesis               
              and PCR, an approach that allows the recovery of mutations with no             
              detectable phenotype.  Regulatory mechanisms operating to maintain             
              tissue-appropriate a-tubulin pools will be identified by examining             
              the ability of cells to 1) eliminate misexpressed a-tubulin                    
              isotypes produced from chimeric genes, and 2) respond to                       
              overexpression of appropriate isotypes from supernumerary tubulin              
              genes.  Genes encoding transacting a-tubulin regulatory factors                
              will be sought by reverting the female sterility associated with               
              overexpression of a maternal tubulin.                                          
                                                                                             
              The protein tubulin is an important structural component of most               
              types of cells.  It exists in a number of different forms, some                
              present in all cells, others present only in certain specialized               
              types of cells.  The different forms of tubulin presumably serve               
              different functions, but very little is known about what these                 
              functions are.  This is a proposal to investigate the different                
              functions of the different forms of tubulin.
