Title       : Dissertation Research: Paleonutrition of the Lower Pecos Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1990     
File        : a9004064

Award Number: 9004064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : April 30,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7960               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristin D. Sobolik  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Vaughn Bryant, Ms. Kristin Sobolik                  
              will analyze archaeological materials and comparative samples                  
              which will provide the basis for her doctoral dissertation.  The               
              project focuses on the subsistence adaptation of Archaic peoples,              
              early hunters and gatherers, who lived in the Lower Pecos Region               
              (Texas) of the Chihuahuan Desert.  It utilizes two approaches.                 
              Ms. Sobolik will visit this research area in each of the four                  
              major seasons and conduct biological surveys to determine the                  
              types and the densities of resources available.  She will also                 
              collect samples which will provide a comparative base for the                  
              identification of archaeological materials.  Secondly, she will                
              examine archaeological remains, stored at the Texas                            
              Archaeological Research Laboratories in Austin, from a number of               
              Pecos sites.  She will combine the results of faunal, floral, and              
              coprolite analyses with data drawn from skeletal studies of                    
              prehistoric inhabitants to delineate Archaic subsistence patterns              
              and draw inferences about paleodiet.                                           
                                                                                             
              The archaeological sites in the Lower Pecos region are of                      
              interest for several reasons.  First, although a large number                  
              have been carefully excavated over the last several decades, much              
              of the material has not been analyzed.  This is unfortunate                    
              because in this desert region preservation is excellent.  Plant                
              remains which can serve both to reconstruct diet and environment               
              are abundant and such situations are rare.  The archaeology of                 
              the region is also important because the long prehistoric record               
              documents how technologically simple populations adapted to and                
              survived in a harsh and variable desert environment.  Ms.                      
              Sobolik's research will synthesize a broad range of data from a                
              number of sites.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several other reasons as well.                   
              Methodologically it is valuable because it explores how very                   
              diverse data sets may be drawn together and analyzed to yield                  
              nutritional information.  If successful it will provide a model                
              which may be applied in other regions of the world.  The work                  
              will also assist in the training of an extremely promising young               
              scientist.
