Title       : Molecular Topology and Development in a Photosynthetic Membrane System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1990     
File        : a9004984

Award Number: 9004984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Clinton Fuller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Redlinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Chlorosomes are light-harvesting structures attached to the                    
              inner surface of the cytoplasmic membrane in green                             
              photosynthetic bacteria.  The polypeptide composition of                       
              Chloroflexus chlorosomes consists of three major protein                       
              components and a fourth minor polypeptide.  Functional roles                   
              for all four proteins have been tentatively assigned.  This                    
              project is aimed at determining the role played by these                       
              proteins during the development of the photosynthetic                          
              apparatus.  Recombinant genetic techniques are being used to                   
              isolate the genes for two major proteins components of the                     
              chlorosome.  The gene for one chlorosome protein (Mr 5700)                     
              has already been cloned:  it contains a coding region for a                    
              carboxyl-terminal extension that is not present on the mature                  
              protein and which may be important for targetting the protein                  
              to the appropriate assembly site within the chlorosome.  This                  
              investigation deals in detail with the genetic structure,                      
              organization and regulation of genes encoding chlorosome                       
              proteins.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The green and purple photosynthetic bacteria possess a                         
              simpler type of photosynthesis than that occurring in higher                   
              plants.  In these bacteria light is harvested as an energy                     
              source to support the synthesis of sugars and other organic                    
              components of the bacteria from atmospheric carbon dioxide,                    
              but oxygen is not produced.  Because of their relative                         
              simplicity these bacteria provide useful model systems which                   
              are often more amenable to detailed analysis than are higher-                  
              plant systems.  Studies of bacteria have made major                            
              contributions to the advancement of fundamental knowledge of                   
              photosynthesis.  Dr. Fuller's investigations provide                           
              essential information about the structure and function of the                  
              biological compounds and complex cellular structures that are                  
              responsible for the useful harvesting of sunlight by green                     
              bacteria.***//
