Title       : Structural Change: A Necessity for Insulin Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9004670

Award Number: 9004670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Shoelson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Joslin Diabetes Center
	      One Joslin Place
	      Boston, MA  022155397    617/732-2429

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              We have been studying the structural features of insulin                       
              analogs in solution as part of project to engineer proteins                    
              with altered biologic and physical properties.  A striking                     
              finding has been the degree of flexibility observed for insulin                
              in solution.  Most notably, the binding potency of several                     
              analogs correlates with overall molecular flexibility.                         
              Selected mutations and bridging structures can lock                            
              conformational substructures that are not productive for                       
              receptor recognition.  Moreover, mutations that increase                       
              molecular flexibility appear to reverse these effects.                         
              Therefore, we have identified a system for relating protein                    
              structures in crystals, in solution (NMR) and at the receptor                  
              surface.  It appears that changes in molecular structure are                   
              necessary accompaniments to high affinity receptor recognition.                
              In the current proposal I have outlined three complimentary                    
              approaches for defining the structural requirements of insulin                 
              action.  First, site-site interactions between insulin and the                 
              insulin receptor will be positively identified.  In this                       
              fashion, comparative binding surfaces of insulin and the                       
              insulin receptor will be constructed, using the three-                         
              dimensional crystal structure of insulin as a template.                        
              Second, solution structures of selected series of analogs are                  
              being analyzed by NMR and CD spectroscopy.  Specific structural                
              features will be correlated  with receptor binding potency.                    
              Finally, increasing concentrations of truncated receptor                       
              homologs will be added to solutions of insulin and selected                    
              analogs; the effects on insulin structure will be                              
              characterized.  In combination these studies should identify                   
              the structural features in solution that are necessary for                     
              receptor binding and the changes in structure that accompany                   
              binding.  Furthermore, these studies will help to provide a                    
              more general foundation for studying relationships between                     
              protein crystal structures, solution structures, and changes                   
              in structure that occur during complex formation.
