Title       : Mechanisms Underlying Plant Cell Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1990      
File        : a9004983

Award Number: 9004983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : October 1,  1990     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Verbeke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of these studies is to learn about the control of plant               
              cell differentiation. Utilizing epidermal cell redifferentiation               
              into parenchyma during postgenital carpel fusion in Catharanthus               
              roseus to pursue these studies. During normal floral ontogeny in               
              C. roseus, approximately 400 epidermal cells are induced to                    
              rapidly redifferentiate during the postgenital fusion of the two               
              carpel primordia. Dr. Verbeke has previously reported experiments              
              involving the placement of water permeable and water impermeable               
              barriers between prefusion carpels which implicate a diffusible                
              agent as the morphogen for redifferentiation. This proposal                    
              continues Dr. Verbeke's characterization of communication factors              
              that convey positional information to plant epidermal cells.                   
              Specifically she will focus on the following questions: 1) Are                 
              the two carpels producing distinct factors, a combination of                   
              which are essential for redifferentiation? 2) What are the                     
              physical characteristics of these factors? 3) What are the                     
              chemical characteristics of these factors? and 4) How universal                
              are the factors?                                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              The mechanisms by which patterns of discrete cell types are                    
              formed in response to their position is a long standing problem                
              in developmental biology. A cell that reacts in a special way in               
              consequence of association with another must do so because it                  
              acquires "information" from that other, information that must be               
              conveyed through chemical or physical signals. These experiments               
              continue a characterization of communication factors that convey               
              positional information to plant epidermal cells.
