Title       : NER: Magnetically Activated Nanoporous Structures for Biomedical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0210033

Award Number: 0210033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig A. Grimes cgrimes@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tejal A. Desai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category.  The proposal
              focuses on innovative materials synthesis strategies to create both passive,
              and magnetically-driven mechanically active precision separation membranes. Of
              particular interest is the development and characterization of well-controlled,
              stable, and uniform nano-dimensional membranes capable of the separation of
              viruses and/or proteins during the blood fractionation processes and the
              blocking of antibodies and complement molecules from encapsulated xenogeneic
              cells.  It is hypothesized that high surface area cylindrical capsules the
              walls of which are comprised of nanoporous membranes, created via a two-step
              process of electric-field driven anodization of aluminum or titanium, can be
              used for the absolute filtration or exclusion of biomolecules in the nanometer
              range.  For a given capsule, a windowpane structure is used with anodized
              nanoporous windows, and un-anodized aluminum struts for structural support. 
              The aluminum anodization process enables precise control of pore size, with a
              controllable pore diameter of approximately 10 nm to 100 nm depending upon
              anodizing voltage.  Beyond making passive membranes, the investigators propose
              fabrication of cylindrical nanoporous biocapsules incorporating magnetoelastic
              elements.  Incorporation of the magnetoelastic elements enable the biocapsule
              to be mechanically vibrated, remotely from a distance, by application of a
              time-varying magnetic field that should enable controlled transport through the
              membrane.  A magnetoelastic thick film layer will be electroplated onto the
              aluminum structural supports of the capsule.  Such capsules could possibly find
              application as in-vivo drug delivery devices, where needed medicine is
              delivered in precise amounts by external application of a magnetic field. 
              

As a further aspect of the proposed research, the investigators seek to
              build upon their expertise in fabrication of nanoporous alumina films of high
              uniformity to fabricate surface coatings comprised of perpendicularly oriented
              gold-coated magnetostrictive nanowire arrays.  The utility of these arrays will
              be investigated for their utility in prevention of biofouling.  It is
              hypothesized that the needle-like shape of the nanowire array elements, and the
              wave-like movement of the magnetostrictive nanowire array in response to a
              time-varying non-uniform magnetic field, will help prevent protein attachment
              to the surface, and could ultimately be used to move or transfer cells across
              the surface. 

The proposed research will determine optimal routes for
              fabrication of the nanoporous capsules with attention to membrane functionality
              as biological filters.  The application of passive nanoporous biocapsules for
              cellular encapsulation and immunoisolation, and mechanically active biocapsules
              for controlled transport and delivery through the nanoporous membranes will be
              investigated.  In addition, the use of magnetostrictive nanowire arrays will be
              investigated for their use in the prevention of biofouling.  The proposed
              outcomes are: (1) Determining a path for in-situ or in-vivo controlled drug
              delivery by application of an external time varying magnetic field.  (2)
              Determination of a surface that would prevent biofouling, facilitating the
              introduction of medical devices into the human body.  

