Title       : Collaborative Research: Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Growth Mechanisms in
               Combustion involving Cyclopentadiene and Indene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0210089

Award Number: 0210089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Mulholland james.mulholland@ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This is a fundamental molecular analysis of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
              (PAH) growth processes in combustion systems involving cyclopentadiene (CPD)
              and indene, which contains the CPD moiety.  These compounds, which are present
              in combustion effluents, are of interest because of their roles as
              intermediates in the formation of potentially mutagenic PAH which contain
              five-membered rings, as well as in the formation of fullerenes and soot. 
              Cyclopentadiene and indene are important in growth of PAH from combustion
              processes because they form resonance-stabilized radicals that are reactive at
              multiple sites.  Study of reactions involving these compounds in well-designed
              molecular systems leads to better understanding of the underlying chemistry of
              PAH growth from combustion and of conditions that control the formation of
              toxic air pollutants and soot.  Previous work indicates that cyclopentadienyl
              and indenyl radicals add to the pi bonds of the parent molecules (CPD and
              indene) that contain external CPD moieties. Subsequent reactions lead to the
              formation of ortho-fused PAH via one of two pathways:  one involving expansion
              of both five-membered rings to form PAH with only six-membered rings by a route
              similar to that for cyclopentadienyl radical combination to form naphthalene; 
              the other involving formation of a norbornenyl-type bridged intermediate
              followed by ring opening and loss of a C1 species to form PAH that retain one
              CPD moiety.  This second pathway is a route of PAH formation not previously
              proposed.  Experiments at Georgia Tech extend work on CPD and indene chemistry
              to thermal reactions of these compounds with three other species:  styrene,
              acenaphthylene, and phenanthrene.  Formation of PAH and growth by addition of
              cyclopentadienyl and indenyl radicals to other types of pi?bonds is studied. 
              Styrene is the simplest aromatic molecule that contains a vinyl substituent;
              these species are common in combustion systems due to the abundance of
              acetylene.  Acenaphthylene is representative of fully conjugated PAH containing
              external five-membered rings; other examples found in combustion systems
              include acephenanthrylene and aceanthrylene.  Phenanthrene is a PAH that
              contains a pi?bond that is less conjugated than other aromatic pi?bonds;
              another combustion-generated PAH with this feature is pyrene. Thus, the
              proposed study will significantly expand the understanding of the growth of
              carbon moieties in combustion systems from addition of cyclopentadienyl and
              indenyl radicals and subsequent PAH fusion.  Semi-empirical molecular modeling
              has been performed on the CPD/indene system to study alternative PAH formation
              pathways.  Qualitative agreement was obtained between experimentally observed
              and computed partitioning between PAH product channels.   Quantum mechanical
              theory has been applied to the study of carbon growth processes involving
              acenaphthylene. This study includes ab initio modeling at Utah of the
              CPD/indene system to refine computational methods and verify semi-empirical
              modeling results.  A computational study of the new cyclopentadienyl and
              indenyl addition pathways being investigated experimentally is
              conducted.

Broader impact

This research will improve chemical mechanisms
              of PAH and soot formation in combustion systems, using a tight coordination of
              experimental and computational approaches.  The project combines experimental
              and computational expertise of investigators at two institutions. This
              collaboration will require a close interaction and will broaden the research
              capabilities of each group.

