Title       : NIRT: Semiconductor Metal Oxide Nanoparticles for Visible Light Photocatalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0210284

Award Number: 0210284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1099954            (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Ismat Shah ismat@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Barteau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas J. Doren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chin-Pao Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jingguang G. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes a systematic study of the synthesis, characterization,
              and application of TiO2 nanoparticles as photocatalyst.  The potential of the
              nanoparticles to absorb in the visible range by tailoring the surface,
              structural and compositional properties will be studied.  Specifically, the
              multifold objectives of this proposal include the utilization of a unique
              physical vapor deposition process to obtain TiO2 nanoparticles with particle
              sizes ranging between 1 and 20 nm, and to reproducibly dope the nanoparticles
              with various dopants. These nanoparticles will be characterized for structural,
              chemical and optoelectronic properties.  Of particular interest is the
              characterization of the valence band and conduction band structure by XPS, UPS,
              and EXAFS. We will also utilize first-principles calculations to acquire an
              atomistic understanding of nanoparticle properties.  The theoretical models
              will be used to develop an understanding of the chemical and photochemical
              properties of pure and modified TiO2 nanoparticles.  Modification involves the
              selective decoration of nanoparticle surfaces with noble metal particles
              including Ag, Au, Pt, etc.   

Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is used as a
              photocatalyst for environmental cleanup.  Upon absorption of light, it helps
              break down toxic chemicals in air and in water.  TiO2, however absorbs only UV
              light.  It would be more useful if its absorption of the visible light can be
              enhanced since most of the sunlight is in the visible range.  This proposal
              describes a systematic methodology to increase visible range absorption by
              changing the particle size, composition and surface chemistry.

This proposal
              was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and
              Engineering" (NSF 01-157). The award is jointly supported through two
              directorates at NSF: (i) Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Division of
              Materials Research in the Ceramics program) and (ii) Engineering (Division of
              Chemical & Transport Systems).

