Title       : NER: Coupled Electronic and Mechanical Properties by Conformational Statistics
               Tight-Binding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0210131

Award Number: 0210131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harley T. Johnson htj@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory S. Chirikjian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1676,1765,9161,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a Nanoscale Exploratory Research award on a proposal submitted through
              the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Solicitation and is jointly funded by the
              Division of Materials Research and the Division of Civil and Mechanical
              Systems. The research has an interdisciplinary flavor. It involves the
              application of mathematical methods first developed for use in robotics to
              create a new computational method to make a tight-binding electronic structure
              method computationally tractable for nanoscale materials problems in which
              coupled electronic and mechanical properties are of interest.
This award
              supports research to develop a new tight-binding atomistic method, based on the
              classical Cyrot-Lackmann moments theorem and recent developments in
              conformational statistics. The computational effort scales linearly with the
              number of atoms in the system and takes advantage of fast numerical techniques
              for computing convolutions on lattices. These numerical techniques, which are
              based on recent developments in group theory and harmonic analysis, are not
              widely known to the computational materials and physics communities. Most
              recently, these conformational statistics methods have been used to delineate
              configurations of highly articulated robot-arms and, separately, long-chain
              polymer molecules. 
The well-known moments based tight-binding technique is
              based on delineating the local topology surrounding individual atoms in a
              structure. The conformational statistics method dramatically reduces the
              computational cost of "brute-force" enumeration of the random-walk type paths
              around each atom, which are interpreted as moments of the local density of
              states. The number of operations per atom can be reduced from order K M , where
              K is the number of near neighbors per atom (usually 3 or 4), and M is the
              number of moments (of order 50), to order Md logMd , where d is the number of
              spatial dimensions. Existing numerical methods enable the use of these computed
              moments to approximate the local density of states, from which the total energy
              of the system and any electronic or mechanical properties of interest can be
              obtained. 
The method will be applied to the study of  pure, doped, regular,
              strained, and defective carbon nanotubes. In each of these cases chiral and
              nonchiral geometries can be handled. The study of semiconductor quantum dots is
              another application. Several atomic scale problems, including surface steps,
              quantum effects in the wetting layer, and material intermixing, will be
              attacked.
This award also contributes to the training of graduate level
              students and the development of a new advanced graduate level course.
              
%%%
This is a Nanoscale Exploratory Research award on a proposal submitted
              to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering solicitation and is jointly funded by
              the Division of Materials Research and the Division of Civil and Mechanical
              Systems. This award supports research with an interdisciplinary flavor. It
              involves the use of mathematical methods first developed for use in robotics to
              develop an efficient computational method for approximate electronic structure
              calculations. The method will be applied to nanoscale materials problems with a
              focus on coupled electronic and mechanical properties. Specific applications
              involve carbon nanotubes: pure, doped, regular, strained, and defective and
              semiconductor quantum dots. In the latter, the focus will be on atomic scale
              problems, including surface steps, quantum effects in the wetting layer, and
              material intermixing. New accurate and efficient computational methods enable
              the prediction of electronic and structural properties of nanoscale atomic and
              molecular structures and have broader applications to other materials.
This
              award contributes to the training of graduate level students and the
              development of a new advanced graduate level course. 
***

