Title       : NIRT: A Nanometer-Scale Gene Chip
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0210843

Award Number: 0210843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Timp gtimp@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Klaus J. Schulten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexey Bezryadin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Pierre Leburton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 2878      SPECIAL PROJECTS - CCR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Timp, Gregory
CCR-0210843


This proposal was received in response to the
              Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT.  As
              research in nanotechnology extends its tools for miniaturization and
              integration to nanometer dimensions (the scale of the secondary structure in a
              protein or a DNA molecule), new vistas in biology and information science are
              revealed, which require new multi-disciplinary approaches to 
both research
              and education.  One new question that emerges is: Can biology be directly
              integrated with electronics to provide information on physiology? Nature has
              provided an electrical interface between biology and the environment through
              ion channels that can now be mimicked using nanotechnology.
The main objective
              of this project is to develop a revolutionary type of silicon integrated
              circuit that incorporates Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor technology with an on-chip
              nanopore mechanism for probing the electrical activity of DNA molecules.
              Ultimately, this biosensor might enable fast, inexpensive 
characterization of
              the minimum volume of genetic material, a single strand of DNA. A key
              constraint is to achieve the required sensitivity. To accomplish these goals,
              an artificial ion channel (AIC) or nanopore, will 
be used in conjunction with
              an amplifier built within one micron from the nanopore, in order to process
              high-frequency electrical signals occurring when single molecules diffuse
              through the channel. A membrane having an AIC will be immersed into a buffer
              solution, and DNA molecules will be pushed through the nanopore by the applied
              voltage bias a principle that has been tested in a number of recent
              experiments. Preliminary tests have already successfully demonstrated that
              ~2-nm diameter nanopores can be reproducibly etched through a ~2-5-nm-thick
              SiO2 membrane, using a high energy focused electron beam. High-quality,
              
pinhole-free membranes are being used in these  experiments. The project will
              develop artificial ion channels for ultrafast sequencing of single DNA strands.
              The AIC devices will also be applied for direct measurements of electronic
              transport properties of DNA molecules. This subject is important 
since the
              charge migration in DNA has been linked to the DNA ability to develop and
              repair defects while being exposed to ionizing radiation. Also, the desire of
              using single DNA molecules as building blocks for electronic 
circuits
              motivates the quest for understanding its transport properties. So far
              transport properties of DNA have been tested either indirectly or when the
              molecule is removed from the buffer solution and dried. The AIC device proposed
              here will be applied to measure directly the long-range charge transfer along
              DNA, while the molecule is kept in its natural environment in solution. The
              measurements will be compared with 
first-principle atomistic simulations. The
              objective is to understand basic mechanisms that control the charge transport
              in DNA this controversial topic continues to be strongly debated in the
              community.
