Title       : ITR: Synthesis and Characterization of a Light-Driven Molecular Motor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0210549

Award Number: 0210549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1170000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Frederick jhf@chem.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph I. Cline  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine R. Cremo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1674      NANOSCALE: INTRDISCPL RESRCH T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1674,1767,7202,9107,9150,9162,AMPP,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) award to University of
              Nevada Reno is supported by Divisions of Chemistry (MPS), Physics (MPS) and
              Electronic and Communications Systems (ENG), and this proposal was submitted in
              response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 01-157). 
              With this award, Professor Frederick and his team will synthesize a molecular
              motor that exhibits unidirectional rotary motion upon light absorption.  The
              motor consists of a rotor chromophore geared into a chiral "ratchet" base.  The
              base and rotor can be functionalized for incorporation into a variety of
              nanostructures.  Motor operation will be modeled by molecular dynamics
              calculations, and its actuation and positional control will be measured
              experimentally using polarized light when the motor is immobilized on a
              surface.  The motor also will be incorporated into biopolymers, such as DNA,
              and measuring light-induced conformational changes will test motor functions. 
              The results of modeling and experimental testing will be used to optimize the
              molecular design.  This motor potentially offers unprecedented positional and
              temporal control, as well as high rotary speed.  Students will learn and do
              research in molecular design and synthesis, surface immobilization and
              characterization, polarized laser excitation and fluorescence microscopy,
              biopolymer techniques, and large molecule dynamics calculations.

With this
              award, a team of research scientists with expertise in organic synthesis,
              molecular spectroscopy, biophysics, and molecular modeling and dynamics will
              design, construct, and test a molecule-sized motor, capable of converting light
              energy into directed mechanical energy.  Polarized laser light will be used to
              drive the motor, potentially offering precise positional control and extremely
              high rotary speeds.  The motor will also be incorporated into large
              biomolecules, such as DNA, to control their shape and function.  Students
              working on the project will receive advanced training in molecular design and
              synthesis, laser spectroscopy and microscopy, computer modeling, and molecular
              biology.  Potential applications of these molecular motors include
              light-controllable drugs, molecule-sized switches and pumps, and friction-free
              materials, as well as engines and propellers for nano-machines. 
