Title       : NER: Bioengineering of Implantable Nanosize Optical Sensing Elements by
               Controlled Radical Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0210508

Award Number: 0210508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Hu jhu@chemistry.uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie T. Lopina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1676,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In this Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER), co-supported by the Divisions of
              Materials Research and of Bioengineering and Environmental Systems, a new
              nanofabrication is proposed for developing nano-composite polymer materials for
              biomedical sensing.  These materials will be produced by controlled radical 
              polymerization/copolymerizaiton using cross-linkable self-assembled monolayers
              on gold colloidal nanoparticles as templates.  The resulting shell-crosslinked
              core-shell nanoparticles are designed for making long-term implantable
              biosensors that may be used as "tattoo dyes" for noninvasive repetitive or
              real-time optical readout.  The objective of this proposal is to create
              nano-sized, affinity sensing interfaces for glucose that are capsulated within
              biocompatible polymer hydrogel shells.  The polymer shells will minimize
              nonspecific bindings at the molecular recognition site and improve the
              longevity and biocompatibility of the glucose sensor.  The small size of the
              capsules and the large effective sensing surface should allow for improvements
              in the selectivity, dynamic range, and mass transport (speed) of affinity-based
              biosensing interfaces in general.  This method will also greatly improve the
              structural homogeneity of the sensing interfaces by pre-organizing the sensing
              elements on nanoparticle surfaces.

The nanophotonic properties of the
              template gold nanoparticles will be utilized as optical detection methods and
              for selective structural characterization of the proposed encapsulated
              molecular recognition interfaces.

