Title       : NER: Deposition of Molecular Nanostructures with Controlled in-plane Orientation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0210058

Award Number: 0210058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans D. Hallen Hans_Hallen@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1676,1712,1775,1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project  was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER.  Nanoscale materials are now fabricated
              by a variety of means, but the dominant methods rely on self-assembly or
              advanced lithography.  These and other fabrication schemes, especially
              self-assembly, can create structures in which the molecular orientation
              perpendicular to the surface is controlled by the chemistry, conferring the
              functionality.  This project will take control of orientation one step further
              - so that the molecules can also be locally oriented in the plane of the
              surface.  Variations of the orientation on a <100 nm length scale permits
              nanoscale functionality based on the relative orientation of molecules to be
              obtained.  This is a powerful concept for high performance molecular devices,
              since the properties of molecules are highly anisotropic.  The 'nanopoling'
              scheme should be much more effective at orienting molecules than current poling
              methods due to the larger electric field that can be generated locally.  The
              central task of this project is to demonstrate the attachment of oriented
              molecules to a surface.  Major tasks will be the identification of the best
              method for each of a few classes of molecules (conjugated polymers, porphyrins,
              DNA), to model the orientation and attachment processes, and to study the
              dependence of these processes on field strength and electrode geometry.  The
              latter will require the facile scanning probe microscope.  Topography and
              orientation of the molecules is characterized with polarization-sensitive
              near-field optical microscopy (NSOM) utilizing the same probe as deposited the
              oriented molecules, and the electrical properties are obtained via
              lithographically-defined contacts.  

The novelty and importance of this
              project evolves from the breaking of the in-plane symmetry within the
              nanostructures.  It will result in new types of nanostructures with novel
              properties and functionality.  This will lead to new devices.  In this project
              we will focus on the science of the growth process with a scanning probe
              microscope.  Ultimate usage for fabrication of the novel devices engendered by
              this deposition technique will require much faster fabrication methods.  The
              prospects for large-scale fabrication once the processes are understood are
              good, and we have defined a possible route to a mask-based technology resulting
              from these studies.
