Title       : NIRT: Manufacturing of Novel Continuous Nanocrystalline Ceramic Nanofibers with
               Superior Mechanical Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0210850

Award Number: 0210850
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1095200            (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuris A. Dzenis ydzenis@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruqiang Feng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gustavo Larsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiao Cheng Zeng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1674      NANOSCALE: INTRDISCPL RESRCH T
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1682,1788,5914,5918,5920,9146,9150,9200,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. Nanostructured materials (NSMs) with
              unusual and extreme properties will play a key role in many emerging
              technologies. However, manufacturing of NSMs with the desired properties is
              highly complex and currently is over-reliant on empirical data. In this
              proposal, a novel manufacturing process producing a new class of ceramic
              materials, i.e. continuous ceramic nanofibers, will be addressed. The novel
              sol-gel electrospinning technique (U.S. patent pending), invented recently by
              two of the PI's (Dzenis and Larsen), produces ceramic fibers of submicron
              diameters with potentially extreme thermomechanical properties. This technique
              will be analyzed and optimized for the production of nanocrystalline ceramic
              nanofibers with superior mechanical properties, based on a comprehensive,
              multidisciplinary research effort. The research team will develop an efficient
              and robust computational methodology for simulating realistic nanocrystalline
              nanofibers and their mechanical response at finite temperatures. A novel
              atomistic-continuum modeling approach based on a hybrid Monte-Carlo finite
              element technique will be developed and used. The models will be applied to
              design strong nanofibers by predicting the effects of the chemical composition
              and atomic structures of grain boundaries and defects on mechanical properties.
              The results will be used to develop chemistry and to direct manufacturing of
              strong nanocrystalline nanofibers. The achievement of the enhanced mechanical
              properties of the resulting nanofibers will be demonstrated experimentally
              utilizing novel mechanical characterization techniques based on scanning probe
              microscopy. 

As a result of this research, the new nanomanufacturing method
              will be further developed based on the atomistic-continuum modeling. New
              nanocrystalline ceramic nanofibers with superior mechanical properties will be
              produced. The combined manufacturing and model-based optimization will allow
              the mechanical properties of the nanofibers to be tailored to specific needs of
              the end user. This general, modeling-driven approach will be applicable to
              other nanomanufacturing processes and nanomaterials. This technology will be a
              significant part of future nanotechnology efforts. This research program will
              impact other key areas of nanotechnology where radical improvement of
              mechanical properties is critical, e.g., nanostructured membranes for
              ultrafiltration and other separation processes, nanoreinforcing elements for
              nanocomposites, supports for nanostructured catalysts, and many others. A
              multidisciplinary education plan will include development of interdisciplinary
              graduate courses on materials synthesis technology, computational materials
              science, and nanoscale materials characterization. Graduate and undergraduate
              research assistants will work within the various research groups on
              computational and experimental aspects of the research. Planned interactions
              with researchers at national laboratories will provide graduate and
              undergraduate students with additional educational exposure.


