Title       : NIRT: Carbon Nanopipes for Nanofluidic Devices and In-situ Fluid Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0210579

Award Number: 0210579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1700305            (Estimated)
Investigator: Yury Gogotsi gogotsi@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Haim H. Bau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Claude Bradley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Constantine M. Megaridis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal was submitted under Solicitation NSF 01-157 "Nanoscale Science and
              Engineering," under the Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT)
              category.  Carbon nanotubes (nanopipes) offer a unique opportunity for
              fundamental studies of fluid transport in the spatial regime between molecular
              and continuum behavior.  This research includes: (a) fabrication,
              characterization, and modification of carbon nanopipes, (b) performance of
              chemical and fluidic experiments, and (c) fabrication of experimental setups
              that would allow transport and measurements of various liquid flows in a
              controlled fashion.  Both actuation and imaging of the fluid are done in a
              transmission electron microscope, and offer a unique opportunity for studying
              the behavior of fluids in nanosize channels at conditions corresponding to
              sub-, near- or super-critical regions of the thermodynamic diagram.  The
              hydrothermal growth technique will be optimized to produce desired tube
              structure and geometry (internal/external diameter, length, and shape) for
              incorporation into experimental devices that allow the transmission of liquids
              through nanotubes.  Fluid behavior in channels ranging from 5 to 100 nm in
              diameter will be investigated, both by following the dynamic response of
              visualized fluid interfaces to external thermal stimuli and by well controlled
              experiments, in which pure liquids and liquids laden with macromolecules will
              be transmitted through the tubes.  The chemistry of high-temperature
              interactions between carbon nanopipes and aqueous fluids will be studied. 
              Chemical modification, metallization, and opening of nanopipes will be done
              using bipolar electrochemistry.  The experimental work will be supplemented by
              modeling based on parallel molecular dynamics simulations.  It is believed that
              the proposed research will advance the fundamental understanding needed for the
              design and fabrication of a new generation of nanofluidic devices, such as
              nano-pumps, chemical factories on a chip, biochips, and nano-analytical
              systems.  The research team will also coordinate and expand the existing
              education and outreach activities of the individual investigators into a
              cohesive and wide-ranging program.  The work involves investigators at Drexel,
              the University of Pennsylvania, and the University of Illinois at Chicago. NSF
              support is being provided by the Chemical and Transport Systems Division and
              the Design, Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation Division in the Engineering
              Directorate, and by the Chemistry Division in the Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences Directorate.
