Title       : NIRT: Study of Self-organization in Strained Heteroepitaxial Nanostructures:
               Multi-scale Modeling, Simulation and Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0210095

Award Number: 0210095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Oscar Dillon                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivek Shenoy shenoyv@engin.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan F. Bower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Chason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lambert B. Freund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


Self-assembled surface nanostructures hold the promise for
              manufacture of microelectronic devices with unprecedented performances
              characteristics. Potential applications include field effect transistors,
              quantum memory devices and solid-state lasers. Strain-driven nucleation, growth
              and coarsening of epitaxial islands during MBE growth, possibly with
              self-assembly of islands with regular arrays, offer a particularly versatile
              and cost-effective approach to manufacturing nanoscale devices. Recent
              experimental and analytical studies have revealed that appropriately
              controlling mismatch strain and processing conditions may influence island
              shapes, sizes and distributions. To exploit this phenomenon in manufacturing
              self-organized quantum dot arrays will require a fundamental understanding of
              the role of strain, surface energies, and kinetics of transport and deposition
              on the formation and evolution of material structures. A particular challenge
              is that island morphology is determined both by atomic scale pheno
mena, such
              as surface step interactions and alloy dispersion, and by long-range elastic
              interaction between geometric features.

We propose to address this issue by
              developing multiple-scale models of the growth of strained semiconductor thin
              films. Our approach will be to use discrete-step and Monte Carlo simulations,
              supplemented by appropriate atomistic or continuum calculations, to model the
              mesoscopic processes that determine the surface energies and transport kinetics
              during growth. The long-range elastic interactions between surface features
              will be modeled rigorously using continuum finite element computations. The
              model will be used to predict the nucleation, evolution in shape and
              organization of islands, and will provide the understanding required to control
              and optimize processing. Modeling will be informed and guided by experimental
              observations of stress relaxation and surface evolution in InGaAs/GaAs and
              SiGe/Si.

The participation of undergraduate students will be integrated into
              the program in two ways. First of all, the budget allows for the appointment of
              several undergraduate students, which will provide firsthand experience with
              concepts of nanotechnology for qualified students. In addition, team members
              will design a new course, intended for undergraduate students in materials
              science and mechanical engineering, to introduce students to concepts and
              methods in nanotechnology.



