Title       : NER: Acoustic Radiation Pressure Driven Atomic Force Microscope for Fast Imaging
               and Parallel Sensing of Biological and Chemical Processes at the Nanoscale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0210415

Award Number: 0210415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Levent F. Degertekin ldegerte@sununo.me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0210415
Degertekin

The capability of operating in liquid environments has
              been one of the key reasons for the atomic force microscope's (AFM)
              indisputable role in the recent advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology.
              This capability has not only enabled imaging biological samples and observation
              of biological and chemical processes at the nanoscale, but also led to the
              development of many microcantilever-based devices in the area of biosensing and
              proteomics.

The liquid environment presents significant challenges to the
              operation of the AFM, especially in dynamic imaging modes such as tapping mode,
              and fast imaging applications. As compared to air, the liquids provide a more
              efficient coupling medium for mechanical perturbations. Hence regular
              piezoelectric actuation of the AFM cantilever results in spurious resonant
              signals due to the liquid filled cavity surrounding the sample and the actuator
              structure. Several novel actuators, based on magnetic, electrostatic, and
              thin-film piezoelectric techniques have been developed to solve this problem,
              but these methods severely limit the type of cantilevers and liquids that can
              be used for experiments. Furthermore, these methods are not suitable for
              actuation of individual cantilevers in an array, an important capability
              required for biosensing applications.

This exploratory research proposal
              aims to remove these important obstacles in the implementation of a versatile
              AFM for applications in liquids using a novel microcantilever actuation
              technique. The technique uses the acoustic radiation force generated by
              collimated high frequency (100-400MHz) acoustic waves directed to the AFM
              cantilever to actuate the cantilever in the DC-MHz frequency range. Promising
              initial results using the technique have been recently obtained and presented
              in the proposal. Based on these results, the following objectives are
              proposed:

-Design and microfabrication of individual and arrays of acoustic
              radiation pressure (ARP) actuators: The actuators will be fabricated on silicon
              substrates using a thin Zinc Oxide film to generate acoustic waves around
              250MHz and silicon micromachining techniques will be used to fabricate acoustic
              Fresnel lenses to direct the acoustic beams to AFM cantilevers.

-Integration
              of the actuator to a widely available commercial AFM system: A fluid-cell
              including an ARP actuator will be manufactured and used on a commercial AFM
              system with appropriate electronics.

-Evaluation of the capabilities and
              limitations of the integrated actuator: The performance of the ARP actuator for
              fast imaging, as well as array operation will be tested and compared with
              conventional methods.

-Study of possible adverse effects of the ARP
              actuator: Interaction of high frequency acoustic waves with biological
              processes will be explored on several important samples and the actuator design
              will be improved accordingly.  Successful implementation of this project will
              impact numerous areas of nanoscience and engineering, because it will help
              researchers in the testing and implementation of innovative ideas and in
              probing a wider variety of biological and chemical processes at the
              nanoscale.

