Title       : NER: Torque Spectroscopy for Nanosystem Characterization and Fabrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0210210

Award Number: 0210210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel G. Cole dgcole@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER.  The purpose of this research is to
              develop the technology to deliver regulated torques to nanosystems; such
              torques would be on the order of piconewton-nanometers.  Helicallv structured
              light possessing angular momentum will be used in an optical trapping
              arrangement to deliver angular momentum to trapped particles thereby applying a
              torque to the trapped object. Position and orientation of a trapped object will
              be achieved with a trapping beam constructed from the interference of a helical
              wave front and a plane wave. This research focuses on developing an optical
              trap using a conventional single-beam trap architecture; constructing the
              requisite helically-structured laser beam modes as Laguerre-Gaussian (LG) beam
              modes and constructing an interference pattern between LG beam modes and
              plane-wave beam modes. Torque spectroscopy experiments of biomolecules will be
              performed. Candidate molecules are coiled-coil proteins like myosin, modular
              matrix proteins like fibronectin and tenascin, and the DNA double
              helix.

This research program will have a broad impact in the advancement of
              knowledge, education, industry and technology. An optical torque-trap is an
              enabling technology for  the comprehensive development of nanoscience and
              engineering, and will have wide application in nanotechnology from
              characterization to fabrication. In nanoscale biosystems it would be used to
              provide an understanding of the behavior of single molecules. For nanoscale
              structures, it would enable the characterization of novel nanoscale structures
              and phenomena which depend upon rotary motion . Finally for nanoscale
              manufacturing processes it would enable new nanofabrication processes which
              would depend upon the manipulation of particles in six-dimensions  Other
              applications include measuring the torque and power output of rotary
              nanomotors, measuring the bending strength of molecules, measuring the drag on
              nanobearings, and driving nanosystems by photonic components.  This program
              will also have impacts in new curriculum for graduate students, combining
              elements of engineering and physics for nanoscience and engineering; the study
              of nanosystems and nanobiosystems; training opportunities for undergraduate
              students in nanotechnology through participation in research projects; and
              industrial collaboration providing technology transfer and training
              opportunities for faculty, research associates, and students.
