Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Aboriginal Radio: A Political Economy of Speech and Sound
               in Indigenous Australia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0210981

Award Number: 0210981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred R. Myers myers@acfcluster.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bambi B. Schieffelin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Fred Myers and Dr. Bambi B. Schieffelin, Mr. Daniel
              Fisher will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. His field work will
              include participant-observation research on Aboriginal media production and
              reception, audio recording of conversational interaction and broadcast speech
              genres in Aboriginal English, and archival research on Australian multicultural
              and media policies. He will investigate correlations among emergent practices
              and institutions of Aboriginal media with ways of speaking, poetic and
              aesthetic strategies, and changes in the political and economic circumstances
              of Indigenous people. Three questions organize the project: (1) Why have
              indigenous media and art achieved great success where other state-sponsored
              social initiatives are assessed as failures? (2) How are new relationships to
              the past and to place mediated through speech and music on the radio, both
              within and across diverse Aboriginal communities? (3) How do particular
              linguistic, poetic, and aesthetic strategies relate to state policies on
              multi-cultural participation and Aboriginal self-determination? 

This
              research is significant in several domains. Mr. Fisher's studies inform the
              anthropology of both Australian Aboriginal cultural practices and the
              appropriation of electronic audio and visual media by Indigenous and 4th world
              peoples. These developments have received increasing interdisciplinary
              attention as Indigenous communities around the world pursue engagements with
              media production to ensure their material survival and cultural futures. This
              project also contributes to anthropological and sociolinguistic research on
              electronically mediated speech practices, the strategic mobilization of
              register, dialect stylization, and code-switching in multilingual and/or
              socially stratified language contact zones. Finally, this work will interest
              scholars of pidgins and creoles by contributing to our general understanding of
              the social and linguistic specificity of Aboriginal English. 


