Title       : NIRT: Nanoscale Quantum Systems: Excitations and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0210575

Award Number: 0210575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $892000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lev Ioffe ioffe@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Boris Altshuler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Premala Chandra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,1767,7208,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              Initiative, NSF-01-157, Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Teams (NIRT).  The
              award is funded jointly by the NSF Divisions of Materials Research,
              Mathematical Sciences and Physics.

The design, development and control of
              nanoscale electronics raises many challenging questions, particularly in the
              area of quantum systems far from equilibrium.  Such mesoscopic devices are
              often weakly coupled to their environment, so that equilibration is difficult. 
              Common issues are shared by diverse problems including quantum dots, driven
              Josephson junctions and finite-size quantum glasses.  There now exist
              controllable quantum systems far from equilibrium that are accessible to both
              theory and experiment.  In this research, a team of theorists from Rutgers,
              Princeton and NEC will address global issues in this area through a series of
              specific studies, using the conceptual links between nonequilibrium spin
              systems and disordered interacting electrons. It is emphasized that
              nonequilibrium sources of electron decoherence must be better understood in
              order to optimize performance of nanoscale circuitry, especially that which
              involves quantum dynamics.

The problem of nonequilibrium quantum dynamics
              can be approached using localization theory.  The dynamics of a quantum glass
              can be described by particle motion in a random potential on a high-dimensional
              sphere.  Such systems display diffusive behavior not expected from a
              localization perspective.  This discrepancy will be reconciled.

Charge
              transport in a low-density disordered insulator displays slow relaxation,
              indicative of the system's inability to find its ground-state.  Its complex
              free energy is due to competition between Coulomb interactions and a random
              potential.  Taking an approach analogous to that in spin glasses, the team will
              identify and solve a model describing the localization-delocalization
              transition in an isolated electronic system.

Sources of electron dephasing
              must be better understood in order to control phase coherence.  This issue is
              crucial for the construction of quantum circuitry; even if each element is
              designed optimally, there is the possibility of collective dephasing.  A
              related problem is the identification of a single qubit where decoherence is
              minimized.  A spin liquid with a doubly degenerate ground-state and a gap may
              be an attractive candidate, since its absence of long-range order effectively
              decouples it from the external environment.
%%%  
This proposal was received
              in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative, NSF-01-157,
              Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Teams (NIRT).  The award is funded jointly
              by the NSF Divisions of Materials Research, Mathematical Sciences and
              Physics.

This complementary team of theorists from Rutgers, Princeton and
              NEC will combine their talents to study fundamental issues relating to quantum
              electron dynamics at the nanoscale.  As electrical circuitry approaches the
              nanoscale these issues become more critical, particularly as they relate to
              problems of phase coherence in nanodevices and its possible application in
              quantum computers.
*** 

