Title       : Capacity Building at CAU, Spelman College, and Morehouse Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0210147

Award Number: 0210147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kameswara R. Namuduri   (Principal Investigator current)
              William Rivera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea Lawrence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Seymour E. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark Atlanta University
	      223 James P. Brawley Dr. S.W.
	      Atlanta, GA  303144358    404/880-8000

NSF Program : 1668      FED CYBER SERV: SCHLAR FOR SER
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal develops the curriculum and laboratory facilities that are
              required to train the
students of the three participating colleges (Clark
              Atlanta, Spelman and Morehouse) in the area of Information Assurance and
              Security.

This plan:
_
1) Builds the core curriculum and create necessary
              laboratory facilities for student education and
training in the area of IAS
              including three core courses and a laboratory course).  The CIS department at
              Clark Atlanta University will offer two courses. The CS department at Spelman
              College will offer one course.  The CS department at Morehouse College will
              enhance some of its existing courses to include IAS related topics. Students
              from Georgia Tech, CAU, Spelman, and Morehouse colleges can take courses from
              any of the four colleges, through the University system in Georgia, without
              incurring any additional charges.
_
2) Creates three computer laboratories,
              one at each of the participating, with the required facilities for student
              training in the area of Information Assurance and Security. The laboratories
              will be equipped with a network of computing systems and students will be able
              to experiment with the security related software in a controlled environment.
              

The impact of the proposed program includes:
_
1) Enhanced curriculum,
              laboratory facilities and research activities in the area of IAS in all the
              three participating colleges.
_
2) More opportunities for CS students of CAU,
              Spelman College, Morehouse College and Georgia Tech to register for IAS related
              courses.
_
3) Increased awareness of information security related issues in
              the community.

The results are measured using evaluations from students,
              professors and faculty members outside the consortium with expertise in the
              area of curriculum development. We anticipate that the students who graduate
              from the three colleges with concentration in IAS will pursue higher studies at
              other Universities or take up jobs as security professionals. 

