Title       : Control of Natural Product Production in Aromatic Herbs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0210170

Award Number: 0210170
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Gang gang@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Culinary and other aromatic herbs make a significant contribution to improving
              the appeal of foodstuff and play increasingly important roles in our society as
              components of the herbal remedies and supplements industry. However, the
              biosynthesis of almost all bioactive secondary compounds or natural products is
              still poorly understood. The plant family Lamiaceae (e.g., sweet basil and
              mint) includes many species that are rich in such natural products. Natural
              product production by the plant is believed to be associated with defense
              against herbivores and pathogens, and Lamiaceae species have evolved elaborate
              structures on the surface of their leaves, known as peltate glands, where these
              chemicals are synthesized and stored. Basil is a particularly noteworthy herb
              because it synthesizes relatively high amounts of both terpenoids and
              phenylpropanoids, two large classes of compounds that include many plant
              defense and medicinally important natural products, including paclitaxel
              (Taxol) and podophyllotoxin (derivatized to form Etoposide and Teniposide) that
              are used to treat cancer. Aside from some focused efforts to delineate the
              pathways to specific compounds, such as paclitaxel and podophyllotoxin, very
              little is known about the biochemical reactions that produce the great
              diversity of compounds that result from these two biosynthetic pathways. Even
              less is known about the genes and enzymes that control or regulate these
              pathways. 

This research project aims to identify how secondary compounds
              are produced in basil peltate glands and to begin to identify and define the
              mechanisms that control their production. Specifically, this research will: 1)
              use metabolic profiling to characterize levels of known metabolites and
              potential intermediates in the phenylpropanoid pathway in peltate glands of
              select basil lines; and 2) use a functional genomics approach to determine what
              roles specific enzymes and other regulatory factors play in controlling the
              flux into and through the phenylpropanoid pathway in basil peltate
              glands.

The research results and developed tools will form a foundation that
              should facilitate research of other plant secondary metabolic pathways.  In
              addition to the intrinsic scientific value of understanding how plants produce
              natural products, such knowledge is essential for rational design of breeding
              strategies to produce plants with targeted natural product profiles.  This
              knowledge will also help in the application of genetic engineering to improve
              and develop new aromatic plants, which could then serve as feed stocks for the
              pharmaceutical and other industries.

