Title       : NIRT: Dimension Dependent Material Properties of Nanoscopic Macromolecular
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0210588

Award Number: 0210588
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1250046            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Nealey nealey@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Ediger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juan J. De Pablo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Franco Cerrina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent work has established that the mass transport and glass transition
              behavior of polymeric materials can be significantly different in nanoscopic
              structures than in the bulk. A structure in this case is defined as a physical
              construct (e.g. a film, a line, or a post). The origin of these differences is
              not well understood, and it is a subject of considerable debate. Less is known
              about the mechanical properties of nanoscopic structures, although it is
              precisely these properties that pose the most immediate and significant
              challenges to the success of future nanofabrication processes.

The PI will
              conduct a comprehensive study of the thermophysical properties, including
              transport and mechanical behavior, of polymeric materials in nanoscopic
              structures. The work seeks to elucidate and establish the general principles
              that govern the physical and thermal behavior of polymers in such structures.
              To that end, advanced lithographic techniques capable of mass-producing
              nanoscopic patterns with dimensions on the scale of tens of nanometers will be
              developed and refined. The resulting experimental structures will permit the
              large-scale characterization effort envisaged in this work. Novel experimental
              strategies will be developed to measure mechanical properties and characterize
              mechanical behavior. Single-molecule, photobleaching and other spectroscopic
              experiments will be pursued to establish the connections between dynamics and
              mechanics. Molecular modeling methods will be developed and implemented for
              molecular and multi-scale simulations of nanoscopic polymeric structures; these
              will be used to interpret and rationalize the results of our experimental
              work.

The results generated by this NIRT will fill a serious gap in
              nanoscience. There will be considerable scientific value in that it will
              provide much of the data and insights required to understand soft-matter
              advanced materials at a fundamental level. It will be of considerable
              technological impact in that it will help the semiconductor and nanofabrication
              industries target materials, processes, and strategies to manufacture deep
              sub-100 nm structures for integrated circuits, photonics, sensors,
              nanoelectromechanical systems, and nanobiotechnology.

The research
              activities will be leveraged considerably by the existence on campus of a
              Center for Nanotechnology and a Materials Research Science and Engineering
              Center. These centers will provide access to state-of-the-art nanofabrication
              and characterization facilities, which are essential for the proposed
              experiments.

A vigorous education and outreach program will be aggressively
              pursued to bring nanotechnology to pre-college students, teachers and the
              general public. Through a collaboration with existing, nationally-renowned
              educational programs at the University of Wisconsin, it will be possible to
              disseminate the activities and results of the NIRT grant in lectures, exchange
              programs and internships (for both students and teachers), instructional
              material development, a web site, and participation in science and technology
              museums.

