Title       : IA Tutorials and Workshops for Educators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0210762

Award Number: 0210762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia E. Irvine irvine@nps.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naval Postgraduate School
	      Code 09
	      Monterey, CA  93943    831/656-2099

NSF Program : 1668      FED CYBER SERV: SCHLAR FOR SER
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We will increase the capacity of the United States higher education enterprise
              to produce professionals in the fields of Information Assurance (IA) and
              computer security by hosting a two-year series of workshops for education in
              Information Assurance. The target audience of the workshops is college-level
              educators who have responsibility for teaching curricula that are, or could be,
              related to Information Assurance issues.  The format for each workshop is three
              sequential sessions: a tutorial session, a refereed paper session, and a
              working session. This sequence allows newer practitioners to become
              knowledgeable about the basics of IA, provides an opportunity for experienced
              practitioners to present new ideas for discussion, and allows both groups to
              interact in a problem solving context to develop solutions for point issues
              presented by the workshop.

The tutorial sessions educate faculty about the
              fundamentals of information assurance and computer security and improves their
              instructional capability in these areas. The paper session provides a forum for
              presentation and discussion of recent pedagogical and technical advances in the
              field. Activities in the working session encourage creative interaction
              regarding current issues for education in Information Assurance. A significant
              effect of the periodic gathering and commingling of experienced and
              inexperienced practitioners is to enhance the sense of community for IA
              educators, fostering collaboration and dialogue among institutions offering
              courses and programs in Information Assurance. The multi-year format allows
              faculty to spend time in their own environment and return to the workshop with
              experiential questions and insight. The output of the workshops will include
              model materials for classroom presentation and demonstration, as well as
              example materials for laboratory experimentation. 

A particular emphasis is
              ensuring participation of demographic groups currently underrepresented in the
              IA education community. The net effect of the proposed activities is to
              directly increase the national capacity for education in Information Assurance
              as well as to extend the knowledge and expertise of IA to a range of
              participants that is more representative of the national profile.

