Title       : NIRT: Nanoscale Engineering of Inorganic-Organic Interfaces: Applications to
               Molecular Scale Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0210693

Award Number: 0210693
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2009       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1300001            (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Engstrom jre@cheme.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald R. Kline  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paulette Clancy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George G. Malliaras  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter T. Wolczanski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1589,1674,9162,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NIRT category. The proposal
              focuses on developing novel chemical approaches to forming well-behaved and
              robust interfaces between small organic molecules and both conducting and
              insulating inorganic ultrathin films for applications in molecular scale
              electronics. Much of the success of present day microelectronics is due to the
              ability to integrate a variety of (mostly) inorganic materials into structures
              useful for devices. For example, silicon dominates the field not because of its
              intrinsic electrical properties, but because of the quality of the interfaces
              it forms (e.g., the Si-Si02 interface). The work to be conducted here seeks to
              develop organic-inorganic interfaces possessing equivalent or superior
              properties, where small organic molecules form the active layers. The solution
              lies in the development of chemically based approaches to the formation of the
              critical interface between the inorganic layers (both metallic and dielectric)
              and the organic layers. Success in this venture will require the application of
              sophisticated synthetic organometallic chemistry, surface and interface
              science, self-assembly and nanofabrication, and "chemically accurate' computer
              simulation. The team that has been assembled at Cornell possesses expertise and
              significant experience in all of these areas. The organic layers will typically
              be formed by a process of self-assembly (in solution or in vacuo) on substrates
              that have been patterned to expose selected areas comprised of metal (e.g.,
              Au), oxide (e.g., Si02), or nitride where the self-assembled monolayer will
              bind. Study of patterned substrates is vital for the investigation of a number
              of issues, from the fundamental to those related to device design and
              performance. Ultimately the team seeks as a final set of goals: (i) development
              of novel organometallic precursors for the formation of both conducting and
              insulting layers that will interface seamlessly with the organic layer; (ii)
              development of a fundamental understanding of the interface formation process,
              including the effects of process variables such as temperature on the molecular
              scale structure of the interface; (iii) demonstration of controllable device
              properties for molecular scale electronics, given enhanced knowledge of the
              interfacial chemistry and physics; and (iv) development of computer models that
              can both predict the atomic scale structure of the interface, and the resulting
              electronic properties. A final significant challenge put forward by the Cornell
              team will be the development of a workshop on research ethics. From the
              experience of working to develop this workshop the participants hope to build a
              better understanding and recognition of responsible research conduct, and to
              know the relevant philosophical underpinnings of ethics sufficiently well to be
              able to make ethical choices in both the development and practice of their
              research.
