Title       : NIRT: Direct Power Generation by Electron Emission from Novel Carbon
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0210366

Award Number: 0210366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1516914            (Estimated)
Investigator: J. L. Davidson jld@vuse.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Greg M. Swain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy S. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Lukehart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal was submitted under Solicitation NSF 01-157 "Nanoscale Science and
              Engineering," under the Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT)
              category.  The research examines a novel concept for direct
              thermal-to-electrical power generation. The concept involves electron emission
              from arrays of carbon-based nanostructured emitters, such as carbon nanofibers
              and diamond nanotips. With characteristic dimensions of one to ten nanometers,
              these materials enable highly efficient electron emission and the possibility
              of quantum confinement effects that enhance the energy conversion process.
              However, the conversion of thermal energy to electrical energy using such
              structures has not been previously explored in detail.  Specific research tasks
              include development of synthesis processes, material characterization and
              analysis, experimental and theoretical analyses of electron energy
              distributions, and characterization of energy conversion under practical
              conditions. In addition, the program will support trans-institutional education
              and training initiatives through a graduate student exchange program and a
              joint seminar series on nanotechnology to be held in conjunction with the MBA
              programs of the participating institutions, which include Vanderbilt, Purdue,
              and Michigan State.  NSF support is being provided by the Chemical and
              Transport Systems Division and the Design, Manufacturing and Industrial
              Innovation Division in the Engineering Directorate, and by the Division of
              Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.


