Title       : NIRT: Tailored Fluorinated Surfactant Templates for the Design of Ordered
               Nanoporous Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0210517

Award Number: 0210517
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Rankin srankin@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Knutson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hans-Joachim Lehmler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,9150,9161,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This interdisciplinary research team will address using a new class of structure
              directing agents, fluorinated surfactants, for the design of ordered nanoporous
              metal oxides and organic-inorganic hybrid materials.  Fluorinated surfactants
              provide a novel platform for both templating of and recovery from ordered
              porous materials because they assemble more readily than hydrocarbon
              surfactants, form stable phases of low interfacial curvature, and are both
              hydrophobic and lipophobic.  Departing from a traditional technique based on
              hydrocarbon surfactants we will first systematically explore the effects of
              fluorinated surfactant structure on the templating of porous silica.  With a
              goal of designing surfactant-templated nanostructures with more tightly
              controlled pore architecture, this project will integrate molecular
              simulations, fluorinated surfactant synthesis, phase characterization, and
              materials synthesis techniques.  We also will exploit the selective solubility
              of fluorinated species in low surface tension fluids (such as supercritical
              carbon dioxide) to enhance template recovery from nanoporous ceramics.  Because
              fluorinated surfactants can be extracted under mild conditions, their use is
              expected to improve methods of synthesizing organic-inorganic hybrid materials
              with nanostructured pores.

The co-assembly of molecular precursors allows
              the synthesis of nanostructured ceramics that approach the functionality and
              efficiency of biological materials.  "Functionalizing" the pore walls with
              selected molecular fragments further enhances the potential of these inorganic
              materials for catalysts, separation materials, sensors and miniaturized
              diagnostic devices.  The synergistic approach to the research and educational
              activities of this project will advance the fluorosurfactant-based design of
              new nanosystems by molecular templating and organic functionalization.

This
              proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and
              Engineering" (NSF 01-157). The award is jointly supported through two
              directorates at NSF: (i) Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Division of
              Materials Research in the Ceramics and Solid-State Chemistry programs) and (ii)
              Engineering (Division of Design, Manufacture and Industrial Innovation in the
              Nanomanufacturing program).

