Title       : NER: Silicide Quantum Dots for Nanoelectronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0210647

Award Number: 0210647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89871              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Greve dg07@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to  the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category.  The proposal
              focuses on the fabrication of nanoscale silicide quantum dots.  Silicide dots
              are potentially useful for fabrication of quantum cellular automata and other
              quantum dot devices.  Quantum cellular automata are assemblies of quantum dots
              which can perform the basic information-processing functions of interconnect,
              digital logic, and memory.  A major motivation for the exploration of silicide
              quantum dots in particular is the fact that they will be compatible with
              silicon devices which will probably remain useful as an interface between
              nanoelectronics and the outside world.  This research will explore novel
              nanoscale fabrication processes and will develop improved understanding of
              surface chemical reactions and phase transitions on the nanoscale.  We wish to
              demonstrate the integration of in situ lithography, selective deposition of
              metals, silicide formation, and epitaxial layer overgrowth.  In particular,
              lithography will be performed by exposing thin silicon dioxide layers with an
              electron beam, thereby enhancing thermal desorption of oxide from the exposed
              regions.  Subsequently the quantum dots will be formed by chemical vapor
              deposition and reaction to form a metallic silicide.  One particularly
              attractive approach is selective deposition of the silicide-forming metal from
              an organometallic source, although other approaches may also be explored.  This
              research will be performed using a recently constructed apparatus which
              combines electron beam patterning with the deposition and characterization of
              quantum dots.  All process steps, including epitaxial overgrowth of the quantum
              dots, can be performed without exposing the substrates to atmosphere.
              Characterization tools to be used in the work include reflection high energy
              electron diffraction, thermal desorption mass spectrometry, and atomic force
              microscopy.  Within this one-year exploratory program, we expect to fabricate
              patterned silicide quantum dots in the 20-40 nm size range.  We will also
              obtain improved scientific understanding of selective growth which will be
              broadly useful in the fabrication of nanoscale devices.  
