Title       : NIRT: Processing, Characterization, Scaling, and Development of Fiber-Reinforced
               Polymeric Nano-Matrix Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0210425

Award Number: 0210425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900513             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Seferis seferis@cheme.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Berg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Hayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Pilat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lambros Georgoulis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1674      NANOSCALE: INTRDISCPL RESRCH T
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1674,1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Advanced composite materials are widely utilized because of their low weight and
              relatively high strength and stiffness.  Traditional composites rely on the use
              of macro or micro-scale reinforcements to increase their properties and
              performance.  Through the use of nano-scale reinforcements and structures,
              either alone or in conjunction with macro-scale structures, composites with
              superior mechanical, transport, and environmental properties and performance
              characteristics can be developed.  It is necessary however, to understand the
              fundamental phenomena behind nano-reinforcement in the form of a phase as well
              as scaling issues if this technology is to be effectively applied.  Modeling
              analyses that focus on viscoelasticity and molecular-level anisotropy and
              heterogeneity will support this investigation and the scaling of material
              properties on a nano/micro/macro level.  Therefore, the proposed research will
              investigate the trinity of nanoscale structures, nanoscale processes in the
              environment, and manufacturing processes at the nanoscale.  
The development
              of nanotechnology represents a fundamental change in the way materials are
              designed, manufactured, and envisioned. The realization of the above research
              objectives will be accomplished through the development of a diverse and global
              team that will incorporate experts from both industry and academia, with
              diverse areas of expertise (polymer chemistry, polymer physics, interfacial and
              surface science, advanced composite materials, and environmental science) and
              age groups varying from scientists with many years of experience down to
              graduate and undergraduate students.  The team will consist of three nodes, in
              the US, Korea and Switzerland. The diverse nature of this team will allow for a
              global investigation of this project on many levels and from many angles in an
              unprecedented fashion. Furthermore, it will provide unique opportunities to
              students and young researchers in the rapidly developing field of
              nanotechnology.  Interdisciplinary teams are needed to study nanotechnology and
              are also needed to educate people about the advancements and varying
              disciplines in this field.  

