Title       : NIRT: Formation and Properties of Spin-Polarized Quantum Dots in Magnetic
               Semiconductors by Controlled Variation of Magnetic Fields on the Nanoscale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0210519

Award Number: 0210519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1830000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Boldizsar Janko bjanko@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacek K. Furdyna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Dobrowolska  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,5915,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              solicitation, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. The goal of this project is to explore
              the issues of confining spin-polarized charges on the nano-scale, in
              zero-dimensional (quantum-dot-like) semiconductor geometries. The approach is
              to do this in III-V- and II-VI-based magnetic semiconductors (such as GaMnAs or
              ZnMnSe) subjected to a magnetic field that is modulated on the nano-scale. The
              giant Zeeman splitting characteristic of these materials is expected to exhibit
              nano-scale modulation resulting in tight localization of spin-polarized states.
              The idea is to produce such nano-scale field modulation in a magnetic
              semiconductor (MS) in three ways: (1) by lithographically-patterned
              ferromagnetic (FM) layers deposited on the MS surface (e.g., sub-micron Co/Pt
              multilayer discs); by depositing and patterning superconducting (SC) overlayers
              on the MSs, where the magnetic field modulation is achieved as the magnetic
              flux by-passes the nano-scale SC "obstacles" due to the Meissner effect; and by
              using unpatterned SC films, where the field modulation at the MS/SC interface
              is achieved via the Abrikosov vortex lattice, whose "lattice constant"-and thus
              the Zeeman-induced quantum dots separation-can be controlled by an external
              magnetic field. Prior to patterning, the SC films will either be deposited
              epitaxially, in the same molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) chamber as the MS layers;
              or ex-situ, by sputtering. Key aspects of the project are: theory, materials
              growth, lithography, characterization, and development of spintronic concepts.
              The project is highly collaborative involving researchers at Notre Dame,
              Purdue, and U. IL at Chicago. Additionally, the Superconductivity and Magnetism
              Group at Argonne National Laboratory, led by Dr. George Crabtree, will
              collaborate by providing magneto-transport, near-field magneto-optical mapping,
              as well as STM and (eventually) spin-polarized STS mapping of the SC-MS hybrid
              structures. 
%%% 
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical
              area of materials science with high technological relevance. An important
              feature of the program is the integration of research and education through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
              In addition to training graduate students in nano-science, undergraduates will
              also participate in research through senior projects and the NSF REU program.
              It is also expected that a regular for-credit course on nano-science at the
              senior and first-year-graduate level will be developed. The project combines
              experiment and theory, and brings together researchers from physics, electrical
              engineering, and material science. Activities are designed to develop strong
              technical, communication, and organizational/management skills in undergraduate
              and graduate students and postdoctorals through unique educational experiences
              made possible by a forefront research environment. Cross-disciplinary research
              and site visits between organizations will enhance the education and training
              process. The project is co-supported by the DMR/CMP, DMR/EM, and ECS/EPDT
              Divisions/Programs.
*** 

