Title       : NER: Increasing the Strength, Surface Energy, and Wickability of Polymeric
               Nanofabrics by Exposure to a One Atmosphere Uniform Glow Discharge Plasma
               (OAUGDP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0210554

Award Number: 0210554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99967              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Reece Roth jrr@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Tsai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER.  This exploratory research effort will
              attempt to achieve a convergence of two frontier areas of Electrohydrodynamics
              (EHD) (the sub-discipline of plasma physics that is concerned with the behavior
              of electrically charged fluids in electric fields): electrospinning of
              nanofabrics; and applications of the One Atmosphere Uniform Glow Discharge
              Plasma (OAUGDP).  Electrospinning is an EHD method for producing nanofibers and
              nanofabrics that has been under active development at UT's Textiles and
              Nonwovens Development Center (TANDEC).  The OAUGDP, recently developed at the
              UT Plasma Sciences Laboratory, allows glow discharges to be generated at one
              atmosphere in air rather than at low pressure in vacuum systems.  Nonwoven
              nanofabrics made of elecrospun polymeric fibers with diameters less than 500
              nanometers have a very soft hand, softer than eiderdown; their polymeric
              materials are recyclable; and such fabrics are permeable to air and water
              vapor, but not to microorganisms or fine particulates because of their small
              fiber diameter.  Polymeric nanofabrics have an enormous potential for quality
              garments, filter media, and protective clothing that is impervious to
              microorganisms and toxic particulates.  Nanofabrics would make excellent
              garments were it not for their relatively low strength, and a low surface
              energy that gives them an uncomfortably low wettability and wickability.  We
              plan to explore potential applications of the OAUGDP to nanofabrics, including
              increasing the strength of electrospun nanofabrics to useful levels; increasing
              the surface energy of nanofabrics; making nanofabrics wettable; and making
              nanofabrics more comfortable as garments by increasing their wickability. 
              

The activity will take place at the University of Tennessee's Plasma
              Sciences Laboratory (http://plasma.ece.utk.edu), which has established a
              reputation for going beyond the technological water's edge to develop new
              technologies and introduce them into industrial practice.  The Plasma Sciences
              Laboratory has spun off one company, Atmospheric Glow Technologies
              (www.a-gtech.com) to market technologies based on the OAUGDP; the Plasma Lab
              has been visited by at least 20 Fortune 500 companies for technological
              assessment; it has obtained 9 patents on the OAUGDP and its uses; and it
              normally has at least two company presidents address the Plasma Science Seminar
              each semester to acquaint GRAs and other associates with entrepreneurship.  One
              of the PIs (P. Tsai) has long-standing contacts with the Army, and has done
              work on the effects of plasma exposure of camouflage and filter fabrics in the
              past.  This relationship should assure visibility of any results of this work
              that are of significance to the Department of Defense or homeland security. 
              With respect to the work in this project, we expect to publish potentially
              useful results in the conferences and journals that serve the textile industry.
               Particularly interesting or "classic" data will appear in a future edition of
              the PIs three-volume book, Industrial Plasma Engineering.  The subject of this
              work is by nature interdisciplinary, and will involve students from the
              Electrical and Computer Engineering Department and the School of Human Ecology
              where TANDEC is located.  Award of this grant comes at a particularly good time
              because when it starts, we will be joined by a NSF-NATO Postdoctoral Associate,
              Dr. Jozef Rahel from Prof. M. Cernak's laboratory at Comenius University in the
              Slovak Republic.  Dr. Rahel will be doing a plasma-textile project that will be
              synergistic with the current project.  It is anticipated that he will take the
              OAUGDP technology back to central Europe, helping his country recover from the
              effects of the Cold War.  We normally send our GRAs to at least one
              professional society meeting a year to present a poster paper on their work. 
              We have women and minority GRAs on the staff of the Plasma Lab, and some of our
              best work of the past ten years was done by women GRAs or postdoctoral
              associates.  Indeed, one of the latter, Dr. Kimberly Kelly-Wintenberg, is now
              the CEO of our spin-off company.  We have attempted to make plasma science and
              our contributions to it visible by presenting invited papers both
              internationally and within the USA, with 13 such presentations in the past
              year.  We also maintain an extensive website from which complete texts of our 9
              patents and archival conference and journal papers can be downloaded. 
