Title       : Bridging the Digital Divide by Using Self-Directed Learning Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0210928

Award Number: 0210928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97005              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Clark kclark6@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to describe an exploratory research project that
              focuses on technology and learning. The research addresses critical issues
              related to improving how technology is utilized in underserved populations to
              improve its pedagogical impact. This is accomplished by studying how
              self-directed learning communities (SDLC) are formed and sustained, as well as
              the motivational issues related to technology access and implementation. These
              issues are vital to maximizing the potential benefits of current efforts to
              bridge the digital divide, which have primarily focused on providing access to
              hardware, software, and content.  Self-directed learning communities are
              defined as a vibrant, participative, and culturally aware human environment
              that promotes learning opportunities to enhance the potential of its members.
              This definition has been adapted from "learning cities" definition of the
              European Lifelong Learning Initiative (ELLI).  Through this exploratory
              research, I will be able to begin to establish an empirically based repository
              for research and practices related to the digital divide and the impact of
              self-directed learning communities. For this SGER research project, I will
              focus on a single learning community for a year in and effort to develop
              concrete data and techniques that may be used in future research. To this end,
              I will seek to answer the following research questions:
1. What are the
              essential factors of a self-directed learning community?
2. How should we
              assess student progress?
3. What kinds of implementation models are valid and
              replicable?
Because self-directed learning communities emerge spontaneously
              instead of being created formally, I will observe and document their formation.
              Investigating the formation to these self-directed learning communities is
              crucial and requires the analysis of the roles, relationships, attitudes, and
              needs of the stakeholders involved. In an effort to establish a benchmark,
              extant data, which may include standardized test scores, will be used. As the
              self-directed learning community emerges, the factors effecting its formation
              will be identified and analyzed.  Once the factors are investigated, the
              researcher will work with the stakeholders of the learning community to create
              assessment measures. The assessment measures will be used to validate the
              factors and test for their generalizeability to multiple self-directed learning
              communities.  Because self-directed learning communities are innovative in the
              way that I am applying them, some of the research effort will be spent
              identifying and analyzing what these constructs are and how they impact
              learning.

