Title       : NER: Dynamics of Flagellar Polymorphism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0210854

Award Number: 0210854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99911              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond E. Goldstein gold@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John O. Kessler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1248,1676,1767,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This is a Nanoscale Exploratory Research award.  The general idea is to
              understand the mechanism by which bacterial flagella "switch" between rotating
              clockwise and rotating counterclockwise, with the longer-term goal of using
              this information to develop nanoscale switches that can be used in practical or
              commercial applications.   

Bacterial flagella are remarkable structures,
              nanometers in diameter, that possess mechanical and dynamical properties unlike
              any known material on the macroscale.  Composed of eleven filaments
              self-assembled from the protein flagellin, they may interconvert between
              multiple helical morphologies of both left-and right-handedness as a
              consequence of monomer conformational transitions that change packing 
              properties on the subnanometer scale. These minute molecular rearrangements
              have important consequences for cellular dynamics on a range of larger scales,
              especially so in cellular motility. During chemotaxis, the multiple rotating
              flagella that provide thrust to the cells bundle and unbundle as their rotary
              motors, embedded in the membrane, episodically change rotational direction.
              When bundled, the bacterium moves linearly; disintegration of the bundle upon
              motor reversal creates a tumbling event that randomizes the cell's orientation.
              These motions of "run "and "tumble "produce the random walks that underlie
              chemotaxis.  The motor reversal also initiates a propagating chirality
              reversal, turning a left-handed helix that had been rotated counterclockwise
              into a right-handed helix rotated clockwise.  These interconversions occur not
              only from the torques of rotary motors, but may also be triggered by fluid flow
              past flagella.

Little is known experimentally about the nanomechanical
              properties of flagella and especially of dynamic polymorphism. Very recently,
              Dr. Goldstein and his collaborators developed the first theoretical model that
              explains the early, mostly qualitative, experiments on chirality transitions
              produced by external flows.  This continuum model incorporates monomer packing
              multistability into a novel nonlinear extension of elasticity theory, coupled
              via slender-body hydrodynamics to fluid flow.  In this way, it connects
              conformational transitions at the nanoscale to dynamics at the cellular scale,
              and captures many of the key features of those experiments.  It also makes a
              number of sharp predictions regarding the initiation, frequency, and velocity
              of chirality transformations, to date untested.  This project will use recent,
              important developments in fluorescent imaging methods for flagella, coupled
              with optical trapping methods, to conduct the first experiments on flagella
              under well-defined and controllable conditions of fluid stress or external
              forces, creating a "low Reynolds number wind tunnel" for flagellar dynamics. 
              Concurrently, Drs. Goldstein and Kessler will extend the theoretical approach
              to make quantitative contact with these experiments, using the latest
              techniques they have developed for the study of the coupled partial
              differential equations that describe overdamped bending and twisting of elastic
              filaments.  These studies will yield important information about the
              stress-induced conformational transitions underlying polymorphism at the
              nanoscale, and perhaps open the way toward the use of these molecular switches
              in microfluidics or MEMS applications.



