Title       : NER: Femtosecond Pump-Probe Confocal Microscopy of ZnO Nanowire Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0210106

Award Number: 0210106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Leone srl@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
 

This is a NER proposal for a specific one-year trial to (1) characterize
              single ZnO nanowire laser structures using spatially-resolved confocal
              microscopy detection, and (2) to introduce pump - stimulated emission dump
              probing to study stimulated emission processes of single nanowire laser
              configurations.  The requisite morphologies of ZnO nanowires have been produced
              and synthetic refinement will be performed to obtain the best quality
              crystalline patterns of multiple nanowires.  Laser and confocal optical
              microscopy tools that are available in this laboratory will be used to
              optically excite ZnO single nanowire laser media and to detect spectrally and
              spatially resolved stimulated emission.  These include novel ultrafast
              pump-dump experiments with a Ti:sapphire femtosecond laser.  The fundamental
              science of the exciton-exciton scattering mechanism to produce stimulated
              emission in crystalline nanowires and the transition to an electron-hole plasma
              stimulated emission mechanism will be explored.  These studies are designed to
              develop new confocal microscopy methods to interrogate nanowire laser devices,
              with the specific ability to explore a single device at a time.  Single
              molecule spectroscopy experiments have revealed a number of intriguing aspects
              of individual molecular environments over the last few years.  These studies
              are intended to transfer this remarkable type of investigation to the study of
              single nanowire lasers and stimulated emission.

