Title       : LTREB: Forest Ecosystem Response to Changes in Atmospheric Chemistry and Climate
               at the Bear Brook Watershed in Maine (BBWM)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0210257

Award Number: 0210257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott L. Collins                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan J. Fernandez ivanjf@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lindsey E. Rustad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Norton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0210257
Fernandez
The Bear Brook Watershed in Maine (BBWM) is a long-term
              paired, forested watershed research
site with each watershed drained by a
              first order stream through a v-notch weir. One watershed
(West Bear) has been
              treated bimonthly for 12 years with N and S by aerial helicopter
applications,
              with the second watershed (East Bear) serving as the reference watershed.
              The
objectives of this LTREB proposal are to:
1. Study the response of the
              calibrated East Bear Watershed to long-term patterns of ambient S,
N, and base
              cation deposition. This will be accomplished by maintaining high
              quality
deposition and stream export data from the reference watershed in
              support of research on
ecosystem processes and change over time funded by this
              project and others.
2. Study the temporal progression of N saturation at the
              West Bear Watershed. This will be
accomplished by continuing the decadal-scale
              whole ecosystem N & S addition experiment
ongoing at the West Bear Watershed.
              
3. Determine if a definable relationship exists between short and longer-term
              climate and the
biogeochemical and hydrologic processes currently under study
              at both watersheds. This
will be accomplished by establishing an air and soil
              temperature measurement program across major ecosystem compartments at BBWM.
              Studies will focus on the relationships between temperature, N dynamics
              (mineralization, nitrification), and surface water N export in both the
              reference and treated watersheds, and we will evaluate the efficacy of using
              heat units to predict ecosystem behavior with respect to these processes.
4.
              Provide support to strengthen the data management efforts at the BBWM, thereby
              making
this long-term record more accessible to the scientific community with
              an interpretive
interface to be used by educators and policy makers through an
              expansive web presence. A
major emphasis of this LTREB proposal is the
              development of a layered web presence on the
BBWM project that provides access
              to data and highlights for policy makers, educators and
researchers.
5.
              Provide support for graduate student training and undergraduate student
              experiences in
research.
Findings from this research have proven to be
              turnkey to date in regional and national debates on
the effects of acid
              deposition and the risk of N saturation to forests and surface waters of
              New
England. The compelling justification for supporting the long-term program
              of research at
BBWM is that changes in response to changing ambient deposition
              of N and S (East Bear), long-
term chemical manipulations (West Bear), and
              seasonal and inter-annual climate variation after
11+ years are showing
              mechanisms of response that were not discernable within the first 2-3
years of
              the study. These long-term mechanisms of response are frequently overlooked
              when
research is conducted on short-term funding cycles. The long-term and
              unique responses being
investigated at BBWM will be critical for adequately
              assessing policy and management options
regarding air pollution and climate
              change in the 21 st century.
