Title       : NIRT: Nanotube and Nanowire Based Quantum Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0210736

Award Number: 0210736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1880000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan K. Watson swatson@middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Lieber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Marcus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonid I. Glazman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David DiVincenzo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 1674      NANOSCALE: INTRDISCPL RESRCH T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1674,9150,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0210736
Watson, Susan K
Middlebury College

NIRT: Nanotube and Nanowire
              Based Quantum Computation

A team research effort has been organized to
              implement a simple one-dimensional quantum computer using carbon nanotubes and
              Si nanowires as the substrate, and to in-vestigate issues of synthesis,
              nanofabrication, theoretical physics, and computer science surrounding this
              focused goal. The device on which the proposed effort will concentrate consists
              of a one-dimensional string of islands of charge-quantum dots-with coupling
              between the dots controlled by the application of gate voltages. The intrinsic
              magnetic moments ('spins') of the dots are used to form the quantum bits
              ('qubits') of a quantum computer. The strength of the scheme lies in its
              simplicity; in contrast to other proposed schemes, only changes to the coupling
              between neighboring quantum dots along the nanotube or nanowire are necessary.
              
The research project is complemented by an educational program that brings
              to-gether students from several disciplines, encouraging them to develop
              intellectually and interact as part of a single collective effort. The
              educational goals of the Nanoscale Sci-ence and Engineering program will be
              explicitly advanced through the creation of courses and lab modules focused on
              nanoscience.
A number of basic physics questions are raised by this project,
              relating to active spin manipulation in this simple 1D system and to the ways
              in which coupling beyond nearest neighbors can correct for problems of quantum
              decoherence and timing errors. If the device ultimately operates as intended,
              it will function as a general-purpose quantum computer, a goal towards which
              much current research is focused.


 

