Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Soconusco Formative Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0210997

Award Number: 0210997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Burger richard.burger@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard Burger, Mr. Robert Rosenswig will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue his archaeological
              settlement survey in the Cuauhtemoc zone of the Soconusco, located on the
              southern Pacific coast of Chiapas, Mexico. The region is particularly
              significant as it includes some of the first sedentary communities in
              Mesoamerica and the earliest evidence of emergent social complexity and
              political hierarchy between approximately 1550 and 650 BC. The Soconusco also
              has the best evidence in Mesoamerica of direct interaction with the Gulf Coast
              Olmec - the first civilization the region. A pedestrian survey will
              systematically cover 50 sq km and map changing political organization across
              the landscape. This survey will take advantage of existing trenches dug for
              banana irrigation to provide accurate subsurface information over a large area.
              With reliable surface-subsurface correspondence, the distribution of
              settlements will be documented with a degree of confidence not often possible
              with regional surface survey. 
Power and hierarchy are arguably the most
              fundamental issues addressed by anthropology and most other social sciences.
              Explaining the emergence of sociopolitical hierarchy over centuries and
              millennia is a job ideally suited to archaeology. Social scientists study the
              structure and dynamics of unequal power relations in contemporary contexts.
              However, these scholars are generally limited to a temporal breadth of decades,
              or with the help of historical documents a few centuries. Archaeologists are in
              a unique position to explore the origins of the institutionalized hierarchy
              that permeates every aspect of modern life. Mr. Rosenswig's research will track
              the development of sociopolitical complexity in the Cuauhtemoc survey zone over
              nearly a millennia and will help to determine the nature of relations between
              local elites and their Olmec counterparts who resided in Mexico's Gulf Coast.
              Did sociopolitical complexity in the Soconusco coalesce as a result of contact
              with the Gulf Coast Olmec of Tabasco and Veracruz? Did the Gulf Coast Olmec
              actually make incursions into the Soconusco? Alternatively, is the impact of
              the Gulf Coast over-emphasized in models of Formative Mesoamerican society?
              These competing hypotheses revolve around the nature of an "Olmec Horizon" and
              strive to understand Early and Middle Formative society and the nature of
              relations between distant regions of Mesoamerica.

Taking advantage of modern
              irrigation ditches and lack of later period occupation, the proposed survey
              will provide reliable demographic changes at a regional scale. The results of
              this study will further our understanding of the relationship between local and
              interregional processes during the emergence of sociopolitical complexity in
              the Soconusco. This research is also significant cross-culturally as
              Mesoamerica is one of only a handful of areas in the world where sociopolitical
              complexity emerged independently and the Soconusco contains some of the
              earliest societies where this occurred. Mr. Rosenswig's research will document
              the manner in which incipient sociopolitical complexity emerged and will also
              assist in training a promising young scientist.



