Title       : NIRT: Deformation Mechanisms and Manufacturing of Nanostructured Materials
               Processed by Severe Plastic Deformation (SPD)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0210173

Award Number: 0210173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Oscar Dillon                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Asaro rasaro@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Petr Krysl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Benson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc Andre Meyers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This proposal aims to gain fundamental understanding of the
deformation
              mechanisms that operate in nanostructured metals and
alloys, in particular in
              those produced by severe plastic deformation
(SPD) methods. Based on this
              knowledge it further aims to develop full
capability to manufacture these
              materials in high quality bulk forms.

The extremely attractive (and rare)
              combination of mechanical
properties (high strength, ductility, fatigue
              resistance) and
manufacturability of these materials leads to a new class of
              high
performance alloys for structural uses.  It is understood that
              this
combination of properties is due to the formation of nano-scale
              grain
sizes in these materials, but the mechanisms responsible for the
              high
strength combined with high ductility are not well understood.
              This
presents a fundamental obstacle to the optimization of these
materials,
              or to predictions of the performance of these materials in
applications.

An
              integrated approach with strong emphasis on manufacturing is
proposed. On the
              theoretical side, deformation mechanisms will be
simulated with
              crystal-plasticity aggregate models and with detailed
models of the grains and
              grain boundaries.  The experimental program
covers a wide a range of strain
              rates and temperatures, texture
development, and in situ transmission electron
              microscopy and atomic
force microscopy to directly verify deformation
              mechanisms. The
experimental results will provide validation to the
              theoretical
modeling and manufacturing process simulations.

Finally,
              simulations of the manufacturing processes will enable
process parameter
              optimization.  A complete, miniature, yet fully
scalable, manufacturing
              facility will be designed and implemented.

The significant impacts of the
              proposed research are made possible by
the acquired fundamental understanding
              of the deformation mechanisms,
and include advances in manufacturing
              techniques to produce these
highly desirable materials in bulk. The miniature
              manufacturing
facility will become a source of significant quantities
              of
nano-structured alloys.  Finally, the proposal will provide students
              at
the UCSD and at local K-12 schools with interdisciplinary education in
a
              cutting-edge area of research.


