Title       : NER: Role of Elastic Anisotropy in Semiconductor Nanopatterning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0210714

Award Number: 0210714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel S. Goldman rsgold@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Kieffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1676,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) proposal was submitted in response to
              the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 01-157). The project
              will explore the role of elastic anisotropy in the self-patterning of
              semiconductor nanostructures, possibly catalyzing a new class of high
              performance nanostructure devices. The project aims to venture into an emerging
              concept in nanoscale science and engineering using a fundamentally new and
              interdisciplinary approach, which combines the complementary expertise of the
              investigators. During the exploratory phase, the role of elastic anisotropy in
              three-dimensional semiconductor nanopatterning will be established. To this
              end, ternary alloy films with varying alloy composition, lattice misfit, and
              thickness will be grown by molecular beam epitaxy; their elastic anisotropies
              will be measured using Brillouin scattering and interpreted using atomic-scale
              simulations. Using these alloy films as the spacer material in quantum dot
              superlattices, the relationship between the elastic anisotropies and the
              long-range order of the resulting quantum dot arrays will then be established.
              The work accomplished in this NER project may lay the foundation for a larger
              effort to develop three-dimensional nanopatterning methods for use in a wide
              variety of innovative nanostructure devices.
%%% 
The project addresses basic
              exploratory research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
              technological relevance. An important feature of the program is the integration
              of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
              and technologically significant area. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school
              students will participate in this project, and will be involved with growth and
              characterization of semiconductor nanostructures, elastic property
              measurements, and computer simulations. 
*** 

