Title       : NER: Spin Injector for Nanomagnetics and Spintronics Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0210583

Award Number: 0210583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip T. Sprunger phils@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dustin Hite  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Kurtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science
              and
Engineering Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the
              NER
category.  The proposal focuses on the development and characterization
              of
one unique class of metal-semiconductor heterostructures, which
              potentially
will result in production of a spin injector.  Specifically,
              problems exist
in characterizing the nature of spin transport and scattering
              through the
interfaces of nanomagnetic and spintronic materials.  As one
              considers
various potential hybrid structures, the need to be able to probe
              the
spin-dependent transmission properties of the interfaces
              between
semiconductors, ferromagnets, non-magnetic metals, and insulators
              becomes
critical.

Our objective is to fabricate and characterize a
              structure that will allow
one to interrogate the spin-dependent transmission
              properties by providing
an easily-controlled source of spin-polarized
              electrons.  The device uses
circularly-polarized light to excite
              spin-dependent carriers within GaAs,
and incorporates a Ag thin-film
              quantum-well spin-filter to energy select
the hot electrons.  This source of
              energy-selectable spin-polarized
electrons then forms the substrate for the
              subsequent growth of magnetic
structures.  We will characterize the degree of
              spin-polarization by using
the empty minority states of a Co film grown on
              this spin injector as an
analyzer.  While changing the doping of the GaAs
              provides a coarse energy
selection, judicious choice of the Ag thickness
              provides a fine-tuning of
the energy of these electrons via the energetics of
              the relevant Ag
quantum-well state.

Our plan to demonstrate, refine, and
              calibrate this device involves the
growth of quantum-stabilized Ag films on
              cleaved GaAs(110) and on GaAs(100)
wafers.  We have already shown that these
              Ag films exhibit quantum-well
states and they will be used to further
              energy-filter the spin-polarized
electrons.  To analyze the spin-polarization
              of these electrons, we will
epitaxially grow Co on the Ag/GaAs structure and
              calibrate the
spin-dependent transport into the empty minority-state bands,
              both as a
function of the polarization of the electrons from GaAs as well as
              the
magnetization of the Co.  Future extensions include the incorporation of
              an
Al2O3 insulating barrier to test the operation in practical
              spin-tunneling
devices.  Throughout the research plan, emphasis will be placed
              on
correlating atomic/morphological and electronic properties of
              nanophase
heterostructures with ensuing spin-dependent conductance.

This
              project impacts the field of magnetics in several ways.  This
structure
              provides an inexpensive tool to interrogate spin transport
properties and
              provides an alternative to spin-polarized photoemission and
inverse
              photoemission.  Once calibrated, it can be used to quickly evaluate
the
              spin-dependent transport properties of advanced materials such
              as
half-metallic thin-films.  Furthermore, it can be used in a direct
              manner
to provide valuable data on the spin-dependent scattering processes
              that
occur at the interfaces of spintronic structures.

