Title       : Condensed-Phase Dynamics by Ultrafast Nonlinear Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0210986

Award Number: 0210986
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Berg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Berg will undertake researches in condensed matter
              chemistry, namely fast time scale dynamics of supercooled and high viscosity
              liquids. New non-linear spectroscopies are to be developed and existing methods
              to be extended. Heterogeneity and non-exponential decays in high viscosity
              liquids and other complex materials are to be investigated, and rotation and
              solvation measurements are to be made and internal diffusive transitions
              invetigated. A Fifth Order Rotational Spectroscopy (FORS) is to be developed. A
              new viscoelastic (VE) theory is to be developed, one that includes both
              inertial and diffusive dynamics in a unified formalism.

This project deals
              with important issues in the behavior of fluids, such as the relationship
              between the dynamics of single molecules and that of the collective behavior of
              fluids. Existing theories have been partially successful in accounting for the
              dynamical properties of fluids and the present work addresses fundamental
              issues that have in the past been treated only slightly. New experimental
              techniques, coupled with theory will be developed. This research will be
              conducted with the aid of graduate and undergraduate students, and postdoctoral
              research associates. They will gain valuable experience through their
              involvement in contemporary forefront research in physical chemistry. These
              experiences will of great advantage in their further studies, or employment in
              industry, government laboratories, or academia. 

