Title       : Investigating Promoter Function in Vivo and the Role of Transposons as Control
               Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0210413

Award Number: 0210413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich Grotewold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Most fundamental cellular processes are controlled at the level of
              transcription.  The extensive knowledge that has been acquired over the past
              years on the in vivo properties of the trans-acting regulators is contrasted by
              how little is still known about the in vivo organization, evolution and
              function of cis-acting regulatory elements.  Insertions of transposons have
              played a crucial role in the evolution of eukaryotic promoters, but the
              fundaments on how this has impacted gene expression is not known.  Previous
              studies on the control of maize flavonoid biosynthesis have provided the PI
              with unique tools to investigate the structure and function of cis-acting
              regulatory elements in their normal in vivo environment.  As a model to
              understand promoter function in vivo, the regulatory region of a structural
              gene of the pathway (A1) that has been extensively dissected in vitro, and that
              is a target of at least two well-defined regulatory systems, will be studied. 
              The cis-acting regulatory sequences that are important for the regulation of A1
              in vivo will be established, by determining the effect of mutations and
              deletions of these elements on the expression of A1 in planta, and by
              exploiting the natural A1 allelic diversity in the Zea.  In at least two
              well-characterized cases, the regulation of A1 becomes under the control of
              different transposable elements, albeit in exactly opposite ways.

The unique
              understanding of the regulation of A1 makes it ideal to interpret transposable
              element gene control systems by providing important insights into the molecular
              bases of epigenetic phenomena.  The PI will investigate whether the transposon
              insertions override the normal regulation of A1, and also determine whether the
              transposons provide novel cis-regulatory elements.  Finally, the PI will
              examine which components of the corresponding transposases participate in the
              novel regulatory patterns displayed by the A1 alleles containing the transposon
              insertions.  Taken together, these studies should provide one of the most
              comprehensive in vivo studies done on the regulatory region of a plant gene. 
              Because of the uniqueness of the genetic and molecular tools available, the
              findings derived from these studies could be fundamental to the general field
              of regulation of gene expression. 
