Title       : NIRT: Architectures and Devices for Quantum-dot Cellular Automata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0210153

Award Number: 0210153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Kogge kogge@cse.nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig S. Lent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Fay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexei O. Orlov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory L. Snider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 2878      SPECIAL PROJECTS - CCR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CCR-0210153
Kogge, Peter

This proposal was received in response to the
              Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. 
              Quantum-dot cellular automata (QCA) is a revolutionary computing paradigm that
              is well suited to nanoelectronic implementation and scaling to molecular
              dimensions. The central feature of 
QCA is that binary information is encoded
              in the position of single electrons among a group of dots forming a cell. This
              represents a significant break with the transistor-based paradigm in which
              information 
is encoded by the state of the transistor current switch. In QCA,
              electrons switch between quantum dots within a cell, but no current flows
              between cells. This leads to extremely low power dissipation, avoiding the
              problem of heat generation that will ultimately limit the integration density
              of transistor circuits. 
Clocking of QCA circuits has proven to be extremely
              important from the standpoint of both architectures and devices. It allows
              arrays of QCA cells to be broken into sub-arrays for pipelined processing, and
              it enables cells to produce signal power gain to replace signal energy lost to
              the environment. Functioning QCA devices have already been demonstrated in an
              aluminum/oxide tunnel junction scheme, confirming the operation of QCA cells,
              shift registers, logic gates, and memory elements. Power gain in a QCA shift
              register has also been achieved. This project will advance the architectural
              development of QCA, investigate questions of switching speed in nanoelectronic
              devices, and develop advanced fabrication techniques to implement the
              architectural and circuit theory concepts. Since QCA represents a dramatic
              break from conventional devices, 
significant changes in architecture are
              needed to fully exploit the capabilities of QCA. In QCA layout, timing, and
              architecture are intimately related, requiring a unified design approach. This
              is analogous to the 
approach begun by Mead and Conway which revolutionized
              VLSI design by making a connection between architecture and layout and building
              on that connection to enable designers to quickly synthesize large and complex
              functional blocks. Likewise, QCA system designers will be able to exploit
              timing in addition 
to layout to produce highdensity functional designs. In
              particular we will investigate the development of simple, yet complete, QCA
              based "Field Programmable Gate Arrays", where 2D arrays of identical cells are
              tiled together, with programmable interconnect and function. Timing plays a
              pivotal role in QCA designs, so it is vital to achieve a complete understanding
              of switching and switching dynamics in arrays of coupled electrons. Some recent
              theoretical results indicate that electron switching speeds would be orders of
              magnitude lower than that expected from the capacitances and resistances of the
              dots and tunnel junctions, contrary to theoretical work done at Notre Dame. To
              resolve this issue we will apply high frequency measurement techniques to the
              study of switching in QCA cells and in arrays of cells.
At present,
              experimental demonstrations of QCA devices are limited to a small number of
              cells by the large capacitances produced by the aluminum tunnel junctions. To
              support and experimentally confirm the advances made in architecture and
              circuit theory, we will employ advanced fabrication techniques based on AFM
              lithography to produce QCA with greatly enhanced operating characteristics.
              This will allow us to fabricate and measure arrays of cells with significant
              extent and complexity. QCA presents a unique opportunity for a broad impact on
              the educational experience of students, and on research in the field of
              electronic devices. 
We will develop instructional modules based on QCA
              simulation tools to teach the concepts of QCA architecture to undergraduate and
              graduate students. These modules will benefit students by introducing them to
              
alternative architectural concepts. In addition, by broadening their
              horizons, it will strengthen their understanding of conventional architectures
              by emphasizing the foundational concepts of architectural 
concepts. 
