Title       : NER: Massively Parallel Electron Photoemitter Micro-arrays for Nanoscale
               Lithography, Imaging, and Inspection Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0210626

Award Number: 0210626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack M. McCarthy jmcarthy@ece.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jody L. House  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Freeouf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Neil Berglund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 2878      SPECIAL PROJECTS - CCR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NER: Massively Parallel Electron Photoemitter Micro-arrays for
              Nanoscale
Lithography, Imaging and Inspection Applications

      Present
              electron-beam lithography, imaging and inspection systems
are limited to
              serial scanning of patterns with only one beam. As a
result the ability of
              such systems to scan substantial areas at
nanoscale resolution with practical
              throughput is not possible.  However
if such machines were to scan using a
              massively parallel array of
independently modulated beams, the resultant
              parallelism would make
possible not only significantly improved throughput for
              conventional
applications in the nanoscale environment but also enable faster
              device
development by software changeable patterns.  However at this time
              there
is no practical multiple-beam electron emitter source available
              that
will meet system-level performance and reliability requirements. 
              The
goal of the proposed research is to prove feasibility of
              photocathode
microarrays for massively parallel and independently modulated
              electron
sources.  A key deliverable of the research will be a
              fabricated
individually gated array of sources with sufficient emission
              current
density to expose a line of electron sensitive resist 5 to 100nm
              in
width.
       The successful demonstration of feasibility for
              photocathode
massively parallel microarrays will require a stable, low noise
              and
reproducible photocathode and a viable scheme for fabrication
              and
independently modulating the current in each beam.  As a result the
              work
will focus on two key aspects.  First the extension of our previous
              work
to develop a thin film stack photocathode and pretreatments that
              will
provide the emission stability and intensity necessary and second
              to
examine schemes for producing microarrays using such photoemitters.
      
               Photoelectron source arrays will make nanoscale lithography and
rapid e-beam
              review testing possible.  Lithography and testing on the
nanoscale are
              necessary if the manufacturing at this scale for
microelectronic devices,
              sensors and electrical- mechanical systems is
to become as high in yield and
              rapid as sub-micron fabrication is
today.
