Title       : Defining the Catalytic Mechanism of Cytokinin Oxidase/Dehydrogenase Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0210160

Award Number: 0210160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33200              (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. English EnglishJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kristin Bilyeu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1145,1168,5930,9109,9178,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports an international collaborative research project between the
              University of Missouri and the Palacky University Olomouc, Czech Republic that
              focuses on aspects of plant physiology related to the enzymology of cytokinin
              oxidase/dehydrogenase (ZMCKX1) reactions.  This new research partnership
              combines complementary research expertise of the two laboratories.  The
              research will examine the role of electron flux within specific compartments of
              plant cells in an effort to understand features of metabolic control of
              cytokinin degradation and regeneration of active cytokinin
              oxidase/dehydrogenase. The main hypothesis of this proposal is that plants
              contain specific bioactive cofactors that are capable of regenerating active
              cytokinin oxidase/dehydrogenase enzymes by accepting electrons during catalysis
              of cytokinins.  We will determine the subcellular location of the enzyme,
              precisely characterize the redox potential of the enzyme for comparison to the
              properties of putative bioactive cofactors, and perform depletion experiments
              to initially identify the reaction-enhancing bioactive cofactor used in plants.
               This research directly addresses the question of specificity for the ZmCKX1
              bioactive cofactor and defines the range of electrochemical redox potentials
              for bioactive cofactor candidates.  Subcellular localization of ZmCKX1 and
              redox characterization will independently contribute to our understanding of
              the biochemical and physiological properties of the enzyme and processes that
              occur during plant development. The partnership also provides unique and
              valuable opportunities for reciprocal exchange of undergraduate and graduate
              students who will gain educational and technical training, and research
              experience at the international level.


