Title       : Intramolecular Anodic Olefin Coupling Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0210175

Award Number: 0210175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Moeller moeller@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this award Professor Moeller will continue his work on the use of
              intramolecular anodic olefin coupling reactions in synthetic organic
              electrochemistry.  This work involves the development of stereocontrolled
              synthetic methods based on radical cation chemistry and then the utilization of
              these chemical reactions in the synthesis of natural products.  Proposed new
              method development on asymmetric electrochemical cyclizations utilizing chiral
              ketene acetals as substrates could lead to a new enantioselective carbon-carbon
              bond forming reaction.  Reactions discovered with prior NSF support will be
              applied to several total syntheses in the new support period.  The first two
              total syntheses involve key tandem cyclizations, the first of which are
              initiated by electrochemically generated enol ether radical cations, whereas
              the last two syntheses utilize highly functionalized furans as the initiating
              group.  

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              is supporting the research of Dr. Kevin D. Moeller of the Department of
              Chemistry at Washington University in St. Louis.  Dr. Moeller will work on the
              use of electrolysis to generate chemical species which react with predictable
              patterns and selectivities.  Use of electrolysis to generate reactive
              intermediates may prove to be a new "green" synthetic method with potential
              industrial applications.  If large quantities of oxidants and reductants
              currently used in organic synthesis could be replaced by reliable
              electrochemical methods then many redox synthetic methods could be made more
              environmentally friendly.  This group will also explore stereoselective
              oxidative cyclization reactions.  These reactions produce molecules which are
              chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make only one of the two
              possible forms (a single enantiomer).  Development of this family of reactions
              is one of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical industry today.
               When developed, Dr. Moeller's work could be applied to the environmentally
              friendly syntheses of a number of biologically active molecules.  Students
              trained during the course of this work will gain skills needed by the
              pharmaceutical industry which now produces a number of single enantiomer
              compounds. 

