Title       : Nitrile Anions: Unmasking Fundamental Reactivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0210955

Award Number: 0210955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fraser F. Fleming flemingf@duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffry D. Madura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Professor Fleming and his coworkers have discovered that cyclic nitrile anions
              generated in tetrahydrofuran or toluene can be selectively alkylated
              intramolecularly to generate trans- and cis-decalins, respectively.  They will
              apply this discovery to the syntheses of two decalin containing clerodane
              natural products.  With the help of his collaborator, Professor Madura,
              computational modelling of the structures of the metallated nitriles which
              participate in these reactions will be investigated.  Lastly, the PI will
              generate chiral metallated nitriles and investigate their enantioselective
              intramolecular alkylation.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Fraser F. Fleming of the
              Department of Chemistry at Duquesne University.  Professor Fleming along with
              his collaborator, Professor Jeffrey D. Madura, and their students will study
              the structures and reaction chemistry of a class of molecules known as nitrile
              anions.  Intramolecular carbon-carbon bond forming reactions of these nitrile
              anions will be used to construct two naturally occurring diterpenes,
              strigillanoic acid and epi-strigillanoic acid.  Nitriles which can be
              metallated on the carbon next to the nitrile functional group will then be used
              in enantioselective carbon-carbon bond forming reactions called intramolecular
              alkylation reactions.  These alkylation reactions produce cyclic molecules
              which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make only one
              of the two possible forms (a single enantiomer).  Development of this family of
              reactions is one of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical
              industry today.  Students trained during the course of this work will gain
              skills in computational chemistry and organic synthesis.  These skills are
              needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals industries. 



