Title       : Small Grant for Exploratory Research: Understanding Political Intolerance: A
               Test of Deonance Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a0210053

Award Number: 0210053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34291              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda J. Skitka Lskitka@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, submitted under the Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)
              program, will examine public attitudes and behavior following the attack on the
              World Trade Center and the Pentagon.  In particular, this study will explore
              alternative accounts for why people become increasingly politically intolerant
              during periods of real or perceived threats to national security.  Although
              fear is often suggested as an explanation for the link between threats to
              national security and increased political intolerance, the fear hypothesis does
              not seem to capture the full complexity of the citizens' reactions to perceived
              threat.  For example, people responded to the September 11 terrorist attacks
              not only with increased political intolerance, but also with a paralleling need
              for vengeance, and a heightened need to engage in prosocial behaviors like
              donating blood - reactions that are less clearly rooted in fear. The researcher
              will test the theory of deonance, which maintains that a motivated state of
              aversive arousal creates a psychological pressure for the individual citizen to
              engage in thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that will be designed to restore a
              sense of moral balance. The most emphatic ways people can restore a perception
              of restored balance will be by expressing moral outrage (a composite
              psychological reaction that includes the need to punish and ostracize those who
              violated the moral order, using whatever means possible) and to engage in moral
              cleansing (acting in ways to shore up those aspects of the moral order that
              have been undercut by the transgression). Among other things, deonance theory
              predicts that people who do engage in prosocial behavior following the
              terrorist attack may have successfully restored a perception of moral order,
              and therefore will be more politically tolerant than those who did not. This
              and other hypotheses will be tested by re-contacting a national random sample
              of people who completed measures of aversive arousal within the first 10 days
              after the terrorist attack. The proposed survey will include measures of moral
              outrage, moral cleansing, fear of future terrorist attacks, and political
              intolerance, and should provide increased understanding of the psychological
              origin and function of political intolerance. 
