Title       : NER: Electron Beam Emitter SPR for Biosensor Applications Nanoscale Exploratory
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0210738

Award Number: 0210738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Hunt bill.hunt@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, we propose to investigate the feasibility of developing
              biosensor nano-microarrays based on a novel type of surface plasmon resonance
              device. In our approach, U.S. provisional patent 601,283,051 "Field Emission
              Electron Beam Biosensor", nanoscale field emission electrodes will be used as
              electron sources to excite surface plasmons in a thin metal film. Antibodies
              will be immobilized onto the opposing side of the metal film and data on
              molecular binding events will be extracted obtained via the collection of
              spectral data associated with the surface plasmon resonance. We will refer to
              the device as the eSPR for "electron-interrogated SPR." As the bias voltage on
              the field emission electrode of the vacuum nano-electronic device is swept
              through its range, the energy of the electron beam impinging on the metal film
              is also swept and the amplitude of the reflected current represents a spectral
              interrogation of the plasmon resonance. As is the case with commercial systems
              that utilize optical excitation sources, such as the Biacore 3000, the nature
              of the plasmon resonance is perturbed by the biomolecular interaction occurring
              in the vicinity of the metal film.  The overarching goal of our efforts will be
              to produce small, portable or embedded biosensor micro-arrays with the
              capability to detect a multiplicity, of biochemical targets
              simultaneously.

The objectives of our project will be as
              follows:
Understand the physical principles of electron-beam induced surface
              plasmon resonance
biosensors
Develop design strategies and processing methods
              to transfer knowledge from the vacuum
microelectronic domain to eSPR sensors
              that have nanoscale dimensions.

Commercially available emitter arrays
              currently being developed for flat panel display devices will be reviewed and
              characterized to determine suitability for use in this eSPR application.   
              Additional eSPR device characterization will be done with software model tools
              such as CFD-
ACE from CFD Research Corporation.

It has been known for
              approximately fifty years 1 that an electron beam can excite a surface plasmon
              resonance in a metal-dielectric structure. In practice the use of an electron
              beam to induce a surface plasmon resonance as a sensing device has remained
              largely an unexploited area
because of the equipment needed and the
              complications of volatile organic materials in a vacuum.
A review of the
              literature has revealed no studies of this type for eSPR. The reward is
              significant
advancement in biosensing capabilities with the eSPR device. The
              development of micro-emitter
arrays produced by standard microelectronics
              processing methods now brings the possibility of very small sizes, throw away
              costs and custom configurations which mitigate the vacuum-biological mixing
              problems. The advent of a low cost, high sensitivity, hand-held or smaller,
              multi-detector would undoubtedly find wide spread applications in both the
              consumer and industrial markets. The realization of such a biosensing device
              would be a significant advancement over current sensors which neither small in
              size nor inexpensive to produce and operate. The risk is due to the fact that
              the field of biosensing utilizing electron beam emitters is unexplored. Without
              relevant research having been previously conducted knowledge gained from
              optical SPR devices must be selectively transferred to an electron beam device.
              The very nature of a device that contains both vacuum microelectronics and
              biological material presents difficulties but contains large rewards in size
              and cost reduction if successfully combined. 

