Title       : Information Security Education in the Public Sector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0210379

Award Number: 0210379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Bloniarz p.bloniarz@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1668      FED CYBER SERV: SCHLAR FOR SER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will advance the practice of information security and computer
              networking forensics in the public sector, and build the national capacity to
              deal with threats in this area.  The target audience is public sector
              professionals and managers, including law enforcement officials.  Starting with
              existing materials and the expertise of CERIAS at Purdue University (a NSA
              Center of Excellence in Information Assurance Education), the University at
              Albany/SUNY is developing competency-based distance-deliverable courseware in
              two key Information Security content areas, aimed primarily at professional
              needs in the public-sector.  These curricula and materials are designed to be
              flexible, and able to be used in a variety of settings including undergraduate
              and graduate degree programs, certificate programs, and professional education.
               We use these materials in a variety of outlets, including degree and
              certificate programs at the University at Albany and Purdue University, as well
              as public-sector training programs and workshops in New York and Indiana. We
              are using the universities close relationships with the New York and Indiana
              State Police, and the New York State Office for Technology in a partnership to
              develop and test these modules.  In engaging these organizations as partners on
              the project, we bring the resources of the University to bear on critical
              public needs.  In doing so, we are developing a mutually beneficial
              relationship that enable  the university educational programs to be more
              responsive to both public and private sector needs.  The results of this
              project will be disseminated through a number of national outlets, including
              distance education learning communities, and consortia for information security
              education and training.
