Title       : NER: Nanoscale Laser-assisted Deposition and Crystal Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0210361

Award Number: 0210361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99516              (Estimated)
Investigator: Costas P. Grigoropoulos cgrigoro@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1406,1407,1676,1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative NSF 01-157, category NER. Exploratory research will be conducted on
              the laser chemical vapor deposition (LCVD) of nanostructures. Experiments will
              be carried out utilizing near filed scanning optical probes (NSOMs) in order to
              confine the effects of the laser irradiation to lateral dimensions of only a
              few tens of nanometers. The main objective of the research is to accomplish
              deposition and writing of nanofeatures at specified locations via NSOM-LCVD
              processes. Different deposition/substrate systems will be investigated. This
              approach will lead to controlled crystal growth and fabrication of complex
              nanostructures in three dimensions. Insight will be gained on the fundamental
              mechanisms of the complex thermo-chemo-physical phenomena during the nanoscale
              deposition, nucleation and crystal growth processes. 

The production of
              surface nanofeatures has many important applications in critical emerging
              technology fields, including the fabrication of nano-electro-photo-mechanical
              integrated circuits. The goal of the research is to develop novel processes for
              nanostructuring surfaces with tailor-made texture, optical and
              electromechanical properties. These processes will be of ubiquitous use in the
              fabrication and heterogeneous integration of functional nanoscale devices.
              Several existing programs at UC Berkeley will be leveraged in order to broaden
              the impact of the research on education and outreach and utilized to identify,
              recruit and attract graduate student researchers from underrepresented groups
              and minorities. It is expected that the research will form a major part of a
              doctoral dissertation, while undergraduate students will also participate in
              the research as laboratory assistants. The research results, procedures and
              expertise developed in this project will be communicated to both graduate and
              undergraduate students through coursework and seminars (including a freshman
              seminar). 
