Title       : NIRT: Uncovering Deformation Mechanisms of Nanostructured Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0210215

Award Number: 0210215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1230333            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Hemker hemker@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              En (Evan) Ma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Francois Molinari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,5918,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is a collaborative inter-disciplinary research to elucidate and
              model the deformation and fracture mechanisms of nanostructured materials.
              These studies are important for the reliability of next-generation MEMS, NEMS,
              magnetic and ultra-hard films, and micro/nano devices, in general, that are
              closely tied to their mechanical performance. A major objective is to obtain a
              thorough and solid understanding of operative deformation mechanisms operative
              in nanoscale materials. The study is specifically designed to probe the
              mechanical response of materials at nano-scales. Novel designs for in situ TEM
              observations and microsample tensile and transient experiments will be used to
              uncover and characterize the dominant deformation and fracture mechanisms in
              high purity vapor and electro-deposited nanostructured thin films. Multi-scale
              finite element calculations containing physical models will be developed based
              on the experimental findings.  These models along with adaptive meshing and
              cohesive elements with atomistic descriptions of grain boundaries in
              nanocrystalline materials will be used to develop models to predict the
              collective macroscopic response of a compilation of nanocrystalline grains. The
              undergraduate and graduate students and post-doctoral fellows engaged in this
              project would be co- advised. Two parallel teams, each including a post-doc,
              graduate student and an undergraduate research assistant, will be formed and
              mentoring skills will be developed at all levels.

The overriding
              intellectual challenge of the proposed study is to develop a science based
              methodology for measuring, describing and modeling deformation and fracture
              processes at or near nanometer length scales. The results will have application
              in MEMS, NEMS and other technologies where magnetic and ultra-hard films are
              used. This project brings together a synergistic combination of expertise on
              the synthesis of nanocrystalline materials, the electron microscopy,
              microsample testing, and adaptive meshing and cohesive element modeling. The
              importance of teamwork is emphasized and all participants will be educated to
              work in an inter-disciplinary multi-scale environment at the nano scale. 

