Title       : Non-Photochemical Laser-Induced Nucleation to Provide Crystallization-on-Demand
               and to Control Crystal Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0210065

Award Number: 0210065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284329             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Garetz bgaretz@duke.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan S. Myerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant will be used to develop non-photochemical laser-induced nucleation as
              a
method for providing nucleation-on-demand, for controlling crystal
              structure, and for
improving the current understanding of nucleation from
              solution. The basis of this
technique is the discovery, made by the PIs
              several years ago, that intense near-infrared
laser pulses could induce
              crystallization in aged supersaturated solutions of small organic
molecules.
              In cases studied so far, laser-induced nucleation enhances the rate
              of
nucleation by a factor of 10 13 . Even more intriguing is the case of
              aqueous glycine,
which crystallizes into two different polymorphs depending on
              the laser polarization state
(linear vs. circular), which implicates the
              optical electric field as being responsible for the
phenomenon. This
              "polarization switching" of polymorphs represents a clean method
              for
controlling crystal structure. It is hypothesized that the oscillating
              electric field of the
light is aligning solute molecules in a pre-nucleating
              cluster, aiding its organization into a
particular crystal structure. The
              method also has the potential of creating new
polymorphs of some substances.
              New polymorphs constitute novel materials that may
have important industrial
              applications.

Over the next three years the PIs propose to gain a better
              understanding of the mechanism
of non-photochemical laser-induced nucleation,
              by systematically studying its
dependence on illumination parameters such as
              intensity, wavelength, laser pulse width
and polarization state. With the same
              goal, they will also explore the effect of a strong
static electric field on
              supersaturated solutions. Other experiments would focus on
screening a large
              number of solvent/solute systems, as well as melts, to correlate the form
of
              the inducing electric field to the crystal structure that is induced. Such
              screening
would also include a search for new polymorphs.

