Title       : NIRT: Nanostructured Surfaces with Long-Range Order for Controlled Self-Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0210321

Award Number: 0210321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline A. Ross caross@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry I. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frances M. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl V. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a class of methods known as 'templated self-assembly'
              that control the growth and self-assembly of nanostructures on surfaces. This
              will enable formation of monodisperse nanoscale features in precise positions
              on a substrate. This work will be an enabling technology in the design of new
              devices that utilize the properties of quantum dots and other nanoscale
              objects, in which the control of the sizes and spatial positions of the
              features is paramount in optimizing performance. The objective is to use
              lithography to modulate substrate surfaces with features of periodicity of
              order 100 nm, to form templates for the growth and self-assembly of
              nanostructures. In this process, lithography is not used to form the
              nanostructures themselves, but instead is used to form a template that will
              'seed' the formation of nanostructures in particular locations. The
              nanostructures will be considerably smaller in size than the period of the
              template. The goal of the project is to develop the templated self-assembly of
              arrays of nanoscale semiconductor and metal islands controlled by epitaxial
              strain, surface chemistry or topography. The island formation will be achieved
              using both the deposition from the vapor phase and by the spontaneous
              agglomeration of metastable coninuous sold films. This work will be carried out
              by an interdisciplinary team of researchers from MIT in collaboration with IBM
              and Sandia National Laboratories working with a group of students and a
              postdoctoral researcher. The outreach involves a communication effort designed
              to inform the general public about nanotechnology through development of a web
              site and other scientific communication avenues, including the involvement of
              undergraduate students as well as other activities such as school
              visits.
%%%
The research will be focussed on the templated self-assembly of
              arrays of nanoscale semiconductor and metal islands controlled by epitaxial
              strain, surface chemistry or topography. The resulting well-ordered nanoscale
              island arrays will have technological relevance in devices that include
              optically active structures involving plasmon wires, and patterned magnetic
              recording media. A range of other applications will also benefit from the
              methods developed in this proposal; for instance optical devices based on
              arrays of semiconductor quantum dots. The educational goals of this work are to
              contribute to the public understanding of nanotechnology and to the training of
              skilled researchers.
***

