Title       : NIRT: Properties and Applications of Deformed Nanotubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0210899

Award Number: 0210899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Fabian W. Pease Pease@cis.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. Because of their extraordinary
              properties, carbon nanotubes  (CNT) in general have been extensively studied. 
              Local deformations of CNT's appear to exhibit combined electrical, mechanical,
              thermal and even optical properties that offer particularly intriguing promise
              for studying physical effects at the nm scale and for novel sensors and other
              devices.  A team with the requisite diverse backgrounds and capabilities has
              been formed to exploit these new opportunities.

One core proposed activity
              is the modeling of deformed carbon nanotubes and other nanostructures (e.g.
              silicon nanowires) using atomic-scale simulation methods ranging from classical
              interatomic potential to tight-binding, ab-initio quantum simulation, and
              electronic and thermal conductance analysis.  Quasi-static and
              molecular-dynamics methods will be used to study deformation processes as well
              as the indenting of polymer films using a CNT.  The electronic conductance of
              deformed nanotubes will be investigated using Kubo and Landauer methods with
              self-consistent quantum simulations.  Complementing the modeling activity will
              be experimental verification of the modeling results with two eventual
              applications in mind:  1) Nanoscale force and thermal sensors based on a
              nanotube bent in the shape of a hairpin.  Such a device might allow temperature
              distributions to be mapped with a spatial resolution as fine as 10nm and also
              be able to respond to fast molecular dynamic force signals, and 2) A
              'turnstile' electron emitter that employs the deformity in the shank of a
              nanotube to produce local band bending to control the transport of single
              electrons to the tip for field-assisted photoemission.  Such a device would
              have significant impact on electron beam nanolithography through the
              elimination of shot noise and also on ultrahigh speed (100GHz)
              analog-to-digital conversion.

