Title       : Planning Grant - South Africa Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0210204

Award Number: 0210204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willie Pearson willie.pearsonjr@hts.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a U.S.-South Africa planning meeting for an international
              social science workshop to foster collaborative research and education.  The
              planning meeting will take place in Pretoria, South Africa in January 2002. 
              Seven U.S. participants in the planning group wish to establish a more coherent
              and better coordinated international social science agenda, including a focus
              on research, education, and training.  If successful, the goal is to expand the
              collaboration to include other countries in Africa, the Caribbean, and South
              America.

The organizer of the planning meeting, Willie Pearson, Jr. of
              Georgia Tech, will work with his counterpart in South Africa, Tyron Pretorius
              of the University of the Western Cape.  An organizing committee will be
              comprised of an equal number of representatives from the U.S. and South Africa.
               Over the course of five days, the group will determine appropriate location,
              time, and topics for a workshop to be held in late 2002 or early 2003..  While
              in South Africa, the group plans to meet with members of the academic
              (primarily social science faculty), business, and government funding
              communities.  This will allow for the discussion to be placed in a broader
              societal context as it relates to policies and practices that address issues of
              innovation, economic development, social welfare and workforce development. 
              These discussions will serve a vital function by permitting the committee
              members to gain a deeper understanding of the most significant social science
              related issues in South Africa. 

The planning meeting will serve as the
              beginning of a dialogue (both electronic and verbal) among the organizing
              committee members.  The end product of the planning meeting will be a workshop.
               The resulting collaboration and partnerships will enhance discovery and
              understanding between the U.S. and South Africa while promoting teaching,
              training, access to higher education, and curriculum reform.
