Title       : NER: Manipulation and 3D Organization of Nanoparticles Using Dielectrophoresis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0210689

Award Number: 0210689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paschalis Alexandridis palexand@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1414,1633,1676,1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER, and it addresses the manipulation and
              organization of nanoparticles. The organization of colloidal particles into
              one-, two- and three-dimensional ordered structures represents the first step
              towards the fabrication of a large number of miniaturized products of great
              technological importance. Structural attributes such as long-range order, high
              packing density, high surface-to-volume ratio, and reproducible shape and
              dimensions are highly desirable. Force microscopy and optical tweezers have
              been used for the manipulation of a small number of individual particles, while
              colloidal crystallization and templating have been used for particle
              organization; however, big challenges remain. Our goal is to develop a
              methodology that utilizes nonuniform electric fields (dielectrophoresis, DEP)
              to direct the organization of nanoparticles into well-defined two- and
              three-dimensional ordered structures (e.g., pyramids, parallelepipeds) with
              prescribed length scales and composition. Such methodology is scalable and
              readily automated, and would allow the manufacturing of functional materials
              with nanometer-scale order that can be used for their structural properties,
              e.g., photonic materials or high density data recording devices, and/or their
              structure, e.g., prefabricated blocks towards more complicated devices ("bottom
              up" strategy). We will follow a systematic approach, from 2D to 3D order and
              from microparticles to nanoparticles. This research is exploratory and high
              risk since forces developed during the organization process may nullify the DEP
              effect, and the dimensions of the electrodes required for the efficient
              organization of nanoparticles may be challenging to fabricate.

This research
              should lead to significant advancements in the field of nanotechnology by the
              (a) fabrication of nanostructures having hierarchical-order using DEP, and (b)
              development of process design tools for efficient implementation of DEP in
              large-scale manufacturing. The graduate and undergraduate students who will be
              involved in the project will gain valuable experience, while industry (and the
              community) will benefit from the expertise on nanostructures and
              nanomanufacturing developed at the university through this research.
