Title       : NIRT: NER: Biosynthesis of Germanium Oxide Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0210384

Award Number: 0210384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Rorrer rorrergl@che.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-hung Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1676,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER.
 This exploratory proposal embraces two
              themes of the NSF Nanoscale 
Science and Engineering Program, including 1)
              Biosystems at Nanoscale, 2) Manufacturing 
Processes at the Nanoscale. 
The
              overall goal of this proposed research is to demonstrate the feasibility of a
              process 
for biosynthesis of germanium oxide nanoparticles.  The PIs specific
              objectives are to: 1) Establish cultures of photosynthetic marine diatoms known
              to co-assimilate soluble silicon (Si) and germanium (Ge), including
              Cylindrotheca fusimormis, Cyclotella nana,and Phaeodactylum 
tricornutum;  2)
              Develop a two-stage photobioreactor for biological manufacture Ge-oxide
              
nanoparticles by marine diatoms, and identify soluble Si/Ge feeding
              strategies that sustain Ge-
oxide nanoparticle formation; 3) Characterize the
              composition and size of nanoparticles by 
TEM/EDAX; and 4) characterize
              photonic properties of extracted nanoparticles by 
photoluminescence
              spectroscopy before and after thermal annealing or H2 reduction.
The PI
              proposes that the biomineralization capacity of marine diatoms can be harnessed
              to 
manufacture germanium oxide nanoparticles that ultimately could be
              processed into photonic 
materials. The synthesis of quantum dots by the
              atomic assembly of Ge atoms or Ge-oxide 
nanocrystals on silicon substrates is
              an emerging area of nanotechnology, as these light-emitting nanomaterials have
              novel optical / electronic properties. Current technology for manufacture of
              Ge-oxide nanocrystals involves exotic and cumbersome processes at extreme
              conditions, such as laser ablation, cluster beam deposition, or DC magnetron
              sputtering.  In contrast, diatoms could manufacture monodisperse Ge-oxide
              nanoparticles at the atomic scale by biologically-mediated processes at ambient
              conditions, using the nanobiochemical machinery of the cell itself. He proposes
              that Ge-oxide nanoparticle production by diatoms can be accomplished in two
              stages.   In Stage 1, diatoms are grown to high cell density on a soluble Si
              substrate (e.g. silicic acid) to the point of Si depletion in the liquid
              medium.  In Stage 2, soluble germanium (e.g. germanic acid) is continuously
              added to the dense diatom suspension at sub-lethal concentration. Diatoms
              assimilate soluble Ge, and then biologically polymerize soluble Ge to Ge-oxide
              nanospheres, which accumulate within the cell since they cannot be readily
              assimilated into the silica cell wall.  
 
If this proposed research is
              successful, then a biotechnology-derived route to synthesis of 
nanoparticles
              or nanocomposite materials with optoelectronic properties would be demonstrated
              and the impact will be significant. 
The research plan will be co-directed two
              chemical engineers with respective expertise in cell 
culture of marine
              organisms and semiconductor materials synthesis. Graduate students working
              
with the PIs would be uniquely cross trained in two high-technology areas:
              biotechnology and 
electronic materials.   


