Title       : NER: Enhancement of the Efficiency of Thermoelectric Devices via Engineering of
               the Electron-Phonon Interaction in Quantum Dot Superlattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0210282

Award Number: 0210282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander A. Balandin alexb@ee.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the National Science and Engineering
              Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category. The proposal
              focuses on a new approache to enhancement of the thermoelectric figure of merit
              ZT of semiconductor materials via tuning of electron-phonon interaction in
              multiple arrays of semiconductor quantum dots. Quantum dot arrays are potential
              candidates for the thermoelectric "electron transmitting - phonon blocking"
              material. At the same time, in order to achieve a significant ZT improvement
              and compete with conventional thermoelectrics one has to design and fabricate
              quantum dot superlattice where carrier transport is facilitated by the
              formation of carrier mini-bands. Indeed, hopping conductivity typical for
              lateral carrier transport in random quantum dot arrays has very low carrier
              mobility while mini-band transport may lead to very high mobility values,
              particularly if one manages to suppress at least partially the carrier
              scattering via smart mini-band engineering. The important task addressed in
              this proposal is theoretical proof-of-concept investigation of requirements for
              achieving mini-band transport regime and carrier scattering suppression in
              quantum dot superlattices.

Modification of acoustic phonon modes in quantum
              dot arrays due to spatial confinement and boundary scattering leads to a change
              in the phonon density of states, a decrease of the phonon group velocity, and
              corresponding drop of the in-plane lattice thermal conductivity. Acoustic
              phonon confinement, e.g. modification of phonon dispersion due to nanostructure
              boundaries, is much less researched phenomenon than carrier confinement effect.
              At the same time, it can serve as an additional tool to decrease the lattice
              thermal conductivity value and increase the effectiveness of the thermoelectric
              device. Thus, another task of this project is a study of the required structure
              parameters, e.g. dot size, shape, acoustic mismatch, etc., for achieving
              desirable acoustic phonon transport features such as low group velocity along
              direction of interest; resonant phonon scattering conditions; decoupling of
              phonon bath from electrons; etc. New efficient thermoelectric devices based on
              nanostructured materials may have a tremendous impact on a wide range of energy
              needs due to their inherent advantages such as high reliability, light weight,
              compactness, quit operation, and environmental safety.

