Title       : NER: Electrodeposition of Nanostructured Compound Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0210506

Award Number: 0210506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99832              (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Stickney   (Principal Investigator current)
              Uwe Happek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1676,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) proposal was submitted in response to
              the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 01-157). The goal of
              the project is to form superlattice nanostructures using electrochemical atomic
              layer epitaxy (EC-ALE). EC-ALE is based on surface limited electrochemical
              reactions, and is complementary to traditional techniques such as MBE and VPE,
              with the possibility of deposition on odd-shaped surfaces such as tubes, and
              strongly reduced diffusion, since the process takes place at room temperature.
              Specific research objectives are: 1. Growth of compound semiconductor
              superlattices. 2. Electrodeposition of compounds on nano array electrodes. 3.
              Growth of superlattice nanocrystals. 4. Studies of delta doping. The impact and
              significance of this project may be summarized as follows. There is a strong
              demand for increased package density of electronic structures, combined with a
              trend to electrochemical processes for production in the chip industry. The
              search for improved optoelectronic materials, like photovoltaic cells and
              infrared detectors is actively pursued in both the private and government
              sector. On the scientific front, the interest in nanostructured materials
              continues to rise, based on the large parameter-space available to engineer
              novel materials. EC-ALE offers unique approaches to the deposition of nanoscale
              structures, and access to materials that cannot readily be produced by MBE or
              VPE. The proposed project relies on both the deposition and characterization of
              nanostructured semiconductors. A cross-disciplinary approach is taken,
              combining aspects of Chemistry and Physics. 
%%% 
The project addresses basic
              exploratory research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
              technological relevance. An important feature of the program is the integration
              of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
              and technologically significant area. The project is co-supported by the
              MPS/DMR and MPS/CHE Divisions.
*** 

