Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Re-evaluating Collapse: A Study of Urban
               Households from Kazane Hoyuk, Southeast Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0210376

Award Number: 0210376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Wattenmaker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the supervision of Dr. Wattenmaker, Mr. Trella will conduct archaeological
              excavations at the Early Bronze Age (3000-2000 B.C.) city of Kazane Hoyuk, in
              southeastern Turkey.  Previous archaeological investigations have indicated
              that by 2400 B.C., Kazane was the center of an early city-state, incorporating
              many thousands of citizens including surrounding towns and villages.  However,
              around 2100 B.C., the city itself shrank by roughly 60% in size.  The changes
              evident at Kazane are representative of changes in settlement patterns in other
              parts of Upper Mesopotamia (southeastern Turkey, Northern Syria and Northern
              Iraq), where many larger towns and urban centers either contracted to a small
              portion of their previous size or were abandoned completely at the end of the
              third millennium.   These excavations are intended to provide a better
              understanding of both the social and environmental processes leading up to
              these dramatic changes.  

At its apex, Kazane was over 100 hectares (about
              250 acres) in size with a surrounding city wall and a 20-meter high mound at
              the center.  Due to the fact that the city was completely abandoned by around
              1800 BC, the architectural phases dating to the period of the site's
              contraction are just beneath the present-day surface and are easily reached,
              making Kazane an ideal site for this study.  The goal of the excavations is to
              uncover a total of 400 m2 of occupation, split evenly between an elite, or
              upper-class domestic area and a non-elite domestic area.  Pre and
              post-contraction household data from these areas will allow for the monitoring
              of change throughout a range of socio-economic levels within the urban center. 
              

The data collected during these excavations will consist of architectural
              plans, domestic refuse such as discarded animal bones, broken pottery and stone
              tools and environmental data in the form of paleobotanical and phytolith
              samples.  Although some researchers suggest that the collapse of city-states at
              the end of the third millennium was entirely the result of an abrupt change in
              climate, local factors such as the intensification of food production and an
              increased emphasis on the consumption of craft goods may have also played a
              role in pushing large cities like Kazane to their environmental limits, leaving
              them prone to collapse.  In an effort to untangle these connections, shifts in
              food production over time will be monitored through detailed analyses of faunal
              remains and paleobotanical samples.  Changes in craft production and
              consumption will be detected by comparing densities of pottery and other craft
              goods from successive phases of occupation.  Finally, paleobotanical and
              phytolith analyses will detect shifts in the frequencies of drought resistant
              crops and weeds, which will speak to changes in climatic conditions.

This
              research, while certainly shedding light on the collapse of city-states in the
              third millennium B.C., will also speak to larger issues such as the long-term
              effects of agricultural intensification and resource extraction.  It will also
              provide for the continued training of Mr. Trella in both excavation and
              artifact analysis and continue the spirit of collaboration between American
              archaeologists and Turkish museum officials.



  



