Title       : DDIG: The Effects of Economic and Cultural Capital on Perceptions of
               Environmental Risk and Quality of Life among Rural Industrial Community Members
               in Southwest China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0210178

Award Number: 0210178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16070              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stevan Harrell stevehar@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,9200,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Since the economic reforms of the late 1970s, industries located in rural areas
              (township and village enterprises, TVEs) have accounted for a growing
              percentage of China's Gross Domestic Product. However, because of a lack of
              appropriate technology, proper pollution monitoring and sufficient capital,
              TVEs emit 60% of China's carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide and suspended
              particulates.  These pollutants lead to increased levels of emphysema, asthma,
              bronchitis and lung cancer in China's rural areas. At the same time that TVE
              laborers and community residents are faced with relatively increased
              environmental risk, including harmful effects on soil, water, air, plants and
              animals, they are also experiencing a marked improvement in their material
              standard of living. This research project, conducted by a Ph.D. student in
              anthropology at the University of Washington, will be conducted in Futian
              Township, a small industrial community located in China's Sichuan province. The
              student will perform basic tests for air and water quality, and collect data on
              community perceptions of quality of life and environmental risk based on survey
              questionnaires and ethnographic data. Drawing upon the theoretical approaches
              of political ecology and environmental risk perception, these data will be used
              to test hypotheses regarding perceptions of environmental risk.  The study will
              allow general extrapolations to be made about similar rural industrial
              communities throughout China and in other countries where rapid development
              coincides with environmental degradation, and will contribute to understanding
              those factors that may mitigate or exacerbate environmental degradation.
