Title       : NIRT: Development, Functionalization, and Assembly of Nanoscale Biological
               Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0210332

Award Number: 0210332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1050000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Seunghun Hong shong@phy.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peng Xiong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prescott B. Chase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephan von Molnar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. We propose a project to develop
              nanoscale biological sensors with single molecule detection capability and,
              more importantly, a novel technique for nanoscale functionalization and
              assembly of these sensors. The devices will consist of several nanoscale
              building blocks: 1) ultra-sensitive semiconductor Hall gradiometer capable of
              detecting a single 5-nm diameter magnetic nanoparticle (magnetic detection); 2)
              nanoscale field effect transistor (FET) based on newly developed semiconducting
              metal oxide nanobelts (electrical detection). We will employ dip-pen
              nanolithography (DPN) to functionalize individual solid state devices to detect
              specific biological substances. Furthermore, DPN-decorated solid substrates
              will be utilized to assemble nanoscale building blocks onto specific patterns
              from solution.
The practicality of any biological sensor is governed by its:
              1) selectivity, 2) sensitivity, and 3) environmental compatibility. We have
              recently demonstrated that sub-micrometer Hall gradiometers, made out of
              GaAs/AlGaAs two-dimensional electron gas, can detect a single 10-nm-diameter
              magnetic particle. They are ideally suited for detecting the presence of
              adsorbed biomolecules tagged with magnetic nanoparticles. We will fabricate
              gradiometers out of InAs heterostructures for the optimal performance under
              ambient conditions. For electrical detection of biological molecules, we intend
              to fabricate nanoscale FET's from a group of metal oxide nanobelts. In this
              case, charged molecules adsorbed on the functionalized nanobelt surfaces can be
              detected by measuring the conductivity change of the nanobelt
              junctions.
Utilizing DPN, the nanoscale Hall gradiometer surface and nanobelt
              FET channel can be functionalized to create specific affinity for desired
              biomolecules, which allows us to build highly selective sensing devices.
              Furthermore, multiple nano-FET's can be assembled onto specific locations on a
              substrate or in a circuit via surface-templated nano-assembly strategy. In this
              method, the solid substrate will be first functionalized with chemical binding
              groups with specific affinity to the nanobelts, and then the substrates will be
              used to capture the nanobelts from their solution.
Successful execution of the
              proposed program will not only produce several highly sensitive novel
              biosensors with immediate application values, but also create a new paradigm
              for biosensor fabrication and assembly that may be widely applicable in many
              other systems. To accomplish the stated goals, we have assembled a team of six
              researchers in biology, physics, materials science, and electrical engineering
              from three institutions. This team provides a unique interdisciplinary
              combination and possesses all the necessary expertise and tools for the
              project. In addition, this interdisciplinary research project will provide many
              students a valuable opportunity to collaborate with researchers in other
              disciplines.


