Title       : The Articulation of Political Strategies and Regional Structure in the
               Teuchitlan Tradition of Western Mexico 2003 Season
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0210871

Award Number: 0210871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78009              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher S. Beekman cbeekman@carbon.cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Christopher Beekman and his
              colleagues will conduct archaeological field and laboratory research at the
              ancient settlement of Navajas in the highland lake district of western Mexico.
              The project brings together specialists in archaeology, palynology, phytolith,
              and macrobotanical remains to carry out a coordinated investigation of a
              stratified society in ancient Mesoamerica. This is part of a continuing program
              of NSF funded research directed towards a better understanding of cooperation
              and competition among elites in West Mexican society from around A.D. 100-900.
              These issues are being addressed in the Tequila valleys of highland central
              Jalisco, where a series of transitions back and forth between intensive
              factional competition, and its apparent suppression in a consolidated polity,
              offer an opportunity to study the mechanisms by which elite competition and
              individual aggrandizement are being harnessed and redirected in a way that
              promotes cooperation and the formation of a state. This is particularly
              significant because these changes in local strategy relate to larger economic
              changes in the region, as the increased use of imported goods that accompanies
              local competition appears to coincide with the formation of long distance trade
              networks to obtain those goods. Specifically, field research will focus on wide
              area excavations across multiple structures and open spaces in public
              architecture at the late settlement of Navajas, which will be used to
              complement prior NSF funded research at the earlier settlement of Llano Grande.
              The excavations will provide data regarding labor organization and the
              construction of the public architecture, and the activities taking place both
              in public spaces and within the more restricted structures. Laboratory analyses
              of artifacts and soil samples conducted at several different universities will
              follow up with three important tasks: to determine the origins of artifacts
              recovered, to develop a refined chronology, and to test existing proposals that
              activities within the public architecture may have related to agricultural
              ritual. Dr. Beekman and his collaborators will focus on the following
              questions: 1) What changes occurred in the organization of labor and the
              association of descent groups with sections of the architecture? 2) What
              activities took place in these public spaces and how did this change between
              the periods of consolidation and decline of this society? 3) To what degree may
              these very local strategies by elites have corresponded to regional changes in
              economic or political networks? 
