Title       : Structural Diversity Based on Cyclopropane Scaffolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0210918

Award Number: 0210918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Taylor taylor.61@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Taylor's group has successfully used molecules containing homoallylic
              alcohol and allylsilane functional groups to prepare enantiomerically pure
              cyclopropanes and oligocyclopropanes.  In the current award period, they will
              study the mechanisms of these cyclopropane forming reactions and use that
              understanding to control future reactivity and selectivity studies.  In the
              current project period, this group will be extending their cyclopropane forming
              methodology to the use of silyl enol ethers as cation traps in addition to the
              allyl silane traps used previously.  This change will provide access to
              cyclopropyl aldehydes which can be further functionalized.  Vinyl cyclopropyl
              alcohols will also be prepared and elaborated into oxepene core structures
              found in marine natural products.  Lastly, vinyl cyclopropanes will be studied
              as substrates for olefin cross metathesis.  This methodology will be used to
              prepare oligocyclopropanes and cyclopropane containing fatty acids.  The fatty
              acids can be used to study membrane and monolayer stabilities. 

With this
              award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
              research of Dr. Richard E. Taylor of the Department of Chemistry at the
              University of Notre Dame.  Dr. Taylor will work on the development of chemical
              reactions which can be used to prepare organic molecules containing a
              cyclopropane ring.  Cyclopropanes are three membered rings containing three
              carbon atoms.  This functional group is found in a number of molecules with
              pharmaceutical and agrochemical uses.  The cyclopropane ring forming reactions
              developed by Professor Taylor and his research group produce cyclopropanes
              which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make only one
              of the two possible forms (a single enantiomer).  Development of this family of
              reactions is one of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical and
              agrochemicals industries today.  Students trained during the course of this
              work will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical and speciality chemicals
              industries which now produce a number of single enantiomer compounds.
              






