Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Large-Scale Fluorescent Tagging of Full-Length Genes to
               Characterize Native Expression Patterns and Subcellular Targeting of
               Arabidopsis Proteins of Unknown Funct
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0210992

Award Number: 0210992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1580000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Vitaly Citovsky vitaly.citovsky@stonybrook.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Seung Rhee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Ehrhardt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Natasha V. Raikhel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1131      ARABIDOPSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              AWARD ABSTRACT:
This pilot project will develop a high-throughput strategy to
              analyze native expression patterns and subcellular localization of Arabidopsis
              gene products of unknown function. This strategy, Fluorescent Tagging of
              Full-Length Proteins (FTFLP), will comprise five major steps: (1) Selection of
              "functionally unassigned" Arabidopsis genes and prediction of their protein
              structure and suitable site for fluorescent tag insertion (2) Amplification of
              each gene in two parts, with the junction between the two parts corresponding
              to our chosen insertion site for the fluorescent tag(3) Introduction of the
              fluorescent tag, yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) using a triple overlap PCR
              approach (4) Insertion of PCR products into binary vectors (5) Production of
              transgenic Arabidopsis lines and analysis of expression pattern and
              intracellular localization for each tagged protein. As a pilot approach, the
              project aims to analyze a statistically significant number of genes to support
              the applicability to a subsequent wider study. To this end, approximately 800
              genes (listed at the already operational project website
              http://arabidopsis.org/info/2010_projects/proteintagging.html) were selected
              from a total of ca. 8,000 unknown genes. This pilot list was chosen based on
              the following sequentially-applied criteria: 1) have matching full-length cDNA,
              2) are annotated as 'unknown protein' or 'putative protein', and 3) do not have
              any Gene Ontology annotations. The selected genes reflect the diversity of all
              the unknown Arabidopsis genes with respect to plant specificity, predicted
              domain and/or gene family information, and availability of matching full-length
              cDNA sequences.
FTFLP as a tool for functional proteomics offers three
              significant advantages: it focuses on genes of unknown function, it produces
              internally-tagged full length proteins that are more likely to exhibit faithful
              intracellular localization, and it utilizes native promoters to allow us to
              determine tissue specificity. Three deliverables will be offered to the
              research community: 
1) Expression vectors harboring full-length sequences for
              each gene under its native promoter and tagged with YFP flanked by unique
              restriction sites,
2) Arabidopsis transgenic lines expressing each construct,
              and 
3) A website and a searchable database containing information about the
              lines and constructs, including the gene sequences highlighted with positions
              of primers and tagging sites, vector construct information, images and text
              descriptions of the protein expression pattern and intracellular localization,
              and protocols and standard operation procedures in experimentation, analysis,
              and interpretation. Also, a Reference Protein Subcellular Localization Map will
              be constructed using fluorescently-tagged proteins with known intracellular
              targeting. 
These resources will be available to the public through two
              unrestricted venues: DNA constructs and transgenic seeds will be distributed
              through the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC) whereas gene
              sequences and expression and subcellular localization data, including
              fluorescence microscopy images, will be disseminated via the project website
              integrated into The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR). Importantly, this
              sharing of the resources and results of this project through ABRC and TAIR,
              respectively, will take place on a continuous basis as the deliverables become
              available. Announcements on the availability of new resources will be made
              through such electronic media as the Bionet USENET newsgroups and parallel
              e-mail lists.
This project significantly advances the overall objectives of
              the 2010 Project by characterizing on a large scale the expression and
              subcellular localization of unknown Arabidopsis genes. Our understanding of
              Arabidopsis biology will be glaringly incomplete without such knowledge. In
              addition, this project has a broader impact on the society and science. Once
              this pilot project demonstrates the feasibility of the proposed approach, it
              will serve a basis for developing a laboratory curriculum for use in cell
              biology training of high school students and teachers as well as beginning
              investigators at the CSHL DNA Learning Center and the annual Arabidopsis
              Molecular Genetics Course, and at the biannual UCR Plant Cell Biology course.
              Finally, a teaching outreach program with community colleges will involve
              undergraduates in summer research. Thus, our program will bridge genomic
              approaches with cell biology in the laboratory and classroom, and generate
              important novel information and tools to characterize the Arabidopsis
              proteome.

