Title       : NER: Fabrication of MgB2 Quantum Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0210447

Award Number: 0210447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell W. Giannetta russg@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexey Bezryadin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to  the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category.  The proposal
               focuses on a novel, scanned probe approach to the growth of superconducting
              MgB2 wires and quantum dots.  Superconductive electronics has immense appeal
              since it can be extremely fast and possesses inherently low power dissipation. 
               The 39 K transition temperature of MgB2 in concert with its negligible grain
              boundary scattering (the central limitation of the copper oxide
              superconductors) make it the most ideal material known for high temperature
              superconductive nanoelectronics.   MgB2 electronic devices with a minimum
              feature size of 100 nm have already been
made using conventional fabrication
              techniques.   Our approach will use a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) to
              directly react Mg with B in the presence of an intense tip-induced electric
              field.   This approach has been used to locally oxide metals with features as
              small as 5 nm.   Our project will attempt to apply this technique to the growth
              of MgB2.    The project will require the growth of very pure, thin boron films,
              the identificationof efficient chemical precursors for scanned probe growth,
              the use of an ultrahigh vacuum STM for scanned growth, photolithography to
              produce submicron scale contact pads and low noise, low current cryogenic
              measurements of resulting devices.  In addition to its very small ultimate
              feature size, the STM approach permits the direct fabrication of arbitrary
              shaped structures without the complications of conventional lithography.
              
	
Several important physical problems will be explored.  In extremely narrow
              wires, thermal and quantum fluctuations will play a crucial role in the
              conduction process.  In a quantum dot geometry the discreteness of
electrical
              charge becomes paramount.  In a device made from a complex superconductor like
              MgB2 these processes are only partially understood but will have a direct
              bearing on the operation of future nanoscale devices.  A frontier scientific
              question that will be explored here is how the mechanism for superconductivity
              itself can be altered at in sufficiently small devices.  There is growing
              evidence that MgB2 is an admixture of two interpenetrating superconductors. 
              How this unique "two gap" behavior is affected by shrinking the size of the
              system, and what new possibilities it holds for device operation and for
              designing new superconductors will all be questions that we hope to initiate
              with this project.  

