Title       : NER: Universally Programmable Intelligent Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0210094

Award Number: 0210094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64117              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce J. MacLennan maclennan@cs.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CCR-0210094
MacLennan, Bruce
NER: "NER:  Universally Programmable Intelligent
              Matter"
Intelligent matter is any material in which individual molecules or
              supra-molecular clusters function as agents to accomplish some purpose.
              Intelligent matter may be solid, liquid or gaseous, although liquids and
              membranes are perhaps most typical. Universally programmable intelligent matter
              is made from a small set of molecular building blocks that are universal in the
              sense that they can be rearranged to accomplish any purpose that can be
              described by a computer program.  In effect, a computer program controls the
              behavior of the material at the molecular level. In some applications the
              molecules self-assemble a desired nanostructure by "computing" the structure
              and then becoming inactive. In other applications the material remains active
              so that it can respond, at
the molecular level, to its environment or to other
              external conditions. An extreme case is when programmable supra-molecular
              clusters act as autonomous agents to achieve some end.  Accomplishing the goals
              of universally programmable intelligent matter will require the identification
              of a small set of molecular building blocks that is computationally universal.
              The SK calculus (a kind of combinatory logic) is a formal system that
              demonstrates that such sets exist.
It is capable of universal computation, but
              makes use of only two simple operations on graphs, which are suggestive of
              molecular processes. Computer scientists have investigated the SK calculus
              extensively for several decades as a basis for massively parallel computer
              architectures, and the translation of high-level functional computer programs
              into SK structures is well understood.  However, the SK calculus may not be the
              best choice for programmable intelligent matter.  This exploratory research
              project has four principal objectives: (1) to develop a model of computation
              compatible with the constraints of molecular processes; (2) to identify at
              least two universal sets of building blocks for programmable intelligent
              matter; (3) to develop methods for interfacing
with additional molecular
              building blocks for sensing conditions and causing effects in the external
              environment; (4) to develop prototype simulation software to investigate
              characteristics peculiar to molecular computation.
Some of the methods are
              theoretical: (1) the construction of a mathematical model of computation
              compatible with the constraints of molecular processes, and (2) a mathematical
              investigation of the properties (such as computational universality) of some
              simple graph operations resulting in at least two universal sets of building
              blocks. The theoretical investigation will be supplemented by (3) the
              development of simulation software to investigate stochastic and other novel
              factors affecting computation in a molecular context, and (4) the use of the
              simulator to demonstrate the use of programmable intelligent matter to
              implement several useful nanostructures, such as nanotubes and membranes with
              active channels and cilia.
Since the resulting building blocks for universal
              programmable matter are expected to be individually simple and few in number,
              this project will provide the information needed by chemists to identify or
              synthesize the substances sufficient to implement universally programmable
              intelligent matter. This will open the way toward the ability to produce
              materials with a desired nanostructure and behavior as easily as we program
              computers today. This project will take a first step toward a systematic
              approach to nanotechnology that will failitate its rapid development.

