Title       : NER: Molecular-To-Microscale Investigation Of Microbial Habitats: Exploratory
               Studies Using Molecular Probes and Microcomputed Tomography and Fluorescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0210819

Award Number: 0210819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94735              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peggy A. O'Day oday@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. Craig Cary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              O'Day

NER- 0210819

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale
              Science and Engineering initiative NSF 01-157, category NER, and is co-funded
              by the GEO and BIO Directorates. A significant challenge to integrating the
              study of microbiological and geochemical systems lies in visualizing,
              identifying, and measuring chemical reactions and feedbacks at appropriate
              length and time scales within their natural environments.  This proposal seeks
              to explore a novel combination of molecular biological probes and synchrotron
              X-ray micro-computed tomography (m-CT) and fluorescence to obtain complementary
              information about physical and chemical microhabitats and microbial
              distribution in natural systems in two and three dimensions.  Microbial
              communities are found in pore spaces and on mineral surfaces at length scales
              corresponding to individual bacteria and bacterial communities (~1-100 mm). 
              Chemical reactions involving microorganisms and aqueous solutions, colloids,
              and minerals take place at the molecular level, but the interaction volumes of
              microbial communities may range from ~5-1000 mm3 or more.  Conventional
              examination techniques such as electron or fluorescence microscopy require
              destructive sample preparation methods that can severely alter biological and
              physical structures.  The aim of this exploratory study is to investigate a
              method for examining the distribution of microbial communities in situ and in
              three dimensions, and to develop complementary techniques for coupling
              element-specific spectroscopic probes and molecular biological probes.  We
              propose to use nucleic acid biological probes directed against rRNA targets and
              tagged with heavy elements (iodine, gold, and silver) to map the spatial
              distribution of microbial communities within natural porous material using
              density-contrast synchrotron m-CT.  In addition, we will investigate the
              ability of fluorescence m-CT measurements to map specific element distribution
              in two dimensions using these target elements and those of the mineral
              substrates.  Based on density contrast and fluorescence mapping, we will
              explore the spatial distribution of microbial communities and mineral
              substrates, and attempt XANES spectroscopy of specific elements to gain
              chemical information.  The coupling of physical and chemical data in two and
              three dimensions, with information content ranging from molecular to micron
              scale, will enable innovative future studies of fundamental processes involving
              element cycling among geologic fluids, minerals, and microbes.

