Title       : NER: Chemical Probing of Biosensor Nano-environments using Dynamic AFM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0210205

Award Number: 0210205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Schneider schneider@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Biosensors are becoming increasingly important for genomic analysis, detection
              of warfare agents, and medical diagnostics. To optimize the performance of
              these devices, new tools must be developed to characterize the molecular-level
              phenomena that underlie their function. This exploratory nanotechnology
              proposal aims to develop a new method to measure nanoscopic properties of
              biosensor surfaces, utilizing the ultrafine resolution of atomic force
              microscopy (AFM) in dynamic mode.

Biosensors must perform two functions at
              once. They must encourage the binding of specific analytes while discouraging
              the binding of adventitious material. Typically, these goals are achieved by
              building heterogeneous surfaces with antifouling polymers together with
              receptors specific for desired analytes. To maximize yield without sacrificing
              selectivity, an optimal density and thickness of polymer must be applied to the
              surface. In this work, the PI hopes to measure the nanoscopic energy landscape
              that a biomolecule traverses near the sensor surface in an attempt to guide the
              rational design of biosensors. For a realistic measurement, both polymer steric
              interactions and specific ligand-receptor interactions must be measured
              simultaneously.

The dynamic AFM method involves oscillating the AFM
              cantilever and measuring the amplitude attenuation as the sample approaches the
              AFM tip. Amplitude attenuation is more sensitive to polymer steric forces than
              deflection, so the sharp tips required for specific ligand-receptor
              measurements can be used. Here, the PI will measure dynamic and conventional
              AFM force curves in a model biosensor system. Using a theoretical description
              of cantilever oscillation, we hope to demonstrate the sensitivity and accuracy
              of the dynamic method.

If successful, the project will have an impact on
              many fronts. First, the technique will provide a unique nanoscopic probe of
              heterogeneous surfaces pertinent to biosensors. It will also be able to measure
              polymer steric forces with nanometer lateral resolution, with implications for
              lubrication and colloidal processing. Finally, since epithelial and bacterial
              cell surfaces also contain specific adhesion receptors together in a polymeric
              environment, the dynamic AFM force method may emerge as a powerful tool in the
              study of cell-cell and cell-surface adhesion.

