Title       : NIRT: Nanotubes and nanowires as biological sensors and actuators: Approaching
               the single-molecule limit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0210806

Award Number: 0210806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1449999            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Hamers rjhamers@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lloyd M. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel W. van der Weide  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering" (NSF 01-157).  The aim of this project is the development and
              use of biologically modified nanotubes and nanowires as electrical probes of
              biological activity.  Researchers will develop a new type of nanoscale probe,
              the "nano-coax", that can serve as a molecular probe only nanometers in
              dimensions. This new probe involves attaching biomolecules specifically to the
              end of silicon nanowires and carbon nanotubes, providing a very highly
              localized sensing region. The electrical response of the nanoprobe will be
              measured over a wide frequency range from kilo-Hertz to Giga-Hertz.  The
              researchers will also explore the use of the nanoprobe as a molecular-scale
              actuator, using an applied electrical control signal to induce a change in
              activity of biological molecules tethered to the end.  The research involves an
              interdisciplinary team of chemists, molecular biologists, and electrical
              engineers.  The outcome of the research will be the development of a new set of
              bioanalytical tools able to rapidly detect biological species with
              unprecedented selectivity and sensitivity approaching the single-molecule
              limit. Successful use of nanoprobes as biological actuators would permit the
              direct manipulation of biological processes at the nanometer scale. The
              research involves a large component of graduate and undergraduate education and
              training.  Graduate students will work together with faculty and undergraduate
              students as part of an interdisciplinary team. Faculty researchers will train
              graduate students and undergraduate students in state-of-the-art methods of
              materials fabrication and biological analysis, providing a workforce
              well-trained for industrial and academic research.

This project is aimed at
              the development of a revolutionary kind of biological sensor.  Recent advances
              have led to the development of tiny wires ("nanowires") only a few nanometers
              in diameter.   In this research project, an interdisciplinary team of
              scientists will fabricate nanowires and then attach biological molecules, such
              as DNA and proteins, to them.  The researchers will then investigate the
              electrical signals generated when these "nanoprobes" interact with other
              biological molecules.  The research has the potential to lead to major advances
              in the development of highly sensitive detectors able to identify minute
              quantities (perhaps as little as a single molecule) of biological molecules. 
              The researchers will also explore the use of  nanometer-sized probes to induce
              changes in biological activity, with long-term potential for biomedical
              applications. This project is co-supported by the Division of Materials
              Research, the Chemistry Division, the Division of Bioengineering and
              Environmental Systems, and the Chemical and Transport Systems Division.


