Title       : Conjugated Ionomers: Internal Compensation as a Route to Engineering Charge
               Depletion Layers and Interfaces Between Dissimilarly Doped Conjugated Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0210078

Award Number: 0210078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Lonergan lonergan@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Charge depletion at semiconductor interfaces forms the foundation for modern
              microelectronic devices.  This award seeks to explore the analogy between
              charge depletion in inorganic semiconductor devices and those based on
              conjugated polymers.  The central theme of the proposed work is the use of
              internally compensated doped conjugated polymers to engineer charge depletion
              layers at interfaces.  Internally compensated polymers, unlike traditionally
              doped conjugated polymers, do not contain any mobile counter-ions.  In the
              presence of mobile counter-ions, charge depletion layers cannot be supported
              and the interfaces where they are most likely to be generated are not stable
              with respect to redox reactions.  The proposed work centers on polyacetylene
              ionomers with a controlled density of functional groups and prepared by the
              ring-opening metathesis copolymerization of functionalized cyclooctatetraenes. 
              These materials are to be used to conduct the first comprehensive study of
              charge depletion at conjugated polymer interfaces as a function of dopant
              density and to explore the possibility of all polymeric pn junctions.  These
              studies will lay the fundamental foundation for the design of a variety of
              devices based on doped conjugated polymers.

As in the initial term of the
              project, new educational initiatives are proposed to keep pace with the
              continued convergence of basic science and engineering.  In particular,
              continuing work on the development of summer undergraduate camps is proposed. 
              These camps continuing work on the development of summer undergraduate camps is
              proposed.  These camps (Chip Camp and Poly Camp) introduce chemistry students
              to highly relevant topics in materials science that are often overlooked in a
              traditional chemistry education.

