Title       : NER: Engineering of InAs Quantum Dot Ensembles Using Interference of Optical
               Surface Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0210279

Award Number: 0210279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90344              (Estimated)
Investigator: Serge Oktyabrsky soktyabrsky@uamail.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 2878      SPECIAL PROJECTS - CCR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Engineering of InAs Quantum Dot Ensembles Using Interference of Optical
Surface
              Waves

This project addresses the problem of inhomogeneous broadening of the
              size
distribution of quantum dot (QD) epitaxial semiconductor ensembles
              formed
via a stress-driven Volmer-Weber or Stranski-Krastanov growth
              mechanism. The
uniformity and narrow size distribution of the QDs are the
              major challenges
for the utilization of QD structures in optoelectronic
              devices. The primary
goal of this proposal is to evaluate the feasibility of
              nanoscale control of
the nucleation process of InAs QDs on a GaAs surface
              using the interference
of the optical surface waves. The interference pattern
              will be generated on
the surface of the substrate using a pulsed UV laser
              during the growth of
QDs by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). The pattern, with a
              typical period of
few hundred nm, will be created using two different optical
              schemes based
on: (i) the interference of the incident wave with the scattered
              coherent
surface wave; and (ii) the interference of the incident waves with
              two
surface waves coupled to the split laser beams. The optical
              interference
pattern will modulate periodically the surface properties of the
              substrate
at 100-200 nm level. The nucleation of QDs will be controlled
              through either
substrate temperature modulation, thereby destroying the
              nucleation clusters
in the antinode of the standing wave pattern, or through
              undulation of the
surface by laser ablation to control the surface energy. The
              100-nm
modulation scale is expected to form a template for initial QD
              nucleation,
and the subsequent evolution of the QD ensemble will be
              driven
thermodynamically towards higher density of dots, (3-10)e10 cm-2.
              The
important features of the in-situ optical impact are that it does not
              leave
any residues on the surface, can be conducted during the growth process,
              and
can be adjusted to introduce the minimum defect density.
We will
              systematically investigate the factors (growth temperature, As flux,
growth
              rate, laser power, etc.) that provide uniform and narrow QD
distribution and
              efficient luminescence. The samples grown using optically
controlled
              nucleation will be studied by the in-situ RHEED, as well as STM,
TEM and
              photoluminescence methods to reveal the correlations between
              growth
parameters, and the structure and properties of the QD systems.
              The
laboratories at the Institute have all the necessary equipment for the
              QD
characterization. This includes state-of-the-art field-emission
              ultra-high
resolution TEM, focused ion beam station, surface analysis tools,
              five STM
tools configured for different imaging modes and environment
              including
ultra-high vacuum, and unique ultrasonic force microscope.
The
              successful completion of the proposed work would have a significant
impact on
              the performance of various optoelectronic components. The method
will allow
              the growth of QD structures with sharp size distribution and high
radiative
              recombination efficiency. For example, the QD structures will be
used as
              active media for laser diodes with superior performance
characteristics, such
              as higher efficiency, higher thermal stability, higher
modulation frequency
              and increased reliability. 

