Title       : NIRT: Size Dependence of Phase Transitions in Nanocrystalline Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0210785

Award Number: 0210785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1080000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Haglund richard.haglund@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Aziz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard C. Feldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Lukehart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,1767,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering" (NSF 01-157).  This research project aims to explore:  1) the
              nature of structure-property changes or phase transitions that occur in solid
              materials in response to temperature, pressure, electromagnetic fields or
              mechanical strain;  2) the size dependence of phase transitions in oxide
              nanocrystals, focusing on electronic and lattice dynamics during the phase
              transition;  3) the effects of interfacial energy and strain; and 4)  the
              influence of pressure, temperature, impurity doping and defect density on phase
              stability. These studies will  produce a multi-dimensional phase diagrams for
              nanoscale oxide materials. In addition to training graduate students and
              postdoctoral scholars in advanced research techniques relevant both to science
              and technology, the combination of chemistry, materials science and physics
              research issues will provide an intellectually rich educational environment.
              The project brings together a multi-institutional team of faculty, postdoctoral
              scholars and graduate students from chemistry, materials science and physics to
              explore nanoscale  materials and their possible uses in technology. Outreach
              through Vanderbilt University's Explorations Web site will showcase this NSF
              project  for the general public. Connections to the Owen Graduate School of
              Management will couple into the rapidly growing business interests in
              nanoscience and nanotechnology.

Understanding structural phase
              transformations in oxide nanocrystals is important to the development of a
              number of important materials technology areas that include catalysis,
              separation technologies, phosphor materials, thin-film electronics, photonics,
              and environmental remediation. Students trained in these areas will compete
              very favorably for jobs in high priority areas of interest to the academic,
              industrial, and government laboratory sectors. This project is co-supported by
              the Division of Materials Research, the Chemistry Division, the Physics
              Division, and the Chemical and Transport Systems Division.

