Title       : SGER: Molecular Design of Intelligent Sensors for Selected Chemical Warfare
               Agents using Support Vector Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0210968

Award Number: 0210968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Omowunmi A. Sadik osadik@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walker Land  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This SGER grant is awarded to Professors Omowunmi Sadik and Walker Land of SUNY
              Binghamton by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program (MPS) to apply
              Support Vector Machines (a computational intelligence technique) to analytical
              data on chemical warfare simulants.   The analytical data originates from a
              hybrid sensor based on gas chromatography coupled with microarrays of
              conducting polymer sensing elements, a so-called electronic nose.  The data
              from these arrays is complex and is appropriately studied using advanced
              pattern recognition techniques.  This collaboration connects an analytical
              chemist with a computer scientist.  The exploratory aspect is the opportunity
              for analytical chemists to take advantage of the advent of the new
              computational intelligence method, which has been successfully applied by the
              coPI to breast cancer detection.

So called "electronic nose" devices have
              the potential to serve as sensitive and selective detectors of mixtures of
              chemicals.  There are many applications of sensors, including homeland
              security, ascertaining food quality, environmental monitoring, and production
              process and transportation engineering.  More sophisticated data analysis is
              required to bring next generation sensors into fruition.  The application of
              computer intelligence methods is promising in this regard.
