Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Power Strategies at Early Postclassic
               Sitio El Coyote, Sta. Barbara, Honduras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0210924

Award Number: 0210924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11270              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey E. Braswell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, William McFarlane will conduct an
              eight-month field season of archaeological research at the site of El Coyote
              located in the Cacaulapa Valley of northwestern Honduras.  Founded during the
              Late Formative Period (200 BC - AD 200), El Coyote remained a regional center
              into the Early Postclassic (AD 900 - 1200).  This is noteworthy as the Early
              Postclassic has been viewed as a transitional period in the prehistory of
              southeastern Mesoamerica, characterized by socio-political decentralization and
              an end of nucleated settlement. Data in hand suggest the Early Postclassic
              community at El Coyote was a centralized village boasting a large ceremonial
              center, a well defined set of ritual practices, organized production locales,
              and long-distance trade connections to greater Mesoamerica.  Current models of
              the Early Postclassic cannot account for the existence of such a site. It is
              clear an individual or group at El Coyote was able to maintain community
              solidarity when other sites in the region were abandoned.   It is therefore
              imperative to refine current models of Honduran prehistory by documenting the
              social, political, and economic organization of El Coyote and charting the
              trajectory of the community through time. Early Postclassic investigations
              directed by William McFarlane, including excavation of ceremonial,
              administrative, and residential structures, mapping of archaeological materials
              throughout the immediate area, and artifact analysis will compliment on-going
              research by the parent project, Proyecto Valle de Cacaulapa.  
	
In addition
              to refining current models of Early Postclassic northwestern Honduras, the
              research design will address broader issues of human interaction.   The central
              question: how do individuals and groups use diverse resources to seize and
              maintain positions of power within and between communities, is considered from
              three different perspectives.  The first perspective emphasizes the use of
              ideological resources, such as religious practices, foreign symbols, and
              imported concepts of statecraft by individuals or groups to create social
              distance between the leaders and the community.  The second perspective
              considers resource allocation strategies that impact the economy.  Control over
              the importation, production, and distribution of raw materials and commodities
              is frequently cited as a central feature of complex societies. The final
              perspective focuses upon attempts to develop and promote activities that
              reinforce community solidarity, thus, tying polity members together.  It is
              expected that during the 3 centuries investigated by this project various power
              strategies were implemented with diverse success rates thus providing an index
              from which to rate the viability of successive leader's social, economic, and
              political policies. 
	
The Early Postclassic research project stands to
              contribute to our understanding of a little researched and poorly understood
              period of Honduran prehistory.  Further, investigations of El Coyote provide an
              opportunity to examine how actions rooted in diverse sources of power can have
              dramatic consequences relative to long-term regional developments. It is hoped
              that a better understanding of the power struggles within and between political
              groups in the past and present may be achieved. 



