Title       : Assessing the Accuracy of Self-reported Pollution Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0210069

Award Number: 0210069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83032              (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Hamilton jayth@pps.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott de Marchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Information provision is increasingly used as a regulatory tool. The
              
Environmental Protection Agency's Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) program
              
requires manufacturing facilities that handle threshold amounts of specific
              
chemicals to report yearly their releases and transfers of  these toxic
              
substances. This project investigates how accurate TRI data are and what
              
factors give rise to errors or evasion in self-reporting.

The proposed
              research uses two different methods to assess the accuracy 
of TRI data. For
              12 of the chemicals covered by TRI reporting, the EPA samples 
air
              concentrations of these chemicals using a network of monitors across the
              
country. Geographic information systems (GIS) software allow one to determine
              
which polluting facilities are within range of the EPA's monitors. The
              
researchers can thus compare how measured trends in pollution from monitoring
              
data match self-reported trends on air releases by the polluting facilities.
              To 
investigate potential divergences between the monitoring data and TRI
              figures, 
the analysis will also explore how the nature of the surrounding
              community, 
state environmental enforcement, and company and facility-level
              characteristics 
affect the apparent accuracy of the reported TRI air
              emissions. The comparison 
of reported TRI figures with expected distributions
              of emissions digits offers 
a second way to assess the accuracy of pollution
              data. The key insight is that 
if facilities are estimating emissions with a
              downward bias, the overall 
distribution of digits will not follow the same
              pattern as the actual digits in 
the monitor data. This research will
              demonstrate the degree that selected 
physical monitoring and analysis of data
              patterns for statistical bias can help 
determine the accuracy of
              self-reported data.

