Title       : NIRT: Two- and Three-Dimensional Assembly of Nanoelectronic Components by DNA
               Scaffolding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0210844

Award Number: 0210844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Kiehl kiehl@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nadrian C. Seeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              T. Andrew Taton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Boris I. Shklovskii  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karin M. Musier-Forsyth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1674      NANOSCALE: INTRDISCPL RESRCH T
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT.  An interdisciplinary team will
              investigate the use of DNA as a programmable scaffolding upon which
              nanocomponents precisely self-assemble as  a possible basis for an electronic
              circuit manufacturing technology.  Rather than using the techniques of current
              semiconductor chip manufacturing, in which features are written onto the
              structure by a lithographic process, this approach will exploit programmed
              Watson-Crick base-pairing for precision assembly limited only by the 0.34
              nanometer nucleotide separation.  The research activities in this proposal are
              focused on 1) Design, synthesis, and assembly of 2D DNA crystal scaffolding for
              the self-assembly of arrays of closely spaced Au-nanoparticles, 2) Design and
              synthesis of Au-DNA conjugates optimized for electron tunneling properties and
              for high-yield assembly to 2D DNA crystals, 3) Characterization of electronic
              transport properties of the DNA-assembled Au-nanoparticle arrays to establish
              the suitability of the DNA scaffolding, tethers, and other structural elements
              for use as passive host scaffolding for electronic nanocomponents.   

This
              study will address basic scientific and engineering challenges in the
              development of DNA nanotechnology for the precise assembly of components for
              nanoelectronics and other applications, such as nanorobotics  and 
              nanomaterials.  It will systematically explore basic chemical, physical, and
              electronic issues related  to  nanoparticle/DNA design, chemical compatibility,
              assembly methods,  electrostatic  interactions,  electronic  transport,  and 
              interactions  with  surfaces,  among  others.  The study will stimulate
              interactions among a highly interdisciplinary team of experts representing the
              fields of   Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and Electrical & Computer Engineering.
               This project  will  contribute  to  educational  and  human resource
              development by supporting three Ph.D. students.   We also expect to involve
              several M.S. level students in this work and provide research opportunities for
              undergraduate students through existing directed studies and internship
              programs at the University of Minnesota.  It will help to establish
              relationships between the University of Minnesota and New York University, as
              well as with industry through the interactions with Nanoprobes Inc.  Finally,
              this project will enhance the infrastructure for nanoscience research at the
              University of Minnesota by providing funding for the unique nanoscale
              electronic characterization system to be used in these studies. 
  

