Title       : NER: Molecular Modeling of Self-Assembled Nanostructures on Surfaces and in
               Narrow Pores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0210487

Award Number: 0210487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99067              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Gubbins keg@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The self-assembly of nanostructures on surfaces and in porous media has been
              studied extensively by experiment, and is of interest in a wide range of
              applications, including optical and biological sensors, lithography,
              fabrication of nano-scale devices, and biomimetic materials. Despite this wide
              interest, the few attempts to develop theories and simulation methods for these
              systems give a poor account of the formation of the nano-structures and the
              effects of major variables (surfactant architecture, nature of surface,
              temperature, concentration, etc.) on them; some trends (e.g. temperature
              dependence) are predicted to be the opposite of those found
              experimentally.

The aim of this project is to carry out a one year
              feasibility study to develop and evaluate a new multi-scale molecular
              simulation strategy to predict the equilibrium behavior of nano-structures
              formed from non-ionic surfactants on planar surfaces and in nano-pores. The
              simulations will cover size ranges from sub-Angstrom to hundreds of nanometers
              by using a combination of ab initio, atomistic simulation, and discretized
              lattice Monte Carlo simulation methods. By optimizing the lattice
              discretization and intermolecular potentials, the PI hopes to develop an
              approach that can predict not only the nanostructures that form, but the
              influence of temperature, composition, solvent, surfactant architecture, nature
              of the solid surface, and morphology of the pore structure, on the
              self-assembled structures. The challenge will be to include a sufficient level
              of molecular detail and sophistication in the model, while preserving
              sufficient simplicity that calculations can be made in a reasonable time on
              current computers.

The feasibility of the method will be evaluated by
              comparison with experimental data. Criteria for success will include (a)
              correct prediction of qualitative trends of property behavior (adsorption,
              structures, aggregate size, heats) with variation in temperature,
              concentration, type of surface, etc., (b) quantitative agreement with
              experiment, and (c) computational burden of the calculations.

