Title       : NIRT: FRG: Collective and Quasiparticle Properties of Nanocrystals and
               Nano-Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0210383

Award Number: 0210383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1800000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Chih-Kang Shih Shih@physics.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian A. Korgel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Markert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alex L. de Lozanne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allan H. MacDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental competition between order and disorder lies at the heart of
              materials science and technology.  Interactions between atoms or electrons
              spaced sub nanometer apart can lead to collective organization into states with
              long-range order. Order in electronic states gives rise to physical
              consequences such as magnetism, ferroelectricity and superconductivity. In bulk
              materials, the collective electronic properties exhibit a characteristic length
              scale called the coherence length, which corresponds to the minimum grain size
              in superconductors, and in ferromagnets the domain wall width. These length
              scales generally exceed or are comparable to geometrical parameters of
              nanostructured materials. For these reasons nanostructured materials represent
              an important new frontier for the study of collective electronic behavior. This
              interdisciplinary research team will study the physical consequences of
              nanometer-size dimensions on collective and independent electron properties in
              individual nanocrystals and in controlled nanocrystal arrays.  It is unique in
              the combination of expertise in materials synthesis, materials
              characterizations and theory that has been brought together at a single
              institution.  It also forges a close partnership  with one leading company in
              information technology and two foreign institutions.  Educationally, this NIRT
              will help lead the campus-wide initiative at UT Austin for training the next
              generation of scientists in nanoscience through the integration of research and
              education and a strong partnership with the newly established Center of Nano-
              and Molecular Science and Techology.  It integrates diversity by actively
              recruiting graduate students in minority groups.  It further reaches out to
              K-12 education in the Austin area. 




This interdisciplinary program
              brings together expertise in advanced synthesis of metal and semiconductor
              nanostructures, expertise in nanoscale characterizations of structural,
              electronic, transport, optical and magnetic properties, and expertise in
              mesoscopic and many-body condensed matter theory, working together in a single
              institution to explore the physical consequences of nanometer-size dimensions
              on collective and independent electron properties in individual nanocrystals
              and in controlled nanocrystal arrays.  Of particular interests are
              ferromagnetic, superconducting, and normal metal nanocrystals, and
              ferromagnetic, semimagnetic, and normal semiconductor quantum dots.  In
              ferromagnetic and superconducting systems the emphasis to date has been on the
              collective properties that underlie, for example, the use of ferromagnets for
              information storage and the potential use of small superconductors as
              quantum-bits.  As these particles become smaller, the physics of the magnetic
              anisotropy barriers essential for information storage will be altered, and
              superconductivity will be destroyed, respectively.  This regime is a frontier
              for fundamental physics and for materials physics and chemistry, and will be
              the focus of this research program.  This research team also forges a close
              partnership with one leading company in information technology and two foreign
              institutions.  It will strengthen educational and training efforts at UT Austin
              in nanoscience and nanotechnology by designing a new curriculum that removes
              barriers between current disciplinary specialization in different majors and
              provides an excellent training ground for the future generation of scientists
              in nanoscale science and technology.  


