Title       : Analyzing Major Sources of Variation in the Relation Between Metabolic Heat
               Production and Respiratory Gas Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0210804

Award Number: 0210804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn E. Walsberg walsberg@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Energy is vital for both the propagation and maintenance of organisms. Thus, the
              use of metabolic energy and the heat that is produced as its byproduct is a
              major theme in modern biology.  Animal energy usage is usually measured by
              "indirect calorimetry" that relies upon the exchange of respiratory gases by
              the organism (e.g., oxygen consumption or carbon dioxide production).  An
              important complication in such analyses is that the relationship between
              respiratory gas exchange at the lungs and metabolic heat production is
              variable.   These variations could have important consequences for our
              understanding of energy use by animals by producing substantial (e.g., >30%)
              errors in energetic analyses.    This project will quantify the relationships
              between metabolic heat production in animals and their respiratory gas
              exchange, and determine the sensitivity of these relations to variables most
              likely to importantly affect energy metabolism.   Critical variables to be
              explored include diet composition, intensity of metabolism, time of day
              relative to the animal's physiological cycles, and extent of time spent feeding
              or fasting.  The most likely physiological bases of currently unexplainable
              variation in the relations between respiratory gas exchange and metabolic heat
              production will be explored.   This portion of the research will focus on
              quantifying the various fates of the carbon dioxide that is produced by animal
              metabolism (e.g., exhaled through the lungs, stored in the body).  This
              research will be conducted using a broad range of animals (insects, reptiles,
              birds) in order to evaluate the extent of biological variation in these basic
              energy relations.  
