Title       : Electric Field Effects on Excited State and Electron Transfer Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0210029

Award Number: 0210029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Boxer sboxer@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1968,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research by Professor Stephen G. Boxer of Stanford University to
              continue studies on the development of spectroscopic methods that probe
              interactions between molecular fragments separated by relatively long spacer
              groups.  Stark effect spectroscopy is used to provide quantitative information
              on the magnitude and direction of charge displacement associated with a
              spectroscopic transition.  The effect of an applied electric field on an
              electronic or vibrational transition is used to generate a deeper understanding
              of bonding, especially in coordination complexes, and the concept that the
              vibrational frequency shifts can be a quantitative probe for electrostatic
              effects in complex systems such as proteins.  Initial results indicate that
              vibrational Stark spectroscopy can be a powerful and minimally invasive
              approach for obtaining information on how protein electrostatic fields change
              in modified proteins and during catalysis.  This work begins to outline how
              electric fields can be used to manipulate the rates of electron and proton
              transfer as biochemical reactions create, consume or displace electric dipoles.
               Unusual and characteristic non-classical Stark effects are expected to occur
              in mixed-valence complexes that exhibit multiple states whose energy difference
              is affected by the applied field.  Analyses of the resulting unusual line
              shapes will give quantitative information on the energetics, electronic
              coupling and charge displacement in these molecules.

A new form of
              spectroscopy will be used to study how electric fields affect electron, proton
              and dipole movements in chemical, photochemical and biochemical processes.

