Title       : NIRT: Combinatorial Engineering of Nanomachines: Building Novel Membrane
               Proteins via De Novo Design and Directed Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0210777

Award Number: 0210777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1395000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Boder boder@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Goulian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffery G. Saven  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. DeGrado  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1402,1674,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the announcement NSF 01-157.

The
              overall objectives of this proposal are to: a) develop novel methods and tools
              for design and engineering of membrane proteins and protein assemblies based
              upon the integration of sophisticated computational chemistry techniques with
              in vitro directed molecular evolution; b) engineer novel membrane pores based
              upon the bacterial porin OmpF for controlling membrane vesicle permeability; c)
              engineer novel membrane fusion machines based upon influenza virus
              hemagglutinin for regulating bilayer fusion and membrane protein display; d)
              further the understanding of the physical and chemical properties underlying
              membrane protein structure and activity; e) train science and engineering
              students in these interdisciplinary nanoscience research methods.
To
              incorporate stable proteins that span the ~4nm thickness of the lipid bilayer
              and that can mediate enzymatic functions or changes in conformation requires
              control of protein structure at the nanometer (and sub-nanometer) scale. In
              their proposal, novel membrane proteins will be constructed by combining
              rational design, partially random design via combinatorial libraries, and
              directed evolution. Two different systems will be focused on as starting
              points: bacterial porins, which are large permeability membrane pores, and the
              influenza virus protein hemagglutinin, which is a pH inducible membrane
              fusogen. A great deal of structural and functional data has been accumulated
              for both of these systems, and enormous potential exists for using them to
              build useful membrane based devices. Channels with altered and regulated
              permeability could be used to selectively deliver compounds to the ambient
              environment or selectively internalize and process external substrates.
              Similarly, gated fusogens could be used to control mixing between vesicles
              containing two different reactants and could also be engineered to act as
              switches that regulate the display of protein domains. Both gated pores and
              fusogens could also be incorporated into synthetic lipid assemblies in order to
              construct new "smart" materials, whose bulk elasticity and/or permeability are
              modulated in response to environmental signals.
Beyond the specific utility of
              the proteins that they will engineer, the tools that they will
develop and the
              new membrane proteins that emerge will provide valuable insight into
              the
relatively primitive field of membrane protein design. The engineering of
              soluble proteins has
burgeoned into an enormous field that is moving rapidly
              and is far ahead of the corresponding field for membrane proteins. In
              particular, the powerful tool of directed evolution, which has given rise to a
              wide range of new soluble proteins, has not been applied to the design of
              membrane-active proteins.

