Title       : NER: Simulation Strategies for Biomolecular Assembly of Nanoscale Building
               Blocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0210551

Award Number: 0210551
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon C. Glotzer sglotzer@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigator will develop a simulation strategy that can be used
              to elucidate the fundamental principles by which functionalized nanoscale
              building blocks (NBBs) are assembled into ordered structures using biomolecules
              as "linkers" or "connectors" between the NBBs. Recent pioneering experimental
              work has demonstrated that suitably functionalized NBBs can be assembled into
              rather simple ordered structures with specific properties and functionalities
              using biological or synthetic macromolecules as linkers. For example,
              nanoscopic gold particles ranging in size from 2 nm to 30 nm and functionalized
              by DNA, biotin, or synthetic polymers have been shown to assemble into
              three-dimensional hexatic close-packed structures and spheres extending over
              hundreds to thousands of nanometers. DNA, in essence a "digitally programmable"
              biomolecule, is especially intriguing as an "assembler" of NBBs because
              specific linker-linker interactions can be programmed by inserting purposely
              tailored complementary nucleotide sequences into different DNA
              strands.

Aside from these exciting "proof-of-concept" studies, however, no
              systematic knowledge with regard to possible synthesis and processing
              strategies, nor the range of structures possible, for NBB/macromolecule
              assemblies has been obtained - not even the principal axes of the vast
              parameter space of these complex systems have been identified. Computer
              simulations will be instrumental in the effort to define and efficiently map
              out parameter space and provide fundamental insight to the assembly process.
              Despite advances in computational power and simulation algorithms, however, the
              disparate time and length scales that govern the staged, hierarchical ordering
              processes of NBBs and macromolecules in solution prohibit the immediate
              application of any one "off-the-shelf" simulation technique.

In this
              project, the PI will explore several ideas for combining different well-known
              molecular and/or particle-based simulation methodologies with the specific aim
              of overcoming the disparate time scales on which the NBBs and macromolecule
              linkers move. She will consider the individual and combined use of several
              classical molecular or so-called "particle-based" simulation methods, including
              molecular dynamics, Brownian dynamics, and off-lattice Monte Carlo, in order to
              develop an overall simulation strategy capable of simulating NBB/biomolecule
              assemblies with as much chemical fidelity as possible given computational
              limitations. The focus will be on using DNA as assemblers, but the strategy
              will generally apply to other macromolecular linkers as well. NBB geometries
              that the simulation approach will be capable of modeling include spheres and
              polyhedra (e.g. gold nanoparticles, colloidal silica, Buckyballs, nanoprisms,
              CdSe quantum dots), nanorods, nanosheets (e.g. clays) and nanoaggregates (e.g.
              linear chain aggregates).

The PI expects the proposed research to provide an
              important and necessary advance in the ability to model programmed
              macromolecular assembly of NBBs in general and DNA/NBB assemblies in
              particular. At the end of this one-year project, she will have tested several
              strategies for simulating DNA-assembled nanoparticle structures, and designed a
              comprehensive simulation methodology capable of modeling assemblies of NBBs of
              arbitrary composition and geometry joined by biomolecules or macromolecules of
              arbitrary chemical structure with classical simulation techniques. This
              methodology will provide researchers in the field of computational nanoscience
              with simulation strategies to support detailed investigations in nanoscale
              systems. Without these strategies, simulation science will likely be unable to
              contribute significantly to the quest for fundamental understanding and design
              principles for the self- and guided-assembly of nanoscale building blocks.

