Title       : NER: Novel Applications Based on Attractive and Repulsive Electrostatic Forces
               in Nanoscale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0210743

Award Number: 0210743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin C. Kan kan@ece.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Novel Applications Based on Attractive and 
Repulsive Electrostatic Forces in
              Nanoscale

The focus of the proposed NER research is to establish an
              electrostatic interface between nanoelectronics and the biological molecular
              systems in the micron and nanometer scales.  The main research actions include:
              

1. To seek concept demonstration for nanometer-to-micron-scale manipulation
              of the electrostatic attractive and repulsive forces through nonvolatile static
              charges controlled by CMOS/EEPROM (electrically erasable programmable read-only
              memory) devices.
2. To establish the spatial and energy resolution limits of
              the electrostatic forces between CMOS and biological systems
3. To establish
              the electrostatic interface between CMOS devices and the ambient electrolyte
              solution without chemical contamination in Si and dielectrics.
4. To formulate
              realistic goals and implementation methods in the follow-on NIRT effort for
              building molecular recognition and actuation capabilities derived from
              nanoscale CMOS technology, if the NER efforts give promising results.

This
              proposed NER investigation is unique in the sense that the nonvolatile static
              charges in CMOS EEPROM devices are employed at the interface, and hence the
              interaction electrostatic forces can be both attractive and repulsive.  For
              molecular recognition and actuation, availability of both attractive and
              repulsive forces at interface is crucial for high selectivity and
              sensitivity.

Two technology demonstrations will be established in the NER
              effort to investigate the scale and resolution of the electrostatic attractive
              and repulsive forces derivable from the CMOS/EEPROM devices.  The first one is
              the micron-scale electrostatic tweezers. For electrostatic tweezers actions of
              pickup and drop, an electrostatic repulsive force is needed. This can be
              accomplished by forces induced from nonvolatile static charges. The second one
              is the nano-scale molecular recognition from surface attractive and repulsive
              forces. Nanometer-scale molecular recognition by complementary nonvolatile
              static charges can be achieved in floating nanocrystal EEPROM structures.  The
              peripheral source/drain structures have alternative dopant types to facilitate
              complementary static charge injection.  The control gate is partially
              implemented by the ground-plane back gate to expose the nanocrystals for
              electrostatic interaction with the ambient. Preliminary concepts for the
              micron-scale [1,2] and nano-scale [3-6] nonvolatile static charge control have
              already been experimentally demonstrated in the PI's group. The micron-scale
              control currently offers much faster charge reconfiguration (in milliseconds)
              than the nanoscale one (achieved by floating Si and metal nanocrystals with
              pixel accessibility inversely proportional to resolution due to peripheral
              contact constraints). 

Present efforts by the PI in funded research programs
              will be discussed in view of the relations with this NER proposal.  A small
              addition to the existing educational outreach program will be presented. 
              Rationale has been made to fit the proposed effort to the one-year span of the
              NER program.  If the concept demonstration is successful, a NIRT proposal will
              be composed next year based on the preliminary modeling and experimental
              results.


