Title       : NIRT: Advanced Characterization Techniques In Optics for Nanostructures (ACTION)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0210752

Award Number: 0210752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2009       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1334582            (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Selim Unlu selim@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kamil Ekinci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lukas Novotny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bennett B. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pritiraj Mohanty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1589,1674,5928,5940,9162,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. Recent advances have made it possible to
              assemble materials and components atom by atom, or molecule by molecule
              allowing for controlled fabrication of nanostructures with dimensions of from 3
              to 100 nm. Compared to the behavior of isolated molecules or bulk materials,
              the behavior of nanostructures exhibit important physical properties not
              necessarily predictable from observations of either individual constituents or
              large ensembles. Predominant at the nanoscale are size confinement and quantum
              mechanical behavior observed in optical and electronic properties, as well as
              distinct elastic and/or mechanical features. The possibility of utilizing
              nanoscale behavior to enhance material properties and device functions beyond
              those that we currently consider feasible is widely anticipated. These new
              materials and devices herald a revolutionary age for science and technology,
              provided we can observe the detailed operation and discover and utilize the
              underlying principles. 

The developments in nanotechnology present an
              outstanding challenge to characterization (measurement) technology by requiring
              nm-scale 3-D measurement capabilities. While the technology for synthesis has
              rapidly advanced, optical characterization of nanostructures is still in its
              infancy. We will build on existing expertise and infrastructure at Boston
              University and University of Rochester and develop a toolbox of novel
              nano-optical characterization techniques to discover and understand the novel
              properties of nanostructures. The Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team
              (NIRT) program in Advanced Characterization Techniques in Optics for
              Nanostructures (ACTION) will develop measurement methods to study and
              understand nanostructures.  Solid immersion microscopy techniques combined with
              metal-tips will provide unprecedented resolution for spectroscopy of quantum
              dots and other semiconductor systems. The ultimate goal of the proposed program
              is to develop robust and efficient optical techniques at a spatial resolution
              on the order of 10 nm.

Beyond building the required tools to investigate
              novel properties of nanostructures, we will apply these tools to help answer
              fundamental questions facing nanoscale researchers today. In the area of
              quantum information processing, we will investigate the experimentally
              inaccessible regime of closely coupled quantum dots, the coherence of excited
              states, and quantum dots in tunable microcavities; in the area nanomechanical
              systems, we will explore the detailed mechanisms of energy dissipation and
              phase noise in resonant nanostructures; in the area of nanophotonics, we will
              directly determine the local modal volumes of defect states in photonics
              bandgap structures and investigate the nanoscale origins of mode leakage; and
              in the area of ultrasonics, we will measure the elastic properties of solids at
              the nanoscale, exploring the high frequency regime of nanoscale stresses for
              the first time.

