Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Effects of Machining Parameters on the Strength
               and Fatigue Behavior of Bolted Joints in GFRP Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0210475

Award Number: 0210475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed A. Seif   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0210475
Seif

Description: 
This award is for support of a joint research
              project by Dr. Mohamed A. Seif, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Northern
              Illinois University (NIU), Dekalb, Illinois, and Dr. Usama Khashaba, Department
              of Mechanical Design and Production Engineering, and Dr. Gamal Nawara, Research
              and Graduate Studies, both at Zagazig University, Zagazig, Egypt.  With the
              wide use of composite materials in structural components, it has become
              necessary to drill holes into laminates to facilitate bolting or riveting to
              the main load-bearing structures.  Stress concentration, delamination and
              microcracking are the main problems associated with drilled holes, which
              significantly reduce the composites' performance. The PIs will investigate the
              effect of the drilling parameters on the mechanical properties of composites.
              This includes the effect of different cutting conditions (feeds and speeds),
              machining operations (CNC, laser, and water jet), and the size and shape of the
              drills. The influence of the quality of the hole on the notched strength, pin
              bearing strength and bolted joint strength under uniaxial static and fatigue
              loading conditions will also be examined. Special interest will also be given
              to study the joint performance under various assembly conditions such as the
              bolt tightening torque, the washer size, the bolt clearance, and the
              diameter/width ratio. Optical microscopes, SEM, and laser measurement
              techniques will be used in this investigation. 

Scope: 
This project will
              help in establishing a better understanding of the behavior of
bolted joints
              in composite materials. In addition, the development of engineering models will
              contribute to improve basic studies of composite materials under various
              operational
conditions.  The collaboration involves an established and
              experienced U.S. scientist in the field and two researchers in a relatively
              small university in Egypt as well as a number of industrial organizations in
              that country.

