Title       : NER: Nanofabrication Using Sub-wavelength Near-field Nano-optical Laser
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0210240

Award Number: 0210240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99981              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suman Das sumandas@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Katsuo Kurabayashi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1407,1676,1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. This project is to develop a
              nanofabrication technique based on near-field optics to manipulate, modify and
              process matter at the nanoscale. This approach exploits the interaction of
              matter with the evanescent electromagnetic field of a laser exiting from a
              sub-wavelength aperture probe placed in close proximity (at a distance an order
              of magnitude smaller than the laser wavelength) to a substrate. This approach
              integrates techniques of microfabrication and MEMS, sub-wavelength photonics
              and near-field optics to produce structures in the sub-100 nm regime. The
              research consists of five tasks: 1) Near-field optics modeling and analysis, 2)
              Design and fabrication of the near-field optical probe, 3) Development of a
              high precision positioning stage for the optical probe, 4) Nanoscale laser
              materials processing and characterization, and 5) Fundamental studies on
              nanoscale transport phenomena and light-matter interaction. Together, these
              tasks will establish the scientific and technical basis for a near-field
              nano-optical laser processing technique.

This research will have the
              following impact on nanoscale science:  1) A scientific foundation for
              understanding the fundamental physical mechanisms governing transport phenomena
              in near-field nanoscale laser-matter interaction. 2) A scientific basis for
              systematic design of apparatus for near-field nano-optical laser materials
              processing. When successfully completed, this research will result in the
              following impact on nanotechnology: 1) New techniques for very rapid
              fabrication of two-dimensional and three-dimensional nanostructures.
              Applications include massively parallel maskless nano-lithography, massively
              parallel ultrahigh density magneto-optic phase change data storage, maskless
              nanoscale patterning of optical and photonic bandgap structures, polymeric and
              biological materials, and nanoscale laser-assisted chemical vapor deposition.
              2) New techniques for massively parallel in-situ material characterization,
              process monitoring and manipulation at the nanometer length Applications
              include massively parallel nanoscale temperature measurement, flow control and
              valving in massively parallel micro- and nano-fluidics, and manipulation of
              biological molecules in vivo. Several industrial interactions are anticipated
              as a result of successful technological developments from this research. This
              project will train undergraduate and graduate students in the exciting fields
              of MEMS/microfabrication, photonics and near-field optics. Research results
              will be disseminated in national and international conferences and journal
              publications. Scientific fundamentals of near-field laser-matter interactions
              will be incorporated into an existing graduate course in Laser Materials
              Processing.
