Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Solid Free Form Fabrication (SFF) of Self-Bonded
               Silicon Carbide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0210598

Award Number: 0210598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmad Safari safari@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : W223      STATE-REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0210598
Safari

Description:  This award is to support a collaborative
              project between Dr. Ahmad Safari, Department of Ceramics and Materials
              Engineering, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey and Dr. Emad Ewais,
              Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute, Helwan, Cairo, Egypt.
               The investigators plan to study the manufacture of self-bonded Silicon Carbide
              (SBSiC) parts from silicon carbide powder via solid free form fabrication
              technique (SFF).  The same material will also be produced by hot isostatic
              pressing (HIP) for comparative studies to benchmark the effectiveness of the
              SFF process. The investigators will examine the application of these forming
              techniques to the manufacture of complex shape objects, near-net shape, fully
              or near fully dense components. The quality of the products will be evaluated
              through studies of microstructure, physical, mechanical, thermal and electrical
              properties. The results of this investigation will be analyzed and reported. 
              There will be a synergy between the research efforts of the U.S. and Egyptian
              teams.

Scope:  In the manufacturing of advanced ceramics the desired product
              performance specifications are difficult to achieve because of the need for
              strict control of all steps during processing.  Also, the manufacturing of new
              ceramic parts by conventional processing requires lengthy and costly design and
              building of molds.  The advent of SFF technology in the last decade has created
              an opportunity to drastically reduce prototyping time and cost.  SFF also lends
              itself to manufacturing of small quantities of tailor-made specialty products. 
              This project will examine the parameters of this special technique, which gives
              the ability to obtain cost effective, iterative design and control of the
              properties of ceramic parts. The results of this work will be of benefit in
              educating engineers, students and researchers in this field in the United
              States and in Egypt.  Dr. Safari is an expert in the manufacturing technique,
              while Dr. Ewais is expert in SiC.  A postdoctorate at Rutgers will participate
              in the research.  This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
              Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
              carry out these cooperative activities.

