Title       : NIRT: Nanocomposite Reactions in the Self-propagating High Temperature Synthesis
               of Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0210141

Award Number: 0210141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Pantoya michelle.pantoya@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. Holtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jordan M. Berg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henryk Temkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shubhra Gangopadhyay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1674,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This plan integrates research and education in the area of combustion,
              specifically focusing on self-propagating high-temperature synthesis (SHS) of
              new materials from nanocomposite reactants. The research objective is to
              understand the influence of reactant characteristics on the combustion
              synthesis process, and on the microstructure of the final product. The work has
              five primary phases: (1) development of techniques to process reactants, both
              in random media and multi-layered foils; (2) development of integrated
              MEMS-based sensing; (3) determination of the controlling mechanisms of reaction
              wave propagation; (4) characterization of the initial and final products; and
              (5) demonstration of a commercial application of a combustion-synthesized
              material. Temperature and pressure measurements of the reacting wave are made
              using micro-fabricated test structures with integrated sensors. Measurements of
              combustion behaviors are obtained using high-speed diagnostic techniques to
              allow imaging of combustion waves (i.e., to determine flame speeds and to
              observe spinning combustion or pulsating waves). Reactants and products are
              characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction 
              (XRD) analyses. A synthesized product material is tested experimentally on a
              commercial application with our industrial partner, Solar Turbines, Inc. The
              experimental effort is complemented by theoretical analysis and software
              development using a commercial simulation package that contains modules to
              numerically solve problems in heat transfer, multi-phase flow and reacting
              flows. 
The materials developed in this plan are applied as coatings on gas
              turbine components to improve the performance and durability of the system. The
              newly developed material coatings act as a protective barrier against
              high-temperature oxidation and corrosion, which are the main degradation
              mechanisms that occur in the turbine sections. When subjected to the hot gas
              streams of a typical combustion environment, the newly developed coatings will
              resist surface attack and maintain the component's mechanical properties. 
The
              study incorporates a "project-based" instruction component. Students will work
              in teams on projects relating to this research. They learn about fabricating
              nano-scale systems, perform combustion studies on the reacting samples, and
              characterize the final products. The project also includes a mentoring program,
              linking graduate with undergraduate engineers in a supportive work environment.
              This experience guides students in making career choices, demonstrates the
              relevance of their coursework to solving real problems, and contributes to
              their overall preparedness. 

