Title       : NIRT: Motion control platform for accurate measurement and manufacturing of
               nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0210543

Award Number: 0210543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $771500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart T. Smith stusmith@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Trumper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Hocken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1674,1788,5936,5950,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. Nano-scale positioning and control
              technology will be essential both for nanotechnology research instrumentation
              and for tools dedicated to fabrication and testing of nano-devices, but few, if
              any, robust and reproducible solutions exist. To realize manufacture of
              macroscopically useful systems, it is necessary to have mechanisms with
              geometric precision and accuracy to facilitate the transition from nano-science
              to productive nanotechnology. This will be particularly important for
              multi-process manufacture and assembly of complexly shaped mechanisms.  The
              objective of this project is to produce a portable and accurate instrument for
              sample/probe motion that is capable of performing at nanometer levels over
              protracted time periods. The output of this work will be a compact and highly
              integrated instrument, capable of reproducibly positioning a macro-sized object
              such as a silicon wafer over the complete scan area of 50 mm x 50 mm and return
              to a specified position thereby enabling observations of processes containing
              nanometer-sized objects as well as the ability to 'pick and place' for
              multi-component assembly. The instrument would enable nanometer resolution
              tools to focus on a nano-device placed anywhere over the instruments operating
              range for applications such as imprint lithography, lithographic self assembly,
              nanowire circuitry and complex multi-process and multi-scale assemblies. 


              This development will provide a facility for nanotechnology studies in all
              fields for which fundamental measurements at the limits of current
              technological capability are an issue, in particular, in the fields of
              bio-mechanics, nano-electronics and nano-mechanics. Training of future
              engineers in the emerging field of instrument and machine design for
              nanotechnology applications will take place both during the development of the
              instrumentation systems and through subsequent projects and graduate
              instruction based around the developed facility. It is also envisaged that
              knowledge of architectures for nanometer mechanism design will be incorporated
              into graduate precision machine design courses. A new graduate course titled
              'Mechanical systems for nanotechnology' is currently being developed and will
              be offered in the 2002 fall semester. Additionally, a project web-site will be
              developed that will include links to logistical and technical discussion pages
              specific to this project as well as links to related sites. As part of our
              outreach to the k-12 community there will be a section providing an overview of
              this work aimed towards high school level readership.

