Title       : NIRT: Nanoscale Organic Circuits and Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0210698

Award Number: 0210698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ananth Dodabalapur ananth@mer.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dim-Lee Kwong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Micheal J. Krische  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1589,1674,9162,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and
              Engineering initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. It focuses on organic
              semiconductor based nanoscale transistors, a particularly important area of
              activity where much remains to be understood and discovered. Organic nanoscale
              transistors make use of fabrication approaches ranging from molecular
              self-assembly to advanced nanolithography. This, together with the considerable
              flexibility in designing and synthesizing a range of semiconducting materials
              offers hope that such devices may one day be components in a new generation of
              electronic circuits. The ability to confine and manipulate electric charges on
              the spatial scale of a molecule is an important advantage for molecular
              electronics. The proposed project aims at combining self-assembly and advanced
              nanolithography to realize two families of nanoscale transistor devices that
              will enable the systematic evaluation of these devices as components in
              electronic circuits. Crucial to the study is the use of advanced high k
              dielectrics in organic nano-transistors. This will lower the operating voltage
              of the devices as well as permit the induction of very large densities of
              charge, which in turn has been shown to open up new domains in charge transport
              with associated applications. The project will involve device characterization
              by conventional methods as well as by scanning probe methods. Additionally, it
              will involve extensive characterization of interfaces between organic
              semiconductors and gate insulators, and morphological characterization of
              self-assembled organic layers with a lateral resolution down to 1 nm.
              Large-area organic transistors have been shown in the recent past to have
              unique properties such as chemical sensing and light-emission. The chemical
              sensing aspects of nanotransistors will be examined in detail for the first
              time This study will combine chemical design of semiconductors with receptor
              groups to bind specific analytes with detailed characterization of the chemical
              nature of the interaction between semiconductor and analyte. Among other
              properties of nanoscale transistors that will be explored is superconductivity.
              Superconductivity has been observed recently in large-area polymer transistors
              and among the suggested applications of such transistors includes quantum
              information processing. Finally, a new approach to fabricate circuits is
              proposed in which the organic nano-transistor circuitry is compatible with
              Si-circuitry. This architecture permits (in principle) the sharing of
              functionality between the Si circuitry and the organic circuitry. The key
              aspect of the fabrication scheme is the use of an up-side down approach to
              fabricate organic circuitry, in which the interconnects are defined first
              followed by the gate level and finally the source-drain level. Thus the fragile
              molecular materials are not exposed to harsh processing environments.

