Title       : NER: Multi-nanolayered Bio-inspired Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2002   
File        : a0210005

Award Number: 0210005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir V. Tsukruk vladimir@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1676,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Biomimetics allows one to tap into the ingenious designs of nature to inspire
              new technologies. Recent developments in the advanced materials sciences have
              given researchers unparalleled access to biological systems at all levels of
              structural organization, including nanoscale organization under nearly in-vivo
              conditions. In the framework of this general approach, The PI will focus on
              testing basic principles governing the function, structure, and operation of
              specially designed free-suspended polymer/inorganic, multi-nanolayered
              membranes that can act as highly sensitive photothermal elements. The design
              proposed is based on principles learned from recent studies of biological
              infrared receptors highly sensitive to thermal flux. The main focus will be on
              the application of these fundamental principles to the development of
              nano-structured materials based on bio-inspired principles. The PI will
              determine if bio-inspired, compliant nanostructures can be designed with unique
              nanothermal properties and sensing capabilities comparable to biological
              receptors. He will fabricate and test multi-layered, free-suspended compliant
              membranes with nanolayered structural organizations composed of regularly
              alternating nanolayers of inorganic nanoparticles and polymer interlayers. The
              membrane is designed to be capable of significant reversible deformations,
              while providing the transduction of mechanical stresses to an external
              detection scheme. He will identify, test, and optimize assembly technologies
              (e.g., layer-by-layer self-assembly on sacrificial supports or
              Langmuir-Blodgett transfer) for depositing compliant membranes on
              micromachined, microelectronic surfaces, while preserving their micromechanical
              and microthermal properties in a manner compatible with prospective
              photothermal cell design. Perforated solid substrates will be selected for
              membrane deposition. A critical issue addressed by this project is the manner
              in which structural and chemical design principles employed by biological
              receptors may be transferred efficiently to generate organized nano-structured
              materials with enhanced thermal responsive properties.
