Title       : NIRT: One-,Two- and Three-Dimensional Superstructured Materials from
               Well-Defined, Complex Nanoscale Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0210247

Award Number: 0210247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1750000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Wooley klwooley@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darrin J. Pochan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jill D. Pasteris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Mackay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tomasz Kowalewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1674,7202,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) project, co-funded by the
              National Science Foundation Divisions of Materials Research, Chemistry, and
              Chemical and Transport Systems, will develop synthetic strategies and
              characterization protocols for the production and study of one-, two- and
              three-dimensional superstructures composed of stabilized nanoparticle
              assemblies.  The synthetic approach involves the systematic ordering, in
              solution and on substrates, of crosslinked assemblies of copolymers, as robust
              core-shell building blocks, to manufacture 1-dimensional meso-scale (~100 nm to
              ~1 mm), 2-dimensional micro-scale (~1 mm to ~100 mm) and 3-dimensional
              macro-scale (>100 mm) objects, each comprised of nanoscopic building blocks. 
              The result will be the creation of entirely unique composite morphologies that
              are not accessible in the phase diagrams of the copolymers directly.  This
              strategy mimics the control of chemistry at the nanometer scale that is
              currently the exclusive province of living systems.  Utilization of the
              nanoscale organic-based superstructures as scaffolds for the initiation of
              nanocrystalline growth of inorganic materials and biomacromolecules will be a
              key goal of the investigation.  The mechanisms by which the organic
              superstructures promote crystallization and co-crystallization will be studied
              in detail.  The hypotheses to be tested include:  (1)  organic nanoparticles
              will be assembled into well defined one-, two- and three-dimensional
              superstructures, suitable for fabrication into useful device applications;  (2)
               such superstructures will present interfacial contacts that template the
              crystallization events to produce unique and controllable nanocrystalline
              phases, initiated from a surface or via co-crystallization;  (3)  the nature of
              the organic superstructures and the nanocrystalline materials will result in
              unique physical, optical, magnetic, and mechanical properties.
The educational
              and research aspects of the proposed activities will cross several disciplines
              (organic chemistry, biology, physical chemistry, polymer physics, chemical and
              mechanical engineering, and materials science) to address effectively the study
              of one-, two-, and three-dimensional superstructures, composed of two or more
              nanoscale constructs, and of templated inorganic/organic nanocrystalline
              materials.  The proposed research is rich with opportunities to impact
              education.  Students will benefit through interdisciplinary, multi-site
              research activities.  An outreach course developed (Fall 2001) at Washington
              University for K-8 teachers will be enhanced and implemented at the
              participating institutions.  The focus of this NIRT also creates an effective
              platform for societal education of the benefits of nanoscience and
              nanotechnology.  For example, the proposed nanostructured solids may represent
              new advanced materials for medicine, such as "smart" hydrogel-like coatings for
              controlled release of drugs, and scaffolds for tissue engineering. These
              materials may also be the next generation of advanced separation media, tough
              optically clear solids, catalysts or nanocomposites used in the fabrication of
              nano- or micro-mechanical devices.  Thermally-responsive memory devices and
              complex nanoscopic coatings for cantilever-based sensor devices are particular
              applications that will be investigated for the 1-, 2-, and 3-dimensional
              superstructures.  Additionally, the proposed materials will be evaluated as
              nanoscopic surfaces from which the crystallization of inorganic salts or
              biomacromolecules can initiate.  The controlled co-crystallization of the
              superstructures will be investigated, as a model system for the nanocrystalline
              phases found in bone growth.  
 

