Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social and Spatial Transformations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0210142

Award Number: 0210142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Liisa H. Malkki lhmalkki@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The westward emigration of Albanians, including a substantial number of educated
              professionals, is the highest rate found among post-socialist eastern European
              countries.  Most have settled in Greece and Italy as undocumented immigrant
              manual laborers.  After a decade of emigration, there are no signs of return
              migration despite the increasing identification of post-socialist Albania's
              economic, political, and legal systems with those of the West. Nor have these
              changes lessened the desire of still-resident Albanians to emigrate.  This
              dissertation research by a cultural anthropologist from the University of
              California, Irvine, explores the social and spatial transformations involved in
              these migrations.  The project will attempt to understand the decisions of
              professionals to leave Albania and high-skilled jobs to emigrate and commit to
              remain abroad, even as undocumented low-skill laborers.  Fieldwork in Athens,
              Greece, and Tirana, Albania, will compare the social worlds of Albanian
              immigrants and would-be emigrants.  Participant observation in key urban nodes,
              interviewing, photographic documentation, and comparisons using correspondence
              analysis, are used to assess the proposition that despite immigrants'
              observable demotion in legal and social status, international labor migration
              is undertaken and experienced as a social advancement.  Rather than taking
              financial gain as a given, this study examines the desire to work in the West
              as an identity change that is part of international migration.  The research
              will contribute to theoretical issues in anthropology concerning development as
              well as further the education of a young scholar.  The broader significance of
              the project includes the utility of the information for managing and serving
              the rapidly growing global population of international immigrants, and for
              understanding the generation and maintenance of disparities in global wealth.

