Title       : NIRT: Epitaxial Magnetic Oxide Structures for Nanoscale Spin Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0210449

Award Number: 0210449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1550000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Chang-Beom Eom eom@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoqing Pan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Rzchowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel W. van der Weide  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Venkat Chandrasekhar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,1589,1674,9147,9162,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0210449
Eom

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NIRT
              category. The proposal focuses on understanding intrinsic phenomena governing
              spin transport at the nanoscale, and the development of new methods for its
              manipulation for future spin-controlled, magneto-electronic, devices. It
              addresses one of the most exciting aspects of current research on
              next-generation electronic devices: the manipulation of spin, rather than only
              electrical charge. The advantages of these magnetoelectronic devices include
              nonvolatility, faster switching in static memory elements, and higher density
              due to a simpler device structure. These issues become even more important as
              technology drives device sizes toward the nanoscale, where new fundamental
              physical effects emerge that alter spin transport, as well as high-frequency
              dynamics and switching times. 
An understanding of these issues at the
              nanoscale requires single-crystal magnetic heterostructures with
              atomically-sharp interfaces, patterned to nanometer dimensions. This proposal
              probes nanoscale spin transport phenomena in epitaxial magnetic oxide
              nanostructures grown with atomic-layer control, whose magnetic, electronic, and
              interfacial properties are tuned at will. Layers with defined electronic,
              magnetic, and morphological characteristics positioned with atomic-layer
              control in epitaxial systems are used to address crucial fundamental questions
              in magnetic nanostructures.
This research program consists of 1) design,
              growth, and characterization of epitaxial magnetic oxide heterostructures with
              atomic layer control by pulsed laser deposition with in-situ real-time
              structural analysis 2) high-resolution and analytical TEM to determine atomic
              structure and electronic properties of the interfaces; 3) nanoscale patterning
              of novel magnetic heterostructures below 50 nm; 4) scanning probe measurements
              of topography and local electronic properties; 5) education and outreach
              efforts with a focus on introducing young people to modern, multidisciplinary
              science and technology, using the research direction as a vehicle. 
The
              multidisciplinary, multiuniversity/industry team consists of members working in
              Materials Science, Physics, Electrical Engineering, and device development.
              Research, education, and outreach all follow the theme of nanoscale structures,
              novel phenomena, and spin transport control. This work will build a scientific
              foundation for the understanding of new phenomena in nanoscale spin-controlled
              devices. The PIs industrial and multidisciplinary interactions will be very
              beneficial in advancing research as well as in educating students. This study
              will also provide fundamental guidelines in the atomic-scale control of
              nanoscale systems such as ferroelectrics and oxide-semiconductor integration
              that are important for next-generation technology.

