Title       : NER: Feasibility Study on High Yield Thermal Plasma Synthesis of Carbon
               Nanotubes and Other Nanocrystalline Forms of Carbon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0210036

Award Number: 0210036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Knight knightr@coe.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elihu D. Grossmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The feasibility of synthesizing carbon nanotubes and other high-value forms of
              carbon will be studied using a lab-scale, nominally atmospheric pressure,
              induction-coupled plasma [ICP] reactor. The rationale for this work was the
              discovery of nanotubes in carbonaceous residues produced during the
              gasification of polymers for monomer recovery from waste, but under conditions
              minimizing solids formation. In this work, the ICP will be used to decompose
              solid polymeric and low molecular weight gaseous hydrocarbon precursors
              [methane, propane and ethylene] under conditions maximizing carbon recovery.
              Organometallic catalysts [Fe, Ni and Co-bearing], previously shown to nucleate
              and enhance nanotube formation and growth, will be injected into the feed
              stream prior to injection into the hot [~10,000 k] plasma region to produce
              conditions favoring nanotube formation. Several hydrocarbon precursors and
              catalysts will be studied in an experimental matrix determining the influence
              of key process variables such as plasma power, process gas flows, precursor
              feed rate, quenching gas flows and reactor pressure on product yield and
              composition. Solid products will be analyzed by electron microscopy and
              chemical solubility techniques to determine the yield of nanotubes, their
              type(s) and any associated by-products.

ICP's are flexible, capable of
              operating under neutral, oxidizing or reducing conditions, and of accepting
              gaseous, liquid or solid feeds. Furthermore, ICP reactors are readily scalable.
              While the lab-scale system to be used in this work will feed solids at ~ 5
              gm/min, potentially yielding up to 5.8 kg of solids/day, industrial systems
              rated in the 600 kW to 1MW power range have already been developed. If
              successful, this work offers the possibility of large-scale production of
              carbon nanotubes at significantly lower cost than existing furnace, arc and
              laser-ablation techniques. This would enable more of the applications proposed
              for C-nanotubeshydrogen storage, composite reinforcement, therapeutics delivery
              etc., to be developed.

