Title       : NIRT: Template-Constrained Magnetic Nano-materials: Synthesis and
               Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0210915

Award Number: 0210915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Yves U. Idzerda Idzerda@physics.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Singel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary J. Cloninger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Trevor Douglas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,9150,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering" (NSF 01-157). The project aims to establish an
              interdisciplinary research and training team to:1) synthesize and characterize
              mono-disperse particles ranging in size from 5 to 24 nanometers prepared by
              biomineralization within protein cages; 2)  to assemble the magnetic particles
              in two-dimensional arrays of micron size and characterize the physical
              structure and magnetic properties of the assemblies; 3) assemble and
              characterize random and ordered two-dimensional arrays formed from binary
              mixtures of magnetically distinct nanoparticles; 4) fine tune the magnetic
              properties of these assemblies by incorporating chemical cross-links and
              spin-coupling modulators to control inter-particle magnetic interactions. The
              precise control of both particulate properties and inter-particulate
              interactions will provide for immediate applications in important areas such as
              superior performance magnetic memory, sensors, and ultra-high speed device
              architectures. The broader impacts on education resulting from an
              interdisciplinary research program using state-of-the-art synthesis and
              multi-facetted characterization will be significant. 

Continued advances in
              ultra-high speed electronics and super dense memory requires the synthesis,
              development and use of new magnetic materials as superior performance magnetic
              memory, sensors, and devices. The interdisciplinary nature of this research,
              containing elements of virology, microbiology, physics, and chemistry, will not
              only provide new  magnetic materials for significant advances in the
              information technologies, it will also provide a superb training environment
              for future scientists and engineers in many other nanotechnology areas of high
              priority to industry and national security. The project is  jointly supported
              by the Division of Materials Research, the Chemistry Division, and the Division
              of Biological Infrastructure.
  

