Title       : NER: Investigation of Carbon Nanotube Nano-optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0210495

Award Number: 0210495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Carney carney@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Slava V. Rotkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0210495
Carney

This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. Nanoscale science and
              engineering is the bedrock upon which 21st century technological progress will
              be based. Large carbon molecules, such as buckyballs and nanotubes have gained
              recognition as promising tools for use in developing nanotechnology. Due to the
              electronic structure of the carbon atom, large carbon molecules can display a
              range of conduction behavior from insulator to semiconductor to semimetallic to
              metallic. The molecules also display striking mechanical properties that have
              already been brought to application in technology such as atomic force
              microscopy where nantubes have been used as probe tips.  The optical properties
              of nanotubes remain largely unknown.

 As device development continues,
              optical inspection methods also become more important. The PI's will perform
              exploratory theoretical investigations of the interaction of carbon nanotubes
              and light. This work is timely and is needed to direct experimental studies and
              device design in the near future. They will compute the electronic (excitonic)
              mode structure of a realistic device: a carbon nanotube of finite length. The
              electronic structure calculation will be carried out with a fully quantum
              mechanical treatment. They will then compute the coupling of these modes to an
              external electromagnetic field. The resulting description of the nanotube will
              facilitate analysis of the structure in an optical field.  This will enhance
              their understanding of the results of optical measurements and will also point
              to uses of nanotubes as components of a nano-optical system. Near-field
              microscopy is one application of particular interest here and will be
              investigated in some depth. Practical applications of the theory will cover a
              great breadth of fields ranging from near-field microscopy to integrated
              optics. 





