Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Integrating Statistical Machine Translation from
               Arabic to English with Syntactic and Semantic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0210165

Award Number: 0210165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Knight knight@isi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : W223      STATE-REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5988,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0210165
Knight

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              between Dr. Kevin Knight, Information Sciences Institute (ISI), University of
              Southern California, Los Angeles, California and Dr. Ahmed Rafea, Computer
              Science Department, The American University in Cairo(AUC), Cairo, Egypt.  They
              plan to explore a new method for automatic translation between Arabic and
              English.  The so-called statistical machine translation method exploits both
              fast computers and the existence of large human-translated documents. The
              investigators plan to develop new models based on bilingual texts that they
              will manually annotate. These annotations will show how the translation process
              should move from Arabic into syntactic/semantic structures and from there into
              English.  In the first stage, a substantial collection of United Nations
              documents translated into Arabic will be manually annotated with morphological,
              syntactic and semantic information by graduate students at the AUC.  In the
              second stage, the annotated corpus will be used to train morphological
              analyzers and parsers of Arabic, in order to automate annotation in the second
              year of the project and to study the annotations of parallel Arabic and English
              sentences for the development of syntactic and semantic translation models.  In
              the third and fourth stages of the proposed research, existing learning
              algorithms will be investigated for their suitability to integrate the
              developed models with statistical machine translation systems developed at
              ISI.

Scope: 
Reliable automatic translation between Arabic and English may
              have major impact on international commerce, technology, and science, but this
              requires that translation quality be improved significantly.  With the proposed
              method, computers may gather vast amounts of translation knowledge
              automatically from text, and apply that knowledge to translate new documents.
              This research will require significant expertise in computer science, Arabic
              and English linguistics, and statistical inference, which are available in the
              two collaborating groups at USC and AUC.  Dr. Knight is well known for his
              research in the area of statistical machine translation and he will provide
              supervision for the research performed by graduate students at ISI and AUC. 
              Dr. Rafea has excellent credentials in Arabic natural language processing and
              in conducting collaborative research with U.S. universities. The task of
              addressing weaknesses in current translation models will make higher
              translation quality possible and will make practical use of machine translation
              more widespread.  The research will involve U.S. and Egyptian graduate students
              and will promote collaboration between researchers in the US and Egypt.  This
              project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
              these cooperative activities.

