Title       : NER: Biodegradable Green Nanocomposites for Automotive Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0210681

Award Number: 0210681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence T. Drzal DRZAL@EGR.MSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amar Mohanty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1676,9146,9197,EGCH,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0210681 
Drzal 
This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale
              Science and Engineering Initiative NSF 01-157, category NER.

Green
              nanocomposites are the wave of the future and are considered as the next
              generation of materials.  The lofty goals set by U.S. Government for the
              creation of bio-based economy present significant challenges to Industry,
              Academia and Agriculture. This proposal seeks to replace/substitute existing
              petroleum derived polypropylene/TPO (thermoplastic olefin) based nanocomposites
              from compatibilized clay reinforced cellulosic bio-plastic through a novel
              approach for automotive applications.  A new bio-based product derived through
              nano-science approach from renewable resources; having recycling capability and
              triggered biodegradability (i.e. stable in their intended lifetime and would
              biodegrade after disposal under compost conditions) with commercial viability
              and environmental acceptability is termed as sustainable green nanocomposites
              under this high-risk exploratory research (NER) proposal.  The main objective
              of this proposal is to replace such petro-derived nonbiodegradable polymers
              with renewable resource-based biodegradable polymers.  Compatibilization
              between the nanoclay and bioplastic is the key to achieving success.  A new
              maleated compatibilizer is targeted to effectively bind both the clay and
              cellulosic bio-plastic in the compatibilized green nanocomposites.

Expected
              Results Our research has proved the "proof of concept" on promising
              potentiality of cellulosic bio-plastic in designing green nanocomposites for
              high impact and high strength applications.  From our preliminary data we find
              encouraging results where the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) decreased
              by ~ 50% and water absorption decreased by ~ 14% on reinforcement of cellulosic
              plastic with 5 wt.% as received commercial clay.  However with the presence of
              compatibilizer we expect to get much improved properties of our targeted
              nanocomposites.  The synergy to be gained by maleated compatibilizer,
              bio-plastic development and novel processing will result in making sustainable
              eco-friendly green nanocomposites of industrial attractions. This intended
              research program through University-Industry interactions is expected to create
              a consciousness among young graduate/undergraduate students in adding knowledge
              of materials and process engineering of new green nanocomposites and to create
              the growing importance of unique nano-technology to generate eco-friendly
              affordable green materials for 21st century automotive
              industries.


Expected Results Our research has proved the "proof of
              concept" on promising potentiality of cellulosic bio-plastic in designing green
              nanocomposites for high impact and high strength applications.  From our
              preliminary data we find encouraging results where the coefficient of thermal
              expansion (CTE) decreased by ~ 50% and water absorption decreased by ~ 14% on
              reinforcement of cellulosic plastic with 5 wt.% as
received commercial clay. 
              However with the presence of compatibilizer we expect to get much improved
              properties of our targeted nanocomposites.  The synergy to be gained by
              maleated compatibilizer, bio-plastic development and novel processing will
              result in making sustainable eco-friendly green nanocomposites of industrial
              attractions. This intended research program through University-Industry
              interactions is expected to create a consciousness among young
              graduate/undergraduate students in adding knowledge of materials and process
              engineering of new green nanocomposites and to create the growing importance of
              unique nano-technology to generate eco-friendly affordable green materials for
              21st century automotive industries.

