Title       : Physiology of Mosquito Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0210251

Award Number: 0210251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc J. Klowden mklowden@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sanford D. Eigenbrode  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1155,9109,9150,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mosquitoes are responsible for the transmission of agents of disease to hundreds
              of millions of people each year.  Their large populations are the result of an
              efficient reproductive system that converts the protein contained in the blood
              that the female mosquito ingests into eggs.  When they mate with females, male
              mosquitoes transfer sperm as well as substances from their accessory
              reproductive glands and these substances alter the female's physiology.  Among
              their many effects, the male accessory gland substances prevent the females of
              most species from ever mating again.  After the first mating, sperm are stored
              in a special sac, the spermatheca, for the rest of her life and these are
              released to fertilize each batch of eggs as it is laid.  Recent work in this
              laboratory has demonstrated that in the most important mosquito vector of
              malaria, Anopheles gambiae, male accessory glands do not control mating
              behavior as they do in other mosquito species.  Mating does, however, somehow
              alter the female's behavior and the hydrocarbon composition of her cuticle,
              which may be the cue that males of this species use to distinguish unmated or
              previously mated females.   Preliminary experiments suggest that sperm
              contained in the spermatheca of the female may prevent her from remating. 
              Another interesting difference that emerged from this work was the
              demonstration of a sperm polymorphism in male An. gambiae; unlike most other
              mosquito species, male gambiae produce sperm of considerably variable lengths,
              but only the longer sperm end up in the female's spermatheca.
	The goals of
              this project are to examine the mechanism of cuticular alteration in An.
              gambiae, its role in mating, and the possible reasons for the varying types of
              sperm produced by the male.  The change in cuticular hydrocarbons of female
              mosquitoes will be assessed by gas chromatography after various experimental
              treatments and the degree to which mating is prevented will be determined. 
              Sperm that are produced by males after various treatments such as hormone
              administration will be examined microscopically and measured for length and
              presence of a nucleus, both within the genital tracts of the male and female. 
              The long-term importance of this project is that it will provide much needed
              information about the mating systems of the most important mosquito vector in
              the world.  If, using tools of genetic engineering, new genes are to be
              introduced into mosquito populations to prevent them from transmitting
              infectious agents, the basic mechanisms of mating by which those genes are to
              be introduced must be better understood.

