Title       : NER: AlGaN Quantum Dots for Short Wavelength Luminescent Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0210216

Award Number: 0210216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Van Patten vanpatte@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin E. Kordesch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. The objective of the proposed work is to
              explore new methods for wet chemical preparation of GaN and AlGaN quantum dots.
               While extensive research has been conducted on metal chalcogenide quantum dots
              in recent years, comparatively little research activity has been directed
              toward studying III-nitride quantum dots.  The primary reason for this neglect
              has been the relative difficulty of preparing III-nitride quantum dots that are
              isolated, monodisperse, and manipulable.  The proposed new synthetic method is
              based on a simple exchange reaction carried out in a coordinating solvent or in
              a non-coordinating solvent containing an adsorbate that stabilizes growing
              nanoparticles and protects them from flocculation.  The advantages of this
              method over previous routes to GaN are inexpensive starting materials, mild
              reaction conditions, extension to other III-nitrides and their alloys, and
              facile processing of the product material.  This ease of processing is key to
              eventually incorporating these quantum dots into thin film electronic and
              optical devices.  The specific aims of this project are to investigate the
              effects of different reaction parameters (temperature, solvent, and other
              additives) on the rate and yield of the reaction and to discover the optimal
              methods for isolation of the desired product.  The successful completion of
              this work is expected to enable research and development of new composite
              materials and devices containing III-nitride quantum dots as integral,
              functional components.
	The experimental work will be performed by an
              undergraduate research assistant and two graduate research assistants under the
              guidance of the PI and one of the co-PIs.  These students will benefit from the
              highly interdisciplinary nature of the research and exposure to a wide variety
              of techniques both synthetic and analytical.  These include dry box, vacuum
              line, and soxhlet techniques as well as a variety of electronic, structural,
              and particle size characterization methods.  The two students will initially
              focus on different aspects of the project (synthesis vs. characterization), but
              by the end of the year, both will have gained experience with the full range of
              techniques being used.  

