Title       : NER: Nanoscale Electron Beam Stimulated Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0210339

Award Number: 0210339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99688              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip D. Rack prack@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Joy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip E. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1407,1676,1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER.  The project will explore electron
              stimulated deposition and etching as a alternative technique to selectively
              deposit and etch nanoscopic features.  The mechanisms and reaction kinetics for
              the electron beam stimulated growth and etch processes will be elucidated using
              standard precursor materials.  Beam energy and current density measurements
              will be performed and the energy flow will be modeled at the near surface
              region to determine the contribution of thermal Joule heating versus electron
              dissociation of the precursor molecules.  The effect of gas phase electron
              scattering, specimen charging, and secondary electron emission will be
              investigated to understand the minimum pixel size that can be realized for this
              nanoscale process.

This project is a collaborative effort between scientists
              at the University of Tennessee (Philip D. Rack and David C. Joy) and North
              Carolina State University (Phillip Russell) and will investigate nanoscale
              materials manipulation with focused electron beams.  The ability to manipulate
              materials at the nanoscale is critical for the nanotechnology revolution that
              is occurring.  To intelligently design and or repair nanoscale devices requires
              techniques to selectively and nanoscopically deposit and remove material in a
              controllable fashion.  Current techniques to selectively deposit or etch
              microscopic features utilize ion beam deposition and etching, laser ablative
              etching using far field and near field optics, and mechanical abrasion using a
              fine microtip.  Of these techniques, focused ion beam techniques are probably
              the most mature technology that has been extended into the nanoscale.  When
              using an ion beam to stimulate a deposition or etch process, the gallium ions
              get implanted into the substrate, which can significantly change the optical,
              electrical, or mechanical properties of the substrate.  Charging inherent to
              the ion-solid interaction also causes proximity effects and can also lead to
              so-called "riverbed effects" which erodes nearby features when the heavy ion
              beam is scattered and induces sputtering.  Electron beam stimulated deposition
              and etching is conceptually similar to the existing focused ion beam approach
              and has been shown to be a viable technique for depositing nanoscopic
              materials.  The main advantages of using an electron beams versus ion beams are
              reduced contamination and smaller spot sizes.
