Title       : NER: Focused Ion Beam (FIB) Micromachining and Advanced Characterization of
               Carbon Nanotube-Metal Junctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0210249

Award Number: 0210249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96436              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharine Dovidenko kdovidenko@uamail.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. The goal of the research is to develop
              the methodology of localized atomic-level structural and chemical interfacial
              characterization of carbon nanotube-metal junctions using high resolution
              transmission electron microscopy (TEM), electron energy loss spectroscopy and
              energy filtered TEM. The Focused Ion Beam micromachining will be used to
              fabricate platinum metal contacts onto carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and also for
              localized specimen cross-sectioning for further TEM analysis. The objectives of
              the study are threefold: (1) advancement of nanoscale characterization
              techniques to achieve an understanding of the effects of FIB-assisted metal
              deposition on the CNT/Pt interfacial structure and chemistry at atomic level;
              (2) development of a specimen preparation technique for selective (localized)
              high-resolution TEM and electron energy loss spectroscopy of CNT-metal
              junctions; (3) development of reproducible metal contact fabrication technique
              with atomic-level control of inter-diffusion and morphology. 

The research
              will advance the nanoobject/metal junction studies to the atomic-level of
              understanding of the interfacial structure and chemistry. Development of
              optimized methodology of CNT/metal localized cross-sectioning technique for
              high-resolution chemical and structural analysis of the junction will be useful
              for studies of the majority of nanoscale objects and future nano-devices.
              Controlled nano-fabrication of CNT/metal junctions with known properties will
              facilitate the reliable electrical testing of the nanosized materials and
              structures for variety of applications ranging from chemical sensors to field
              effect transistors, thus enabling fabrication of new devices to serve people in
              their everyday life. Two graduate student will be directly involved in the
              program gaining knowledge in such advanced characterization techniques as
              transmission electron microscopy, electron energy loss spectroscopy, and FIB
              micromashining. The expertise generated by this program will be utilized
              directly in the educational process to teach the current and future
              scientists/technologists. The PI will organize and carry out scientific
              seminars, will incorporate new data into the graduate level courses to
              facilitate the dissemination of knowledge and the developed methodology. 
