Title       : NER: Synthesis of Boron Nitride Nanotubes for Nanoelectronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0210283

Award Number: 0210283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raj N. Singh Raj.Singh@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

0210283 Singh

This proposal was received in response to the
              Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157,
              in the NER category. The primary objective of this research is to develop a
              fundamental understanding for synthesizing/manufacturing boron nitride
              nanotubes (BN-NTs) predictably and reproducibly by Electron Cyclotron Resonance
              Microwave Plasma Chemical Vapor Deposition (ECR-MPCVD). Pure BN nanotubes
              present an attractive opportunity for practical applications. They offer a
              unique combination of electrical and mechanical properties. Their predicted
              wide band-gap is independent of tube structure, which reveals BN-NTs potential
              for new generations of nanoelectronic devices based on field emission and cold
              cathode characteristics. This exploratory NER project will use ECR-MPECVD to
              synthesize BN-NTs. The unique features of this study will be to select novel
              metal-organic precursors, incorporate appropriate catalysts, and provide
              special surface pre-treatments to enhance formation and growth of single and
              multi-walled BN-NTs. In addition, in situ monitoring of plasma chemistry and
              processing parameters will be performed to relate to BN-NTs formation and
              growth. The proposed research will investigate two unique aspects: (1) Roles of
              the precursor chemistry on the synthesis of BN-NTs, and (2) Effects of
              substrate pretreatment such as surface modification by seeding and ion
              implantation on the BN-NTs formation and growth. In addition, influence of
              special catalysts such as Li3N and Mg3N2 on the synthesis of BN-NTs will be
              investigated. HRTEM, EELS, SEM, TED and possibly other analytical techniques
              will characterize the nanotubes. In addition, selected electrical properties of
              BN-NTs will be measured for applications in electronics.

On a broader scale,
              a successful completion of this research will lead to a knowledge base for
              synthesizing BN-NTs with exceptional electrical, thermal, and mechanical
              properties for applications in electronics. It is expected that future
              generations of nanostructure electronic devices can be based on BN-NTs. For
              example, BN-NTs may serve as a perfect nano-insulating tubular shield for any
              conducting material encapsulated within. This offers the possibility of
              nanotube electrical transport tailored over a wide range. Unique field emission
              and cold cathode characteristics of BN-NTs have applications in flat panel
              display devices. Another important goal of this project is to train graduate
              student and research associate/post doc through participation on this research
              project and their MS and Ph.D. theses. In addition, minority/women high school
              and undergraduate students will also be mentored and exposed to this
              research.

