Title       : NER: Mesogeochemistry ù Geochemical Reactions and Mass Transfers in Nano-scale
               Pore Space Confinement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0210820

Award Number: 0210820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99425              (Estimated)
Investigator: Huifang Xu hfxu@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yifeng Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1676      NANOSCALE:  EXPLORATORY RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1676,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Xu & Wang
NER-0210820

This proposal was received in response to the
              Nanoscale Science and Engineering initiative NSF 01-157, category NER, and is
              co-funded by the GEO Directorate.
The emergence of nanotechnology has made it
              possible to manipulate material structures at nanometer scales and has greatly
              advanced our understanding of how these nano-scale structures give rise to
              novel physical and chemical properties not seen in bulk materials.  Nano-scale
              pore structures, also called mesoporous structures, are ubiquitous in geologic
              and engineered materials. Our preliminary studies, both experimentally and
              theoretically, indicate that chemical reactions in mesopores can be
              significantly modified, both thermodynamically and kinetically, due to the
              nano-scale confinement.  The objective of this proposal is to (1) clarify the
              sorption behavior of chemical species in a nano-scale pore space confinement as
              compared to that in bulk solutions and test the hypothesis that metal sorption
              on mesopore surface can be greatly enhanced by the confinement effect; and (2)
              to determine the rates of aqueous species diffusion in nano-scale channels to
              test the assumption that these channels can provide passages for mass transport
              during chemical reactions.

To isolate the effect of nano-scale pore space
              confinement, we will conduct parallel sorption experiments on non-mesoporous
              materials, and the measured sorption capabilities will be compared between
              mesoporous vs. non-mesoporous materials. Particular attention will be paid to
              the possible effect of electric double layer (EDL) overlap in mesopores on ion
              sorption and diffusion. Based on the experimental data, a new surface
              complexation model will be proposed to explicitly include the effect of EDL
              overlap.  The issues to be addressed in this proposal are fundamental, and the
              proposed work will highly impact many aspects of geochemical research.  The
              proposed research will establish a theoretical foundation for the development
              of high-performance functional materials for solving challenging environmental
              issues we are facing today.


