Title       : NIRT - Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Investigations of
               Fluid Interactions/Transport in Nanodomains and Around Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0210258

Award Number: 0210258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $622350             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Thompson rwt@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nikolaos A. Gatsonis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Grant McGimpsey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1674      NANOSCALE: INTRDISCPL RESRCH T
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1674,1788,5918,5921,5924,5977,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant is made under the Nanoscale Sciences and Engineering initiative, NSF
              01-157, category NIRT, to address the growing interest in developing
              manufacturing processes and systems that involve fluids at the nanoscale. 
              There also is continuing evidence that fluid phenomena that occur at the
              nanoscale are unlike macroscopic behavior.  For example, some hydrophobic
              channels will permit liquid water to exist, while only slightly narrower
              channels will only permit water vapor to exist.  Similar phenomena are expected
              to manifest when evaluating fluids other than water.  The proposed
              experimental, theoretical and computational investigations will focus on the
              confinement and transport of water, alcohols, amines, and other interesting
              organic compounds in nanochannels. We will investigate both rectangular and
              cylindrical geometries with length scales from 1 nm to 1000 nm, and diameters,
              or widths, from 0.1 nm to 15 nm (or even larger).  Surface materials will span
              the regime from hydrophobic to hydrophilic, considering amorphous and
              crystalline inorganic materials, and polymeric materials.  Additionally,
              transport rates of fluids through nanochannels will be evaluated.  It is
              anticipated that fluid flow properties and transport rates will be governed by
              fluid-surface interactions to a far greater extent than observed in macroscopic
              channels. The investigations at WPI will be complemented by research on flow
              behavior of nanoparticles in conventional, rotating and circulating fluidized
              beds performed by the NIRT group at New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT).
              

The generic geometry of the nanofluidic system and fluids to be considered
              are representative of important manufacturing systems and processes.   The
              outcomes of the research have significance to nano-rheology, nano-lubrication,
              control of nanosurface properties, modeling and simulation at the nanoscale,
              lab-on-a-chip technologies, and other nanofluidic devices.  Biosystems and
              environmental processes that involve nanofluidic transport through membranes
              and channels will also benefit from the expected outcomes.  The research will
              be performed by an interdisciplinary team of PIs and graduate students at WPI
              that will collaborate with the NIRT group at NJIT.  Additionally, we have
              collaborations with researchers in Taiwan, Germany, and Canada that will be of
              benefit to this effort. This investigation also has a strong educational
              component and will take advantage of WPI's project-based educational system
              that requires each undergraduate to conduct a technical team-project (called
              the Major Qualifying Project, or MQP) and a team-project involving
              Society/Technology interactions (called the Interactive Qualifying Project, or
              IQP).  Each MQP or IQP is equivalent to a three-course workload.  The
              integration of undergraduate education and research will be pursued with MQPs
              to be conducted by teams of undergraduates from the three departments where the
              three PIs reside.  In addition, the societal impacts of nanosciences and
              nanotechnologies will be pursued by a team of undergraduates conducting IQPs. 
              These undergraduate projects will provide means for educating young scientists
              and engineers in new emerging technologies in interaction with an
              interdisciplinary research team.  

