Title       : NIRT: The Development of Vault Nano-Capsules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0210690

Award Number: 0210690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1750000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard H. Rome lrome@mednet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce S. Dunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Heath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey I. Zink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold G. Monbouquette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1132,1674,1767,7202,9162,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) project is designed to
              develop a flexible, targetable nanocapsule by exploiting a naturally occurring
              nanoscale structure, the vault.  Vaults are large (13 MDa) ribonucleoprotein
              particles composed of multiple copies of three proteins and an RNA, found in
              nearly all eucaryotic cells. The vault particle is a nanocapsule honed by
              millions of years of evolution with incredible potential for compound
              encapsulation, protection, and delivery. The vault nanocapsule can assemble
              from multiple copies of a few subunits into a stable structure that adheres to
              and is transported along skeletal networks in the cell, and is likely to open
              and close in response to cellular signals. Understanding how such a capsule can
              be manipulated will allow encapsulation of small molecules (drugs, sensors,
              enzymes, toxins etc.) and targeting the engineered nanostructures to specific
              tissues, cells, or organelles.  

This team plans to modify the vault using a
              cell-based protein production system and test the concept that vaults can have
              a broad nanosystems application as malleable nanocapsules. Seven research
              groups at the University of California, Los Angeles, and other locations
              (California Institute of Technology; Vanderbilt University), organized by Dr.
              Leonard Rome, will direct their attention to engineered vault nanocapsules
              produced in a core production laboratory.  Modified vaults will be examined
              with molecular imaging techniques including negative-stain, cryo-EM single
              particle reconstruction, atomic force microscopy, and X-ray crystallography. 
              This structural characterization of the vault is an essential first step in
              designing new vault-based nanocapsules.  

Vault nanocapsules will be
              produced with sequestered metal binding sites and assessed for functional
              consequences of metal sequestration; for example, cells expressing the
              engineered particle will be examined to determine whether they have increased
              resistance to metal toxicity.  In other studies, particles will be imbued with
              functional properties of light emission and magnetic properties to allow the
              particles to be manipulated in a magnetic field and to probe physiological
              properties of the vault, i.e., the inflow and outflow of large and small
              molecules. The ability to manipulate biological nanoparticles in these and
              other ways offers an opportunity to assemble these particles into structures
              that may have significant future applications. Spectroscopic techniques will be
              applied to the engineered particles to allow assessment of the interconversion
              of opened and closed forms. These studies will lay the groundwork to enable the
              control of entrapment and release of specific encapsulated materials.  

The
              participants of this team are founding members of the California Nanosystems
              Institute (CNSI), established to bring together scientists and engineers across
              disciplines and across institutional boundaries in order to push forward in the
              area of nanotechnologies.  In partnership with the CNSI, the team will
              establish an educational program designed to advance the field of nanosystems
              research and technology.  This will include training of future researchers and
              decision-makers and creation of multidisciplinary courses, to enrich school and
              community resources and influence the technical capabilities of industrial
              scientists and engineers. In addition, the PI and co-PIs will be involved in
              research mentoring of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students,
              curriculum planning, and lecturing.  A vault website (www.vaults.arc.ucla.edu)
              will be maintained and expanded to disseminate information about vaults and
              vault nanocapsule development.  This centralized source of information will
              include links to published materials and lists of materials and reagents
              available for sharing.  

Funding for this interdisciplinary project is
              provided through collaborative contributions from the Directorate for
              Biological Sciences (Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences), the
              Directorate for Engineering (Divisions of Bioengineering & Environmental
              Systems and Chemical & Transport Systems), and the Directorate for Mathematics
              & Physical Sciences (Divisions of Physics and Chemistry).

