Title       : Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Evolution of Developmental Diversity, April
               17-21, 2002; Cold Spring Harbor, New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0210944

Award Number: 0210944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0210944
Grodzicker

In the last few years the fields of evolution and
              molecular developmental genetics have intersected to produce new results and
              insights which have generated much current excitement. It is now clear that the
              very few primary model organisms that are currently utilized in biomedical
              research are not sufficient to let us understand the tremendous diversity of
              animal and plant life on earth. Understanding the generation of this diversity,
              honed over eons of evolution, will most likely provide important insights into
              the mechanisms that cause organ variation and the evolution of species. 
              

The goal of the proposed Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Evolution of
              Developmental Diversity to be held April 17 to April 21, 2002 is to bring
              together a broad range of scientists studying various molecular and genetic
              aspects of animal and plant biology with a strong emphasis on morphological and
              functional comparisons of organismal diversity and evolution. This conference
              is expected to attract approximately 250 scientists from around the world. This
              biannual meeting will provide a format for the exchange of ideas and
              information among both junior and senior scientists for the discussion of the
              latest research findings and technical advances towards the study of the
              evolution of developmental mechanisms that diversify animals and plants, and
              fosters scientific collaboration.

Eight topics (eight sessions) have been
              selected for detailed discussion as a reflection of the most advanced and
              interesting areas of study in the evolution and development field (Evolution of
              Gene Regulation, Genetics I and II, Genomics, Axial Pattern, Segmentation and
              Regionalization, Organogenesis: Morphological Innovation, Speciation). Three
              established scientists per session are invited to present a relatively global
              perspective of their work (one of which will also act as the chairperson for
              that session), while the remainder of the talks will be selected from the
              submitted abstracts. Other participants are able to present their research in
              poster sessions to be held during the conference. This format allows the
              participation of many junior scientists, giving them a format to present their
              latest work.

