Title       : NER: Polymer Nanowires Synthesized on a Flat Surface Via a Surfactant Template
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0210485

Award Number: 0210485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Grady bpgrady@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edgar A. O'Rear  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1676,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nanoscale materials offer many potential technological applications due to the
              unusual properties inherent in these materials compared to their traditional
              macroscale analogues. Conducting polymers are prime targets for nanoscale
              synthesis as their conductivity is greatly enhanced by highly oriented
              morphologies. In this proposal, The PI's show for the first time that oriented
              polyaniline (PANI) nanowires, with almost uniform radii, have been oxidatively
              synthesized on highly ordered pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) and on mica using
              an
adsorbed surfactant template. They have also synthesized similar
              structures, but not as ordered, using polypyrrole. The dimensions of the
              synthesized structure vary depending on the substrate. If a way can be
              determined to produce conducting nanowires with almost uniform radii so that
              their center-to-center distances are regular and controllable, then this would
              have substantial impact in many areas, particularly in the microelectronics
              industry.

The important technological discovery that has allowed them to
              make these advances is the fact that adsorbed monolayers of surfactant can form
              very unique structures at the solid-liquid interface. The type of structures
              range from cylinders, spheres and flat bilayers on hydrophilic surfaces, to
              half cylinders, half spheres and monolayers on hydrophobic surfaces. Using the
              results of work done by others, they were able to choose a specific surfactant
              structure as a patterning template. Their experiments have been successful, in
              the specific case of adsorbed half-cylinders the resulting film also has what
              appears to be a half-cylinder morphology for certain polymers and surfaces. The
              dimensions of the fillers have been measured to be between 50 and 100 nm in
              diameter, and as long as 150 microns.

This exciting new discovery and the
              work described in this grant have all been completed over the last 4 months.
              Although AFM micrographs clearly support their claims, their understanding of
              some critical issues is not complete. For example, the structures vary
              significantly in dimension (height and width) depending on the substrate and
              monomer that is used. The wires coalesce; one of the most important issues is
              to understand why these wires coalesce, and determine, if possible, a way to
              reduce or arrest coalescence. They know almost nothing about the properties of
              these nanowires, including their conductivity, and clearly the properties of
              the wires is extremely important. This grant will enable them to explore all of
              these issues and help them to achieve the ultimate goal, the synthesis of fully
              dispersed nanowires oriented in one direction over very large length scales.

