Title       : NER: Social and Ethical Dimensions of Nanotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0210452

Award Number: 0210452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Gorman meg3c@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Hull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Groves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rosalyn W. Berne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn Vallas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


ABSTRACT
NER: Social and Ethical Dimensions of Nanotechnology
Project #
              0210452
Michael Gorman, University of Virginia

The best time to make
              certain a technological revolution will be beneficial to society
is in the
              beginning.   Progress in nanotechnology requires cooperation among
engineers,
              scientists, ethicists and social scientists focused on advancing the field in
              a
way that promises the maximum benefit to society. 

This exploratory-type
              award amounts to  'proof of concept' effort concerning the ability of the
              interdisciplinary  team at the University of Virginia to work together on a
              NIRT project to develop new directions in the understanding of societal
              implications of nanotechnology.   Two specific elements are involved.  The
              first step is initiation of a new research project in the MRSEC.  This project
              is defined by interaction among the co-PIs and involves a new graduate student
              who is interested in societal dimensions of nanotechnology.  She is conducting
              a new project in the MRSEC and the work reflects on her own process of
              enculturation into the laboratory environment--particularly the social and
              ethical dimensions of her project choices and research.   An outside consultant
              is assisting in the training of  student in participant observation techniques
              and methodologies.. This shared supervision is a model for what we hope to
              accomplish with a NIRT award.

The second element involves the development of
              case studies related to the societal implications of new nano-technologies
              within the MRSEC.  To engage current graduate students, the project provides
              $2000 awards for 4 students.  They are to develop case-studies for presentation
              in Rosalyne Berne's section of TCC 401 to about 60 engineering undergraduates
              in their fourth year, and also in Mike Gorman's first-year honors course for
              entering engineers.  The objective is production of two case-studies, each
              prepared by a team consisting of one MRSEC graduate student and one student
              with an appropriate STS background, either in our systems engineering/ethics
              option or from the Institute for Practical Ethics. The case-studies cover
              social and ethical dilemmas in nanotechnology research that are extrapolations
              from current research. This pairing process is a first step towards the kind of
              longer-term pairing of MRSEC and STS students called for in our
              proposal.

The end result of all of these efforts will be a demonstration
              that a focus on societal dimensions can enhance the value of the scientific
              research produced by a MRSEC. Ethics are not just overhead, i.e., an important
              activity that diverts scientists and engineers from their real work.
              Nanotechnology will fail to realize its full promise if social dimensions are
              not built into the research program. GMOs are an example: a technology designed
              to feed the world that is being rejected by much of the world on ethical
              grounds. Nanotechnology risks mistaking technological possibility for social
              opportunity. Research into societal dimensions is therefore critical to the
              success of nanotechnology.


