Title       : NIRT: Merged CMOS/Molecular Integrated Circuit (Mol-MOS) Fabrication, Analysis
               and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0210585

Award Number: 0210585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1050000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lloyd R. Harriott lrharriott@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lin Pu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Bean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mircea R. Stan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew C. Hillier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. This program addresses the issues of
              fabrication and integration of molecular devices with conventional electronic
              technology. The research team will address nanoelectronics from a comprehensive
              viewpoint by considering how nano-devices and nano-circuits can be assembled,
              modeled and designed with the requirements of large-scale integration and
              manufacturability in mind.  For one, we will examine new combinations of
              electrode and active materials that are more compatible with conventional
              device and processing technologies. Modern integrated circuits use a variety of
              metals (Al, Cu, Ta, W, Ti, etc.) and insulators (SiO2, SiN, etc.) in multilevel
              metalization schemes that result in a complex 2.5 dimensional arrangement of
              contacts and wires.  In contrast, most molecular devices use planar
              arrangements of Au electrodes that are not compatible with MOS-based
              electronics. This problem might be overcome by designing organic molecules with
              end groups engineered to attach only to Cu electrodes. These would ultimately
              be mated with metal electrode structures formed using state-of-the-art film
              deposition/growth techniques and electron beam lithography.  These structures
              would incorporate sacrificial insulating spacer layers.  Near the end of the
              process sequence, the insulating layers would be etched away leaving pockets
              that by their shape, size and Cu endpoints, provide an ideal "home" for the
              target molecule.  The completed template could then be rinsed in a solution
              containing these molecules, adding them to the structure.    Since the volatile
              organics would not be subject to high temperature processing, this would
              provide a viable means of adding molecular electronic devices to underling
              microelectronic circuits. 
We will also develop black-box models of molecular
              devices. These models are essential if one is to anticipate novel computing
              architectures where molecular devices may function far differently from modern
              transistors, and where optimized circuit design my entail radically different
              patterns of device interconnection.  Presently, such models do not exist but
              are absolutely required to allow design with nanodevices at higher levels of
              abstraction.  
A  major part of our effort will be dedicated to education and
              outreach.  The subject of nano-electronics is highly interdisciplinary and does
              not fall within the normal pedagogical bounds of engineering and scientific
              disciplines.  We will thus offer a compelling 3D animation-based website
              (building on our existing expertise) and a graduate level web-published
              "Frontiers of Nanoscience" course emphasizing the fundamentals of nano-device
              operation and their giga-scale integration.

