Title       : Expanding Dendroarchaeology into Northern Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0210436

Award Number: 0210436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Towner Rtowner@ltrr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. Dean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Bagwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With support of the National Science foundation, Dr. Ronald Towner and his
              colleagues will conduct archaeological tree-ring research at prehistoric cliff
              dwellings in the remote Sierra Madre of northern Sonora, Mexico. These
              spectacular structures rival the more famous cliff dwellings of US Southwest in
              size and construction techniques, but have received virtually no attention from
              scientists. Our team of US and Mexican dendrochronologists and archaeologists
              will collect tree-ring samples and archaeological data from these enigmatic
              structures in order to (a) develop an absolutely dated annual tree-ring
              sequence for northern Mexico and (b) generate baseline archaeological
              information, such as detailed site maps, for the previously undocumented cliff
              dwellings. 

The development of absolutely dated tree-ring sequences in the
              area will be a major advance toward providing Christian calendar dates for many
              archaeological sites in northern Mexico. Such a breakthrough will help
              historians, archaeologists, and anthropologists delineate important aspects of
              the development and decline of complex societies in Mexico, such as Casas
              Grandes, and illuminate aspects of the interaction between prehistoric
              societies in the US Southwest and northern Mexico. By dating the rooms and
              structures, it will be possible to study the behaviors and social organization
              of the site inhabitants and, on a larger scale, examine issues such as
              migration, trade, and the transfer of technologies and ideas between
              prehistoric groups in northern Mexico and the southwestern United States. In
              addition, the baseline archaeological  data will provide important information
              relevant to current and future research questions and management decisions by
              the Mexican government regarding these irreplaceable pieces of their national
              patrimony. The project will also help Mexican scientists learn tree-ring sample
              collection techniques, thus enabling them to conduct future research at sites
              in northern Sonora and Chihuahua. 

Finally, the project tree-ring  samples
              themselves contain important environmental information. The many tree species
              used in the cliff dwellings are different than those found in the United states
              and exhibit different growth patterns. These patterns are a result of somewhat
              different climatic regimes in northern Mexico and will help in identifying
              climatic relationships between the US Southwest and northern Mexico. The
              absolutely dated ring sequences, therefore, will contribute significantly to
              future studies of past hemispheric climatic variability and models of short-
              and long-term weather phenomena such as the southwestern monsoons, El Nino, 
              and La Nina.

