Title       : NER: Optical Modulation by Field Gated Transparency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0210574

Award Number: 0210574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Rinzler rinzler@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. This program will explore the feasibility
              of using field effect induced charge injection into semiconducting, single wall
              carbon nanotubes to modulate the intensity of the optical absorption in thin,
              optically uniform films of nanotubes. The approach combines and extends recent
              results showing that 1) nanotube absorption bands can be modulated by
              chemically and electrochemically induced shifts of the nanotube Fermi levels
              and 2) recent successes in nanotube based field effect transistors which rely
              on field gating to similarly shift the nanotube Fermi level. For bulk nanotube
              samples possessing typical diameters ranging from ~1.1 - 1.6 nm the absorption
              band of interest (the V1 to C1 transition for the semiconducting nanotubes)
              straddles the 1.55 mm wavelength having technological relevance in fiber optic
              communications. Use of the field effect for modulation will result in an all
              electrically addressable device, with high anticipated switching speeds. The
              research will involve development of electrically coupled nanotube films having
              good optical clarity, the integration of these films into transparent
              electrode, field-gated devices, and the exploration of chemical doping and
              nanotube-nanotube screening effects on the function of the devices. The
              proposal identifies a fundamentally new mechanism for effecting optical
              modulation and, if successful, should encourage further work both in optimizing
              the nanotube based implementation as well as the development of alternative
              materials and devices. In keeping with the University of Florida and the NSF
              mission of training future generations of scientists the program will fund the
              research of both graduate and undergraduate students. Historically
              under-represented groups in science will be particularly encouraged to
              participate.

