Title       : NIRT: Computational Design and Optimization of Nanoscale Spintronic and
               Thermoelectric Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0210717

Award Number: 0210717
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1045168            (Estimated)
Investigator: James K. Freericks freericks@physics.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy Y. Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1674,5915,5936,5946,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              Initiative, NSF 01-157, category Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team
              (NIRT).  The award is funded jointly by the Division of Materials Research and 
              the International Division, and involves researchers at Georgetown University
              and IBM-Almaden.

The objective of this research project is to develop and
              apply computational methods to help optimize spintronic devices and to
              investigate novel proposals for thermoelectric coolers.  Both types of devices
              to be considered consist of ultrathin layers of different materials stacked
              together, forming a heterogeneous system in which bulk properties are strongly
              modified on the nanoscale by the presence of interfaces.  Density-functional
              methods and many-body techniques will be combined to study both equilibrium and
              nonequilibrium properties of such systems.

 The spintronics project is aimed
              at developing a better understanding of how to efficiently inject spins from
              metals into semiconductors.  This issue is key for the design of improved spin
              transistors and spin filters.  Computer algorithms will be developed to
              self-consistently calculate the nonequilibrium steady-state transport in
              nanoscale multilayer devices composed of ferromagnets, semiconductors,
              insulators, and materials close to the metal-insulator transition.  The
              rearrangement of charge and spin near each interface will be treated
              self-consistently.  Density-functional methods will be employed to evaluate
              materials-specific interface properties such as fermi-level mismatch and charge
              and spin scattering lengths, which will then be used as input parameters for
              the Keldysh nonequilibrium transport codes.

In the thermoelectric project,
              nanoscale heterostructures composed of metals, semiconductors, and
              heavy-fermion, and other strongly-correlated, materials will be investigated as
              potential thermoelectric devices.  This is an extension of ongoing work on
              thermoelectricity in bulk materials and on modeling many-body effects in
              Josephson junctions.  The numerical renormalization group will be used to
              examine equilibrium properties of systems described by the periodic Anderson
              model and its combination with the Falicov-Kimball model.  Transport properties
              will be calculated using a linear response formalism.  Density-functional
              calculations will be used to determine properties of relevant interfaces and to
              estimate parameter regimes for the lattice models.  To date, experimental
              difficulties have thwarted a sytematic study of nanoscale devices constructed
              from heavy-fermion materials.  The proposed computational modeling will help
              guide the search for novel heavy-fermion-based-low-tempreature thermoelectric
              devices.

This university-industry collaboration will provide valuable
              educational opportunities for postdoctoral researchers and graduate students. 
              The Georgetown graduate student will spend one year at the IBM site as part of
              his/her training in Georgetown's Industrial Leadership in Physics program. 
              Postdoctoral researchers will also gain experience in both the academic and
              industrial research environments.  In addition, the project involves
              international collaborations, particularly with Croatia, in which both senior
              and junior personnel will participate.
%%%
This proposal was received in
              response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative, NSF 01-157,
              category Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT).  The award is funded
              jointly by the Division of Materials Research and  the International Division,
              and involves researchers at Georgetown University and IBM-Almaden.

The
              objective of this research project is to develop and apply computational
              methods to help optimize spintronic devices and to investigate novel proposals
              for thermoelectric coolers.  Both types of devices to be considered consist of
              ultrathin layers of different materials stacked together, forming a
              heterogeneous system in which bulk properties are strongly modified on the
              nanoscale by the presence of interfaces.

This university-industry
              collaboration will provide valuable educational opportunities for postdoctoral
              researchers and graduate students.  The Georgetown graduate student will spend
              one year at the IBM site as part of his/her training in Georgetown's Industrial
              Leadership in Physics program.  Postdoctoral researchers will also gain
              experience in both the academic and industrial research environments.  In
              addition, the project involves international collaborations, particularly with
              Croatia, in which both senior and junior personnel will participate.
***

