Title       : ANYWHERE, ANYTIME, ANYSIZE, ANY SIGNAL: Scalable Remote Information Sensing and
               Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0210619

Award Number: 0210619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49607              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Markowsky markov@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9150,9169,9217,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Several recent meetings have highlighted the growing interest in
              the
biological, ecological, environmental, and other research communities
in
              the development and deployment of large distributed systems for
information
              collection, aggregation, analysis, simulation, predictive
modeling and
              realtime analysis within their respective disciplines.
Likewise, recent events
              have caused concern and raised interest in the
need for similar systems in the
              context of homeland security.  It seems
apparent that a structured discussion
              of the needs for these systems
could create opportunities for synergistic
              efficiencies between the
various user communities. To date, however, no such
              discussions have
been held among these differing user communities, nor among
              these
communities and the groups providing and developing technologies
              to
support their needs.

It is with the possibility of identifying such
              potential synergies
that the Multi-Sector Crisis Management Consortium (MSCMC)
              is
organizing a series of workshops to discuss the design, development
and
              deployment of such systems "From Sensor to Supercomputer and Back:
Systems for
              Information Collection, Aggregation, Analysis, Assessment
and Realtime
              Simulation." To begin exploring these synergies, MSCMC is
proposing the
              following workshop.

The purpose of this workshop is to summarize the current
              and projected
states of sensor, communication and power technologies for
              collection
and communication of information from distributed sensor systems
              with
large numbers of nodes, and to survey the present and expected needs
for
              such systems in environmental, facility, medical, crisis
management, public
              safety and national security arenas. A succinct
summary of the current and
              projected technologies mapped to current
and projected user requirements is
              envisioned to result from this
workshop.

This workshop will bring together
              experts in field sensor, processing,
wireless, field power source
              technologies, to structure solutions for
the common problem of collecting and
              communicating data, including
from remote field locations, by cost-effective,
              scalable, integrated
devices and networks.

The workshop will examine the
              user needs and technologies involved in
field deployable systems for
              information gathering including
sensors, wireless communications and power
              supplies, up to the local
aggregation point.  While the integration of
              "locally" gathered
information into larger infrastructures for purposes of
              analysis is
also required, such integration is beyond the specific focus of
              this
workshop.

It is intended that this two day workshop will produce:

 
                 (1) understanding by participants of the current state of the art
     and
              availability of technologies of sensors, power, integrated
     circuits, and
              wireless, and how they may be employed in our
     society.

     (2)
              determination of current and future needs for better
     capabilities

    
              (3) suggested courses of action to integrate available
     technologies into
              scalable, reliable, cost-effective devices and
     networks of value to meet
              those needs, including for both the
     general scientific and research
              community and to government
     agencies seeking better ways to protect the
              public from chemical
     and biological incidents

     (4) proposed design
              and production of devices not now available
     or suitable for the above
              purposes

     (5) recommendations for regulatory relief, especially for
              design,
     manufacture, and use of workshop-proposed wireless technologies

                  for the above purposes

     (6) recommendation for further work in these
              ares, and
     identification of potential collaborations and
              partners.



 


