Title       : NSE/NIRT: Electron Transport Through Molecular Inorganic Clusters - A Convergent
               Approach Toward Molecular Electronic and Magnetic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0210426

Award Number: 0210426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1250000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hongkun Park HPark@chemistry.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Long  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Reichman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,1589,1674,7202,9147,9162,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Park
0210426

This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering 
Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NIRT
              category. The proposal focuses on a convergent multi-investigator experimental
              and theoretical program to investigate fundamental electronic and magnetic
              properties of molecular inorganic clusters and to explore their device
              applications. This proposal represents the synergistic collaboration between
              (i) the synthesis of novel inorganic clusters with diverse electronic and
              magnetic properties engineered via judicious control of synthetic parameters,
              (ii) the fabrication and characterization of prototype electronic devices built
              from individual clusters and low-dimensional cluster arrays, (iii) the
              electronic and magnetic characterization of cluster arrays using
              state-of-the-art measurements, and finally (iv) the development of detailed
              understanding of cluster properties using high-level theoretical calculations,
              which will, in turn, guide the design of molecules and molecular electronic
              devices. The proposed research is firmly grounded upon the expertise and
              strengths of participating PIs that have already been demonstrated.

The
              synergy between their efforts is expected to result in a fundamental
              understanding of the electronic and magnetic properties of molecular magnetic
              clusters, which, in turn, may lead to the applications toward novel molecular
              electronic and magnetic devices. The proposed collaboration between synthesis
              and characterization efforts will provide detailed experimental information on
              the electronic and magnetic properties of new molecular magnetic clusters,
              which can then be fed back into the cluster synthesis efforts to engineer
              desired characteristics. Moreover, the interplay between theory and experiment
              will allow for the development of a fundamental understanding of electron and
              spin motion in these clusters and will therefore aid the design of clusters
              with novel properties and devices with new functionalities. The PI's expect
              that a synergy between synthesis, characterization, device fabrication, and
              theoretical calculations will ultimately provide important insight into the
              viability of single-cluster memory devices and spin-electronic (spintronic)
              devices using ordered inorganic cluster arrays.

The proposed research effort
              will provide powerful educational opportunities for students at Harvard and
              Berkeley by exposing them to a broad collaboration that encompasses synthesis,
              characterization, device fabrication, as well as theoretical calculations. The
              collaboration between Harvard, Berkeley, and IBM will also provide a unique
              setting in which undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate students can
              participate in a collaborative interdisciplinary research effort in nanoscience
              and technology, while also being exposed to research at world-class academic
              and industrial research institutions. This unique opportunity, which won't be
              available to students without this collaboration, will surely broaden their
              vista and be of aid in their career decisions.

This Nanoscale
              Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) project is co-funded by the National
              Science Foundation Divisions of Electrical and Communications Systems (ENG),
              Chemistry (MPS), Materials Research (MPS), and Grant Opportunity for Academic
              Liaison with Industry (ENG).

