Title       : Using Artificial Correlational Selection to Evaluate the Causes of Sexual
               Dimorphism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0210971

Award Number: 0210971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynda F. Delph ldelph@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edmund D. Brodie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Differences between the sexes are pervasive in both animals and plants.  Such
              dimorphism can result from selection directly on a trait or it can be a result
              of genetic correlations between traits.  The investigators will test the
              hypothesis that multiple characters exhibit sex differences in the dioecious
              plant Silene latifolia, because of genetic correlations between traits.  This
              hypothesis will be investigated with two quantitative-genetic experiments.  The
              first incorporates a set of controlled crosses and subsequent measures of
              progeny, to determine the pattern and magnitude of genetic covariances among
              traits.  The second experiment will involve artificial selection to investigate
              how labile the genetic correlations are between flower traits and physiological
              traits.  They will select on the combination of traits rather than on
              individual traits to alter the correlation between traits, the most powerful
              way of breaking correlations.
These experiments are centered on measuring and
              altering genetic correlations.  These correlations can occur because of
              pleiotropy, in which one gene affects more than one trait, or because of
              linkage, in which the genes affecting traits are inherited together.  The first
              of these, pleiotropy, leads to long-term correlations between traits, whereas
              linkage can be easily broken by selection.  If the investigators are unable to
              break the correlation between traits, then this will lend credence to the
              hypothesis that pleiotropy contributes to patterns of genetic correlation and
              differences between the sexes.

