Title       : NER: Developing a Nanoscale Strain Gauge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0210613

Award Number: 0210613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98015              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Vaughn mark.vaughn@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1676,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop a nanoscale "strain-gauge" to
              measure flow-induced stresses at an interface. This molecular probe will be
              developed from a flexible macromolecule such as a single-strand DNA with
              fluorophores conjugated to each end. One end will be tethered to the phase
              interface and the other will extend freely into the deforming phase.  In the
              presence of fluid flow, the molecule will change configuration, based on the
              local hydrodynamic forces. This change will be measured by fluorescent
              resonance energy transfer (FRET), which provides a nanoscale "ruler'" for
              measuring the distance between two fluorophores.  FRET provides a sensitive
              means to measure distances between fluorophores that are 1-9 nm apart.

This
              technique will initially be developed to map the flow field immediately
              adjacent to an interface as a means to study the effect of flow and/or
              deformation on interfacial properties. However, the technique will also be
              useful in studying the effects of flow in self-assembled monolayers and
              tethered macromolecules. It will also help verify multiscale modeling
              techniques by providing accurate measurements of molecular-scale response to
              macroscopic forces. 

Both undergraduate and graduate students will be
              directly involved in the development of the technique and will be trained in
              material science applications of fluorescent microscopy and in bioconjugate
              techniques.  Results from the this study will also enhance the classroom
              experience for students in courses such as fluid mechanics by providing a
              visual example of flow/boundary interaction.

