Title       : QEIB: Stochastic Nonlinear Population Dynamics: Mathematical Models, Biological
               Experiments, and Data Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0210474

Award Number: 0210474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J M. Cushing cushing@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Dennis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shandelle M. Henson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Desharnais  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Costantino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9263,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Cushing
0210474
     The project entails a theoretical and experimental
              study
that examines nonlinear population dynamics phenomena in the
context of
              stochasticity and that addresses fundamental concepts
of how stochastic and
              nonlinear forces combine to produce
observed population phenomena.  The
              methodology involves an
interdisciplinary effort that features a thorough
              integration of
biologically based modeling (deterministic and
              stochastic),
mathematical and numerical analyses of model dynamics, and
              the
derivation and application of statistical techniques for
connecting
              models with data (including parameter estimation and
model evaluation).  The
              investigators study the fundamental
question about how (demographic)
              stochasticity at the individual
level propagates to the population level.  A
              promising class of
models that incorporates both demographic and
              environmental
stochasticity is pursued.  A variety of statistical
              and
mathematical questions that arise from these studies are
investigated. 
              The validity of this modeling methodology and
accuracy of a priori model
              predictions is directly testable by
experiments.  The project study includes
              an experimental test of
this modeling approach to demographic and
              environmental
stochasticity, using a laboratory model that the
              investigators
have successfully used in a wide variety of population
              dynamics
and modeling studies during the last decade.  The
              modeling
methodology is also applicable to field populations and
              the
investigators pursue the development of field studies with
several
              researchers who have expressed interest in such a
collaboration.  These
              collaborators include colleagues at (1) the
Center for Environmental Analysis
              at California State University,
Los Angeles in a project modeling the
              spatially structured
dynamics of seashore species, (2) the University of
              California,
Davis in a project to model a lupine-caterpillar-nematode
              system,
(3) Andrews University on mathematical/statistical models of
              the
distribution of marine birds and mammals on Protection Island
National
              Wildlife Refuge in the Strait of Juan de Fuca, and (4)
the Virginia Institute
              of Marine Science on nonlinear models of
the blue crab in the Exuma Cays.
   
               An understanding of the dynamics of biological populations
is fundamental to
              the understanding of ecological and
environmental problems.  Mathematical
              models can be a valuable
tool that provides this understanding.  They can also
              provide the
means to predict the future of ecosystems and the species
              that
they include.  An accurate descriptive and predictive capability
gained
              through mathematical models provides not only a basic
understanding of
              ecological problems, but also the ability to
design programs for the
              assessment, management, and control of
ecosystems and for the solution of
              environmental problems.  A
fundamental difficulty in the application of
              mathematical models
to ecological problems has been the lack of a close
              connection of
models with biological data.  A key problem is the ability
              of
models to incorporate random effects and disturbances.  The
investigators
              extend, analyze, and apply a modeling methodology
they have developed during a
              decade of experimental studies, in a
controlled laboratory setting, that
              addresses these difficulties.
The methods are not restricted to laboratory
              populations,
however, and the project also includes collaborations with
              new
colleagues for the purpose of applying the methods to field
studies of
              natural populations.

