Title       : NER: Engineering Stable Nanoscale Conducting / Insulating Polymer Interfaces:
               Combinatorial Exploratory Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0210479

Award Number: 0210479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99938              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carson Meredith carson.meredith@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thin films can become unstable at thicknesses below 100 nm, due to attractive
              van der Waals (VDW) interactions. This problem is particularly severe in
              conducting and semiconducting polymers, which have large Hamaker constants. VDW
              instability results in dewetting and must be avoided in nanoscale film
              processing. Yet, robust methods for preventing VDW instability in these systems
              have not emerged. A failure to develop strategies to control instability places
              severe limits on the use of conducting polymer thin
films at nanoscale
              dimensions. To address this critical limitation, this research will explore an
              innovative method to stabilize nanoscale conducting / insulating film
              bilayers.

Research Plan and Significance. Nanoscale conducting polymer
              devices require multilayered junctions of conducting / insulating interfaces.
              VDW instability is likely to occur at these junctions due to Hamaker constant
              mismatch. This research will develop an exploratory method to prevent VDW
              instability at polymer bilayer conductor / insulator interfaces.

The lack of
              previous research and theory on nanoscale conductive polymer wetting stability
              leads to the exploratory, high-risk nature of this project. The risk is
              increased by the experimental difficulty in maintaining consistent substrate
              chemistry over the many samples needed to test hypotheses. To overcome this
              limitation in experimental efficiency, a high-throughput measurement method
              will be used for feasibility studies of bilayer stability.

Specific Aims: 1)
              The parameters required to prevent VDW instability will be determined for a
              model bilayer thin film system: poly(3-undecybithiophene) (PUBT) / polystyrene
              (PS), and 2) Stability measurements will be compared to a Hamaker constant
              model to ascertain its effectiveness in predicting stability of nanoscale
              bilayers.

Outcomes. The proposal work will provide the first systematic
              measurements of VDW stability of insulator/semiconductor and
              insulator/conductor thin film bilayers. This exploration will set important
              limitations and demonstrate the feasibility of incorporating nanoscale
              conductor / insulator junctions in device architectures.

Educational Plan
              and Significance. The educational goal of the PI is to increase the content,
              breadth, and inclusiveness of the instructional process for surface and colloid
              science at Georgia Tech. To meet these needs this research will supplement the
              PI's continuing educational thrusts:

*  Development of a graduate course in
              surface and colloid science chemical engineering
*  Internet-available surface
              lecture examples for undergraduate engineering courses
*  Active recruitment
              of the local community, minority, and underrepresented students in
    
              engineering research.

