Title       : NER: Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Devices for Future Spintronics Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0210281

Award Number: 0210281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elisabeth G. Gwinn bgwinn@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category. The proposal
              focuses on testing the feasibility of using self-assembly of organic monolayers
              onto inorganic substrates to control spin phenomena, namely magnetism. The work
              is a collaboration between the Gwinn group at UCSB, which has expertise in
              semiconductor physics, and the Naaman group at the Weizmann Institute, which
              has expertise in the assembly of organized, organic thin films (QOTF) onto
              inorganic substrates. In these hybrid devices, organic molecules with large
              electric dipole moments chemisorb onto an inorganic substrate, forming an
              organized, close-packed dipole sheet. The energetics of forming the adsorbate
              favors transfer of electrons between the organic molecules and the substrate,
              somewhat similar to the effect of gates in field-effect devices, but without
              the need for a gate or gate insulator. This chemically-induced charge transfer
              modifies the electronic properties of both adsorbate and substrate.

The
              proposed feasibility experiments will test for spin-related phenomena in hybrid
              devices of organized organic adsorbates on inorganics. The advantages of using
              organic material is the large versatility in properties that can be tailored
              relatively easily, its low cost, and the ease of production due to
              self-assembling processes that can replace expensive high resolution
              lithography. The enormous variety of organic molecules that self-assemble
              provides a chemical ~knob" that may make possible new classes of
              organic/inorganic spintronic devices.

Two lines of investigation will be
              pursued during this year-long project: studies of chemical manipulation of the
              magnetic properties of GaAs-based semiconductor devices via the organic
              adsorbate; and studies of the magnetic properties of organic inonolayers of
              chiral molecules on non-magnetic substrates. Ferromagnetic GaAs
              heterostructures with near-surface Mn-doped layers will be covered with OOTF to
              test the feasibility of chemically controlling magnetism in ferromagnetic
              semiconductors. The effects of the OOTF will be investigated by magnetometry
              and by magnetotransport measurements. Adsorption of OOTF onto the sidewalls of
              non-magnetic GaAs/A1GaAs superlattices will be used to attempt to modify the
              sheath of edge states that appears in the quantum Hall regime. Signatures of
              the effects of the OOTF would appear in low-temperature magnetotransport
              experiments. Studies of chiral OOTF will investigate further their previously
              observed magnetic properties, when adsorbed onto Au; and whether the chiral
              QQTF retain their magnetic properties when adsorbed onto GaAs.


