Title       : NIRT: Probing Viral Adhesion with Nanoengineered Biomembranes and Quantum Dots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0210807

Award Number: 0210807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1132232            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacquelyn Gervay-Hague gervay@chem.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gang-Yu Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie L. Longo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Kauzlarich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Satyaprabha Dandekar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1674      NANOSCALE: INTRDISCPL RESRCH T
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,1674,5936,5937,5998,7202,9107,9162,AMPP,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) award to University of
              California Davis is supported by Divisions of Chemistry (MPS), Biological
              Infrastructure (BIO) and International Office (SBE), and this proposal was
              submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering"
              (NSF 01-157).  With this award, Professor Gervay-Hague and her team will study
              viral adhesion and infection that are mediated through the binding of viral
              proteins to cellular ligands.  In many cases, the ligands are presented in a
              multimeric form, which gives rise to polyvalent interactions with viral
              proteins, and much less is understood about the molecular basis these
              polyvalent interactions. Nanotechnology and bioimaging spectroscopies will be
              used to study protein-ligand interactions systematically at a molecular level
              with this award.  Using a combination of nanofabrication, lipid bilayer
              engineering and nanoparticle functionalization, carefully designed ligand
              arrays and local bio-environments will be constructed.  Protein recognition of
              these molecular architectures will be investigated to determine the binding
              strength, stoichiometry, cooperativity, and kinetics of adhesion to develop an
              understanding of the mechanism of viral adhesion to host-cells.  A knowledge
              developed from these studies has larger applications toward the detection and
              deactivation of viruses in the environment.  In addition, these studies at the
              interface of chemistry, nanotechnology and biology will provide students with
              opportunities in research and training in many interdisciplinary fields.
              

With this award, a team of research scientists with expertise in organic,
              inorganic, and analytical chemistry, as well as chemical engineering and
              immunology will study the mechanism of viral adhesion to host-cells.  These
              adhesion interactions have the dimensions of nanometers and it may be possible
              to regulate viral adhesion to surfaces that have been engineered to mimic the
              native state of host cells.  Introduction of viral proteins to these
              nanoplatforms and monitoring of the binding process using microscopy and
              spectroscopy will help elucidate the mechanism of viral adhesion to surfaces,
              which may ultimately lead to novel strategies for detecting and deactivating
              viruses in the environment.  Students, postdoctoral associates, and co-workers
              will greatly benefit from this multidisciplinary approaches to problem solving
              in the area of nanoscale biosystems.
