Title       : NIRT: Electrodeposition of Nanostructured Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0210832

Award Number: 0210832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth J. Podlaha podlaha@che.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia Y. Chan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wanjun Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1674      NANOSCALE: INTRDISCPL RESRCH T
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1674,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering" (NSF 01-157), category NIRT. Novel electrodeposited
              nanostructured multilayered alloys for microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)
              will be developed. High sensitivity magnetic sensors and hard materials for
              micro-cutting tools and molds will be fabricated. Compositionally modulated
              multilayered alloys offer a variety of improved properties including enhanced
              giant magnetoresistance for thin film magnetic sensors, and superior hardness
              for high aspect ratio microdevice components, compared to their coarser
              microstructural counterparts. It is expected that the nanometric feature of the
              layers will contribute to a change in the physical properties and
              microstructure.  Electrochemical processing will be used to fabricate both thin
              and thick nanomaterials with pulsed waveforms. 

Magnetic, electronic and
              mechanical properties will be examined, including electrical resistivity,
              magnetoresistivity, DC/AC magnetization and susceptibility, and
              hardness.
Investigators at LSU/CAMD, Argonne and Brookhaven National Labs will
              work
together towards characterization of the electrodeposited nanolayered
              alloys with student
involvement at the national labs.  Student outreach will
              be conducted through PI participation in the Society of Women Engineers and the
              National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and
              Chemical Engineers.  The proposed electrodeposition techniques have the
              potential to significantly improve the quality of multilayered nanostructures,
              especially those with curved and recessed substrates.

