Title       : NIRT: Nanoreactor Processes for Manufacturing Oriented Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0210229

Award Number: 0210229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1124957            (Estimated)
Investigator: Seong H. Kim shkim@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul S. Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ayusman Sen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry C. Foley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Fonash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1674      NANOSCALE: INTRDISCPL RESRCH T
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,5936,5942,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. The Penn State team proposes a new
              nanomanufacturing technology that utilizes carefully designed nanoreactor
              systems to align, bond, and assemble oriented nanomaterials as they are
              produced, rather than trying to manipulate them afterwards. This approach to
              manufacturing with nanoscale control is based on the combined use of (1)
              nano-fabricated chemical reactors and (2) nanoscale material assemblers. An
              integral part of this approach will be the use of high resolution probes to
              guide, test, and confirm the product and structure development. With the
              attainment of controlled alignment, nanomaterials with novel properties and
              functions can be assembled into usable materials that will play a critical role
              in advancing future technologies. These include wires, tapes, sheets,
              composites, and circuits with tailored characteristics. The production of these
              materials requires innovative architectural methods to position, stitch, weave,
              coil, or connect nanomaterials with precise control of alignment, composition,
              and phase on the nanoscale. The principal tasks to be carried out during this
              NIRT grant period are as follows: (a) fabrication of integrated nanochannel
              reactor/processing systems that perform polymerization, transport, alignment,
              and assembly, (b) production of aligned composite polymer fibers, tapes, and
              bundles using initiator-based polymerization reactor systems, (c) production of
              polymeric nanofibers and hollow tubes using anchored-catalyst systems, and (d)
              conversion of oriented polyacetylene nanomaterials into carbon tubes,
              conducting wires, and electronic devices. 

To realize the full potential of
              nanoscience, nanostructured materials must be produced in requisite quantities
              with reproducible orientations, dimensions and properties by cost effective
              means. They must be produced in a manner conducive to them being further
              manufactured into usable, macroscale materials. Although the pace of
              nanoscientific discoveries continues to increase, nanomaterials process and
              manufacturing engineering - a key enabling science - have received little
              attention. If this situation persists, nanoscience will remain a laboratory
              curiosity and will not be transferred into a real technology benefiting
              society. To address this problem, the Penn State team will try to develop
              nanomanufacturing methodologies that can quickly be converted to
              mass-production technologies. The realization of this approach will lead to
              mass production of ordered polymeric nano-composite materials that cannot be
              made in any other way, and fast, reproducible fabrication of nano-electronics
              devices. Cross-training of students in the diverse fields required to carry out
              this research will expand our nation's future capabilities in nano-science and
              engineering.

