Title       : NIRT: Plasmonic Nanophotonics and Optoelectronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0210445

Award Number: 0210445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1299997            (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir M. Shalaev shalaev@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Wei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Weiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Melloch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1674,1767,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. This project is aimed at developing new
              classes of metal-dielectric nanostructured materials and their applications in
              photonics, spectroscopy and optoelectronics. Metal nanostructures are capable
              of supporting various plasmon modes, which can result in high local fields and
              thus in dramatic enhancement of optical responses. Such plasmonic
              nanostructures act like nanoantennas accumulating and building up the
              electromagnetic energy in small nanometer scale areas. The dramatic enhancement
              of optical cross-sections resulting from such energy concentration opens new
              avenues for numerous applications of metal nanostructures. A number of new
              phenomena and their applications in photonics and optoelectronics will be
              studied in this project. Those include negative refraction in left-handed
              materials based on metal nanowires, photonic band-gap materials using metal
              nanostructures, plasmon-enhanced nonlinear photodetectors, disorder-induced
              localization of plasmons and fractal sensors for detecting molecules,
              light-gated optical transmitters, photonic nano-circuits and nano-chips. This
              interdisciplinary research brings together experts in the physics of plasmonic
              nanomaterials (Prof. Shalaev), femtosecond pulse-shaping spectroscopy and
              ultafast photonics (Prof. Weiner), and fabrication of plasmonic (Prof. Wei) and
              optoelectronic (Prof. Melloch) nanomaterials. A successful program in plasmonic
              nanomaterials, supported by synergistic activities with the Birck
              Nanotechnology Center and Center for Sensing Science and Technology at Purdue,
              will accelerate the development of a multidisciplinary Nano-photonics Program.
              The proposed research will integrate and infuse cutting-edge research in the
              emerging areas of photonics and nanotechnology with top-flight education and
              training.	
