Title       : NER: Fabrication of an Integrated Structure of 3D Macroporous Silica and Carbon
               Nanotubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0210195

Award Number: 0210195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95936              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry H. Du hdu@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sang Park  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1676,1788,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.:			CTS-0210195

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS:	HENRY
              DU

INSTITUTION:			STEVENS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY

ABSTRACT:

	3D porous
              materials with highly ordered interconnecting pores and carbon nanotubes are at
              the frontier of science and engineering.  This Nanoscale Exploratory Research
              (NER) proposal aims to integrate these two areas by exploring aligned growth of
              carbon nanotubes on the pore walls of high-surface-area microporous silica. 
              Several tasks are being pursued to achieve the proposed goal.  Specifically,
              equilibrium-driven colloidal self-assembly processes as well as colloidal
              epitaxy on ultra-fine TEM grids is being used to obtain opals of polystyrene
              spheres as structural templates.  A sol-gel route is being employed for
              effective infiltration of the templates to produce inverted silica opals upon
              subsequent thermal decomposition of the template opals.  A synthesis strategy
              is also being developed for deposition of uniform, nanometer-sized, catalytic
              cobalt particles on the pore walls.  The approach is being used to grow aligned
              carbon nanotubes on the pore walls throughout the volume of the macroporous
              silica using plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition.

	This project
              represents the first known attempt to fabricate an integrated structure
              composed of 3D macroporous materials and carbon nanotubes.  Critical challenges
              are being addressed related to the deposition of cobalt particles and the
              controlled growth of aligned carbon nanotubes on pore walls.  The integration
              of the two aspects of this work will yield potentially robust structures for
              applications where an abundance of nanotube arrays is needed for system
              efficiency.  Such applications include entrapment of DNA and proteins,
              catalytic supports, desalination of seawater, and hydrogen storage for fuel
              cells.  Knowledge generated in this investigation can be extended to the
              fabrication of other 3D macroporous materials, such as semiconductors.  The
              success of the project thus offers exciting prospects for the exploration of
              carbon nanotubes for applications in the nanotechnology arena and across
              science and engineering.  

