Title       : NIRT - Collaborative Research: Experimental and Computational Investigations of
               Fluid Interactions/Transport in Nanodomains and Around Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0210400

Award Number: 0210400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $628950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Pfeffer pfeffer@adm.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chao Zhu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rajesh N. Dave  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dimitri Gidaspow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hamid Arastoopour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1674      NANOSCALE: INTRDISCPL RESRCH T
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1674,1788,5918,5921,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant is funded in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT.   Fluidization and transport of
              micron-sized powder materials are routine unit operations for large-scale
              manufacturing and processing of a variety of particulate products in many
              industries, such as petroleum, chemical, agricultural, food, pharmaceutical and
              ceramics. While many of these industries can benefit from the unique properties
              of nanostructured materials, little attention has been paid to the fluidization
              and transport of nanoparticles. In this proposal, the challenging problem of
              understanding the physics of fluidization and transport of nanoparticles, in
              order to be able to process them to manufacture nanocomposites with tailored
              properties, is addressed. Normally, nanoparticles cannot be fluidized because
              of the very large interparticle forces that exist between them. Recent
              research, however, indicates that nanoparticles can be fluidized at gas
              velocities well above the minimum fluidization velocity of the primary
              particles without being elutriated, because they form large stable
              agglomerates. These agglomerates are very porous, allowing for a variety of
              physical and chemical surface treatments that take advantage of the extremely
              large surface area of the nanoparticles. The NJIT/IIT research program includes
              experiments to study the flow behavior of nanoparticles in conventional,
              rotating and circulating fluidized beds. Theoretical modeling and computer
              simulations, using kinetic theory at various length scales, are also proposed.
              These models will be used to predict the size and structure of agglomerates of
              nanoparticles and the flow behavior of nanoparticles in risers. Experiments
              will also be performed to manufacture nanocomposites with tailored properties
              by coating "fluidized" nanoparticles with polymer or by mixing two different
              species of nanoparticles. The modeling and computer simulations will provide
              predictive capabilities that will also help in optimization and scale-up. The
              investigations at NJIT/IIT will be complemented by research on the flow of
              fluids in nanoscale channels/cavities, performed by the NIRT group at Worcester
              Polytechnic Institute (WPI).

Another positive outcome of the research will
              be the education and training of undergraduate and graduate students in the
              area of particle technology, a relatively neglected area in engineering
              education but of extreme technological, economic and environmental importance.
              This will be accomplished in part by a new course in nanotechnology
              incorporating the results of the research which will also help in disseminating
              the results. Moreover, because of the large diversity of NJIT's and IIT's
              student body, many of the students in the particle technology programs at both
              institutions, and who will be involved with the proposed research, are women
              and underrepresented minorities. Research and education collaborations and
              partnerships will also be initiated with academic institutions, industry and
              government agencies involved with the flow and processing of nanoparticles.
              Academic collaborations, in addition to that with (WPI) include the Ecole des
              Mines in Albi, France and Osaka Prefecture University in Japan.  

