Title       : NER: Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Extraction Process for Forming Nanoporous
               Materials for Low-k and Biosensor Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0210230

Award Number: 0210230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sindee L. Simon sindee.simon@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shubhra Gangopadhyay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1676,9102,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Materials with controlled nanoporous structures will be developed for potential
              applications in the areas of microelectronics and biosensors.  The goal is to
              couple a nanotemplating methodology for creating nanophase separated materials
              with supercritical CO2 extraction of one of the phases.  The advancement of the
              proposed methodology over the current state of the art includes increased
              flexibility in the types of matrix materials which can be used, as well as
              processing advantages over methods in which the porogen is removed from the
              matrix by thermal degradation.  The scientific challenge of the proposed work
              lies in understanding the polymer physics associated with extraction of the CO2
              soluble component without collapse of the matrix.  In essence, this is related
              to the glass transition, plasticization effects, the viscoelastic properties of
              the matrix and the stresses incurred due to extraction.  We will prepare
              spin-on films at Texas Tech, as well as working with collaborators at IBM, to
              prepare nanophase separated morphologies.  The films will contain a component
              which is insoluble in supercritical CO2 and will also contain a soluble
              component which can be extracted.  Characterization of the properties of the
              films before and after exposure to supercritical CO2 extraction will be
              performed, including measurement of the dielectric properties, thickness and
              refractive index.  In addition, films will be studied by Fourier transform
              infrared spectrometry, transmission electron microscopy and atomic force
              microscopy.  Two graduate students and one undergraduate researcher will
              perform the  research under the direct supervision of the PIs. 
