Title       : NIRT: Manufacturing/Synthesis and Nanostructure of Superhard Thin
               Films/Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0210351

Award Number: 0210351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Raj N. Singh Raj.Singh@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard E. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Punit Boolchand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1674,1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0210351 Singh
The primary objectives of the proposed NIRT (Nanoscale
              Interdisciplinary Research Team) research addressing the theme on manufacturing
              processes at the nanoscale are to: (1) develop processing methods to
              manufacture novel superhard thin films of controlled nano-structures and
              properties in the ternary (C-B-N) system, (2) develop advanced techniques to
              characterize the nano-structures of selected new superhard materials, and (3)
              relate the scale of the nano-structure (1-50 nm) to their unusual properties
              such as hardness. With this vision in mind, the premise of the proposed NIRT is
              that the functionality/property of nano-structured materials in the form of
              thin films and coatings can be designed by employing a suitable nanoscale
              architecture and distribution of the basic structural building blocks to
              control the properties at a scale of 1-50 nm. In this proposal we seek to
              address the design of superhard and nano-structured thin films not by just
              refining the polycrystalline microstructural scale, but rather by exploring the
              novel routes for processing/manufacturing, characterizing, and controlling the
              nano-structure of new materials in order to achieve unusual mechanical,
              physical, thermal, and possibly other properties. Thus, materials will be first
              designed and processed/manufactured to have only short-range order and then
              nano-structured thin films will be created by clever modifications of the
              non-equilibrium processing methods, and/or kinetic/thermal manipulation of the
              networks/nanostructues to create nano-crystalline thin films. The eventual aim
              of these activities will be to develop predictive tools for designing and
              synthesizing materials with unusual properties/hardness so that a knowledge
              base for "creating materials by design" will be obtained. To accomplish these
              goals of the NIRT, a truly interdisciplinary and complementary research team
              has been assembled.
On a broader scale, a successful completion of this
              research will lead to a knowledge base for designing and manufacturing
              nano-structured superhard materials in the ternary C-B-N system with unusual
              mechanical and physical properties for applications in machining, electronic
              devices, MEMS, and functional/protective coatings. Graduate and undergraduate
              students and research associate/post doc will be trained through participation
              on this research project and their MS and Ph.D. theses. In addition,
              minority/women high school and undergraduate students will also be mentored and
              exposed to this research. 

