Title       : Carolina Cyber-defender Scholarship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0210076

Award Number: 0210076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1661758            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bei-Tseng Chu billchu@email.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail-Joon Ahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yuliang Zheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Tolone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa A. Dahlberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1668      FED CYBER SERV: SCHLAR FOR SER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program will graduate 30 graduate students specializing in
              Information
Assurance (IA) over a period of four years. The program will be
              accomplished through the close
collaboration of the University of North
              Carolina at Charlotte (UNC Charlotte) and North
Carolina A&T State University.
              UNC Charlotte will offer an NSA-recognized IA curriculum over
the North
              Carolina Education and Research Network (NCREN), a real-time two-way
              video
system designed for distance education in North Carolina. The IA
              curriculum emphasizes critical
thinking, development of teamwork and effective
              communication skills. Student research and
presentation are integral parts of
              every course. Students are strongly encouraged to participate in
on-going
              research projects. The program is distinguished through its close partnership
              with
industry, program diversity, distinguished faculties, state-of-the-art
              laboratory facilities, and
expanding IA career opportunities to under
              represented groups in our society.

Each student is required to complete a
              qualified industry-sponsored internship. Each internship
project must
              originate from a company or organization focusing on a real-world IA
              problem;
require creative design and/or research that are appropriate for a
              Master's level student; and has
clearly defined deliverables, which typically
              would include documents and/or prototype software.
