Title       : NIRT: Philosophical and Social Dimensions of Nanoscale Research: Developing a
               Rational Approach to a Newly Emerging Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0210552

Award Number: 0210552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Davis W. Baird   (Principal Investigator current)
              RIG Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Berube  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Khushf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alfred Nordmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1674,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NIRT: Philosophical and Social Dimensions of Nanoscale Research -Developing a
              Rational Approach to a Newly Emerging Science and Technology

Nanoscale
              science and engineering presents new challenges and opportunities not only to
              the scientific research community but also to all those who shape its public
              understanding. As nanoscale researchers claim a middle ground between
              nano-visionaries and nano-skeptics, the public also seeks a middle ground
              between overreaching "hype" and irrational fear.  This award is on an
              exploratory scale and is designed to enable the interdisciplinary research team
              to develop approaches to two main objectives. First it will develop activities
              that establish a broad interdisciplinary dialog on nanoscale science and
              technology that includes the public as well as interested social and natural
              scientists and engineers.  This activity will be built around the NanoCenter of
              the University of South Carolina.  Second, interdisciplinary teams of
              researchers will begin work on four specific research projects ("task areas")
              aimed at elucidating the rational middle ground for understanding nanoscale
              science and technology.

Activities to be pursued as part of the
              interdisciplinary include: a Summer Workshop on  "Reading Nano-science and
              -technology; " a Fall Symposium on "Nano-science and -technology and the
              Environment;" a Spring Conference "Discovering the Nanoscale," that focuses on
              a "science studies" audience with the hope of follow-up conference six months
              later in Darmstadt Germany;   a regular series of "Nano Lunches" on the
              Columbia campus in fall 2003;  and a website and archive for the project.
              

The pursuit of this first objective allows for the achievement of the
              second objective, namely to rationally understand nanoscale research at the
              appropriate middle ground between visionary hype and skeptical or irrational
              fear. The research team focuses on the concepts of understanding and control,
              concepts that are central to the rational comprehension of opportunities and
              risks. Four specific topics will be developed:  
         
1) Stability and
              Control of Nano-science and -technology (How experimental, theoretical and
              technological work on the nanoscale produces stable phenomena over which we
              have significant control);
          
2) Imagining and Imaging the Nanoscale
              (How our abilities to imagine the nanoscale (both in words and in drawings) and
              our abilities to image the nanoscale (specifically with various nanoscale
              microscopes) interact, and how the pictures of the nanoscale that result effect
              scientific, technological and public understanding of the nanoscale);
        
               
3) Risk and Problems of Self-replication and Cascading Effects with
              Nanoscale Technology  (How to consider and control the special issues of risk
              posed by nanoscale interventions, specifically the use of self-replication and
              its potential for cascading effects. Analogies with work in genetic engineering
              will be developed); and
         
4) The Public Face of Nano-science and
              -technology  (How nano-science and -technology is presented to the public and
              how the public has reacted to it. Connections with legal and democratic
              infrastructure will be developed.)

