Title       : RUI: Ubiquitin-Mediated Degradation of Picornavirus Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0210188

Award Number: 0210188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Lawson tlawson@bates.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bates College
	      
	      Lewiston, ME  04240    207/786-6093

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The ubiquitin/26S proteasome system is the major process by which proteins are
              selectively degraded in eukaryotic cells.  Little is currently understood about
              how the ubiquitin system selects substrates, and the polyubiquitinating
              mechanism is not understood clearly.  A small number of viral proteins have
              been shown to be substrates for ubiquitin-mediated destruction.  These include
              the 3C proteases of the encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) and hepatitis A virus
              (HAV) and the 3D RNA polymerase of HAV.  These viral substrates for
              ubiquitin/26S proteasome system offer the opportunity to study the mechanistic
              details by which proteins are selected and ubiquitinated by the
              ubiquitin-conjugating machinery, as well as to examine the potential role of
              selective protein destruction in picornavirus replication.  A major goal of
              this project is to employ the EMCV and HAV 3C proteases as substrates for
              measurements of binding affinities to ubiquitin system enzymes and for
              addressing the fundamental questions of whether polyubiquitin chain synthesis
              occurs via a processive mechanism and whether it can involve more than one
              ubiquitinating enzyme complex.  This research will also initiate a
              characterization of the ubiquitin-conjugating system that targets the HAV 3D
              polymerase for degradation, in preparation for future studies of how this
              substrate is selected and what function its destruction serves in HAV
              replication.  This project includes an endeavor to develop an inducible
              expression system for 3C protease genes cloned into mammalian cells, and this
              system will be used to evaluate the cytotoxicity of the EMCV 3C protease and to
              determine whether a failure to ubiquitinate the 3C protease effects the
              efficiency with which EMCV is replicated. These studies will involve
              undergraduate students in research on the mechanism of some of the crucial
              steps in protein degradation.
