Title       : NER: High-Bandwidth Scanning DC SQUID Susceptometer for Characterization of
               Nanomagnetic Structures and Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0210877

Award Number: 0210877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99883              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Huber martin.huber@cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0210877
Huber

Nanomagnetic devices for applications such as quantum
              computing and high-capacity memory cannot be developed without faster, more
              sensitive characterization tools to directly probe phenomena and material
              structures at the nanoscale. The objective of the proposed work is to advance
              the capability of a non-invasive, high-sensitivity technique-scanning
              superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) susceptometry for the
              dynamic characterization of nanomagnetic systems and phenomena.

The
              principal investigator will achieve this objective through two innovations.
              First, spin sensitivity will be improved from the current state of the art, a
              few thousand electron spins per Hz1/2, to a few tens of spins per Hz1/2. This
              improvement will be accomplished by reduction of pickup loop dimensions in a
              combined optical and electron-beam lithography process and by utilizing an
              ultra-low-noise dc SQUID process. Second, bandwidth will be increased from the
              current state of the art, tens of kHz, to tens of MHz by the use of dc SQUID
              series array amplifiers as preamplifiers for the dc SQUID susceptometer.

The
              devices will be characterized for flux sensitivity and bandwidth at 4 K and 20
              mK.  The devices will have many applications at 4 K, although operation at 20
              mK will be essential for the study of quantum decoherence mechanisms in
              electronic systems.  Undergraduates, working with graduate students in the
              collaborator's laboratory, will characterize the spin sensitivity of the
              devices and their performance under realistic
scanning conditions by imaging
              individual cobalt nanomagnetic spheres of controlled diameters ranging from 3
              nm to 10 nm and magnetic moments ranging from tens to tens of thousands of
              electron spins. Further, one SQUID susceptometer will be used to image a
              second, identical device to quantitatively characterize the noise generated by
              the devices.

The scientific emphasis of this project is to produce sensors
              that will have applications in the area of nanoscale structures, novel
              phenomena, and quantum control and to use these sensors image both static and
              dynamic properties of individual cobalt nanomagnets.  Integration of a
              high-sensitivity, high-bandwidth SQUID susceptometer into a scanning platform
              will significantly increase the number and kind of systems that can be studied,
              decrease turn-around time, and increase the number of samples that can be
              studied in an
single experiment. Thus, the successful realization of this
              project will contribute to advances in nanoscale devices and system
              architecture. An added benefit of this project will be the educational benefits
              at both CU-Denver (PI's institution) and Stanford University (collaborator's
              institution) resulting from the collaboration between CU-Denver undergraduate
              students and Stanford graduate students.

