Title       : NIRT: Nanoscale Magnetic Microscopy with Multi-Photon Absorption Polymers and
               Y-Junction Nanotubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0210533

Award Number: 0210533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1050000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Naughton naughton@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Fourkas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Krzysztof Kempa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1589,1674,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
	This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              initiative, NSF 01-157, category NIRT. It focuses on innovative approaches to
              nanoscale subsurface spin imaging, including three MRFM (magnetic resonance
              force microscopy) schemes and one novel non-mechanical spin sensing scheme
              using giant magnetoresistance (GMR) detection. A research team composed of a
              condensed matter physicist, a physical chemist, a materials scientist and a
              theoretical physicist will design and develop nanoscale probes for MRFM as well
              as MFM (magnetic force microcopy).  Carbon nanotube and multi-photon absorption
              (MPA) fabricated polymer cantilevers, in linear and various forked geometries,
              will be employed for piezoresistive, optical waveguide and RF impedance
              detection of specimen spins, with anticipated sensitivities to the single spin
              level.  Novel attogram-sized ferromagnetic nanorods will be synthesized and
              attached to the cantilevers for use as gradient generators/spin probes. In
              addition to individual magnetic spin sensors, arrays of MRFM sensors will be
              made, with each sensor having an integrated three-dimensional radio frequency
              microcoil fabricated via MPA, facilitating spatial and temporal spin
              correlation measurements toward nanoscale functional MRI.  
       There is
              much to be gained by advancing spin-detection technology toward the single-spin
              level, with potential applications in information technology, medicine and
              scientific exploration.  MRFM, which is developing into a most highly sensitive
              measurement technique, stands to play a major role in this goal. 
              Molecular-scale devices, such as carbon and other types of nanotubes, will play
              an increasingly important role as well.  To reach this goal, several
              impediments must be obviated, such as thermal noise, the spectral function of
              which defines a set of parameters to be optimized in the quest for single spin
              detection, 3-D molecular imaging, dynamic visualization and beyond.  Another
              impediment is the traditional optical detection using visible light, the
              wavelength of which is larger than the required physical dimensions of the
              resonating magnetic sensor.  The approaches of this program are designed to
              overcome these obstacles.
       In addition to the four senior personnel,
              this interdisciplinary research program will involve numerous graduate
              students, undergraduates, and select high school students during summer months,
              covering a broad range of topics such as nanoscale magnetometry, micro and
              nanofabrication, carbon nanotube synthesis, multi-photon absorption, nanomagnet
              synthesis, and theoretical aspects of magnetism, nanotubes and
              semiconductors.


