Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Agricultural and Environmental Change in Syria
               During the Bronze and Iron Ages: The Relevance of Archaeology to Current
               Agricultural Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0210651

Award Number: 0210651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Hansen jmh@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                        With National Science Foundation support Alexia Smith and Dr. Julie
              Hansen will investigate the impact of climate change on agricultural practices
              in the Near East during the Bronze and Iron Ages (3050-535 B.C.). A region-wide
              drying event is thought to have occurred at the end of the third millennium
              B.C., and this study examines its impact on food production strategies.
              Palaeoethnobotany, the study of human uses of plants in antiquity, is a prime
              tool for investigating ancient agriculture. Carbonized plant remains can be
              preserved on archaeological sites for thousands of years and may be
              systematically recovered by placing a soil sample in a large tank of water,
              whereby the botanical remains float to the surface for collection. The presence
              of crop plants, together with their associated weed assemblages, allow for the
              reconstruction of ancient agricultural practices. 

Palaeoethnobotanical
              remains collected from Tell Qarqur, a multi-period site on the Orontes River in
              NW Syria, will be analyzed to determine how crop production changed over time.
              Tell Qarqur lies just north of the Ghab Valley, where a number of pollen cores
              have been examined, making Qarqur a prime location for considering the effect
              of local environment upon food production. The questions asked include: 1) What
              crops were grown and do cropping patterns change over time? 2) What types of
              ecosystems were exploited for wild plants? 3) If the habitats exploited change
              over time, does this reflect a changing environment? Examination of the flora
              currently surrounding the site and collection of modern botanical samples will
              greatly assist in identifying the ancient remains.

This data will then be
              placed into a regional context and evidence for agricultural and environmental
              change from sites in Syria, Israel, Lebanon, and Jordan will be examined based
              on published palaeoethnobotanical, zooarchaeological, and palaeoenvironmental
              reports. Together these countries provide a promising opportunity to examine
              the ways people modify agriculture in relation to their environment, since
              steep precipitation gradients exist and food productions strategies are likely
              to change over relatively short distances. The questions asked include: 1)
              Within a given time period, do the major crops vary with increasing distance
              from the coast, or along a north-south axis? 2) If so, is this reflected in the
              faunal remains? 3) Can distinct "food production" zones be identified from the
              data, and if so, do the boundaries of these zones change with time?

	This
              research is important for several reasons. First, it provides information on
              Bronze and Iron Age agriculture in Syria, of which little is known. Second,
              this study synthesizes a large body of published data from the Near East,
              thereby providing a firm basis for examining environmental change and shifting
              agricultural patterns. Finally, recent climatic data suggest that many
              semi-arid regions will become drier over the next few decades due to global
              warming. This study will yield a deeper understanding of how people have
              adapted their farming practices in response to past climatic shifts, knowledge
              that would greatly aid modern-day developers to enhance production within
              current low-technology or subsistence agriculture.


