Title       : NER: Field Effect Transistor Using Long Conjugated Semiconducting Molecular
               Wires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0210501

Award Number: 0210501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lingjie J. Guo guo@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. David Curtis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0210501
Guo
This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science
              and Engineering Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER
              category. The focus of this proposal is to study the electrical properties of a
              special class of molecules, namely, conjugated polymer wires, and to implement
              transistor structures based on the field effect. Devices based on organic
              materials have been identified as one alternative for future electronics. The
              attractive features of molecular electronics are that it provides an
              opportunity to study a new group of materials on the molecular level, while
              offering us a whole new micro- and nanoelectronics technology. Currently there
              are two areas of research in organic electronics, one is molecular electronics,
              and the other is organic thin film transistor. In the molecular electronics
              area, there have been several successful demonstrations of experimental working
              devices. One of the biggest challenges, however, in the application of
              molecular electronic device is the difficult in connecting individual molecules
              to form functional circuits. As a result, practical applications of molecular
              devices have been primarily aimed at memory circuits, where the circuit's
              layout is relatively simple. In another area, researches on organic thin film
              transistors (TFTs) based on conjugated polymers and oligomers have been
              conducted for over a decade, and have been envisioned as an alternative to the
              more traditional a-Si TFTs. However the extremely low mobility of these organic
              films has presented an immense challenge, and placed serious limitation to its
              practical application.  

Recognizing the technical difficulty in these two
              ends, we propose to use three types of conjugated macromolecules to implement
              transistor structures. These molecules are semiconducting conjugated polymers
              that are in the form of long rigid wires.  The PIs will synthesize and
              fabricate the device such that the two ends of the molecule will covalently
              bond to the source/drain electrodes. Through a systematic study of this type of
              molecular transistor, they would like to address both the device performance
              issues such as whether these semiconducting wires can offer sufficient
              conductance and drive capability for practical applications, as well as their
              extendibility to implement simple molecular circuits based on the operation
              principle of field effect transistor. In comparison with conventional
              semiconductor devices, a remarkable aspect of molecular wires is that their
              response may be dominated by quantum coherence effect, possibly even at high
              temperature. So the proposed molecular wire transistor can also help to
              understand many outstanding questions on transport phenomenon in such
              structures. They believe that with advanced nanofabrication technologies and
              the organic synthesis expertise of this NER team, they are in a unique position
              to realize the proposed molecular wire transistor, and to study various
              transport properties in this new class of molecular electronics.


