Title       : NER: Creation of Polymeric Nanofoams Based on Retrograde Vitrification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0210525

Award Number: 0210525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99910              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vipin Kumar vkumar@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wei Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1676,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a research project aimed at exploring novel process
              strategies to develop closed-cell polymer foams that have cell sizes in the
              range of nanometers. The idea of creating nano-scaled cells in polymeric
              materials is exciting and largely unexplored. Due to the unique structures,
              nanofoams are expected to have many properties that are superior to those of
              existing materials, such as a much higher strength-to-weight ratio. In
              addition, nanofoams would provide novel functional materials that could be
              tailored for the needed properties, for example, thermal conductivity,
              dielectric constant, acoustic and damping coefficients. Nanofoams have the
              potential to be used for any applications where foamed polymers are currently
              used, with the benefit of further material savings and improved performance.
              These novel materials will find a wide range of applications in construction,
              packaging, motor vehicle, microelectronics, and household products.

This
              research will explore the creation of nanofoams from the PMMA-CO2 system using
              a solid-state foaming method. The retrograde vitrification phenomenon will be
              employed to increase the gas diffusivity and solubility. Both conventional
              solid-state foaming techniques and the stress induced bubble nucleation method
              will be explored to develop the nanofoaming process.  A low temperature and
              high pressure vessel will be designed and instrumented. Gas solubility and
              diffusivity will be measured. Properties of the new nanofoam materials, such as
              the morphology, mechanical properties, and dielectric properties, will be
              characterized in this research.
