Title       : Self-Assembled Polydomain Ferroelectric and Ferromagnetic Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0210512

Award Number: 0210512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345399             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander L. Roytburd roytburd@wam.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ramamoorthy Ramesh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project is a collaborative theoretical and experimental study of
              self-assembled oxide poly-domain architectures in film/substrate
              heterostructures. The polydomain structures of thin films on substrates are
              strongly determined by their mechanical constraints: the misfit between the
              film and substrate, the orientation and local structure of the film/substrate
              interface, and the geometri-cal configuration of the film. The goal of this
              research is to design controlled polydomain struc-tures through constraint
              engineering to obtain enhanced functional properties of ferroelectric and
              ferromagnetic film materials. Different techniques of constraint engineering
              (modification of film/substrate misfit, patterning of films and film/substrate
              interfaces) will be employed to achieve this goal. These techniques will be
              developed and tested on PbTiO3-Pb(Zn,Ti)O3 (PZT) tetragonal films, which
              demonstrate strong piezoeffects. Subsequently, the techniques will be ap-plied
              to films of highly adaptive ferroelectrics with compositions near the
              morphotropic phase boundary in the PZT system. Polydomain engineering will also
              be applied to ferromagnetic oxides of the La1-xSrxMnO3 system, which exhibit
              colossal magneto-resistance and promising mag-netostrictive properties. The
              research objectives are sought through a combination of theory, modeling and
              experimental verification of theoretically obtained domain design principles.
              Theo-retical work will include analysis of internal stresses and energetics of
              polydomain structures, phase field modeling for non-patterned films, and finite
              element analysis (FEM) for local stress effects and patterned films. The
              experimental work will consist of thin-film processing, engi-neering of
              patterned films, design of polydomain structures and their characterization by
              X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy, scanning force microscopy and
              magneto-optical imaging tech-nique. Measurement of electric, magnetic and
              mechanical properties of films will also be per-formed. 
%%% 
The project
              addresses fundamental research issues in areas of electronic materials science
              having technological relevance. An important feature of the project is the
              strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and education.
              The combined resources, including experimental and theoretical methods, provide
              special opportunities for education and training of graduate stu-dents involved
              in highly interdisciplinary forefront research.
***  

