Title       : NER: Exploring the Mechanical and Thermoelectric Properties of Composite
               Nano-Rods and Nano-Springs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0210587

Award Number: 0210587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwo-Ching Wang wangg@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Toh-Ming Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catalin R. Picu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodorian Borca-Tasciuc  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1676,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The grant explores a an experimental study of the mechanical and thermoelectric
              properties of a novel class of nanostructures that have been developed recently
              using the grazing angle deposition (GLAD) technique. The structures are in the
              form of nanorods and nanosprings grown perpendicular or at an angle to the
              substrate and aligned with each other. The aspect ratio, spacing and symmetry
              of the rods may be selected at will. The structures can be made from a large
              variety of materials in the elemental, alloy and multilayered form. These
              conditions are ideal for material characterization. Mechanically, the nanorods
              are the nanoscale equivalent of the cylindrical macroscopic specimens used for
              material characterization at the macroscale. A major objective is to load the
              nano-rods with an AFM or a nanoindenter tip both in axial compression and in
              bending. This technique offers tremendous advantages over the standard
              measurements made at the nanoscale by nanoindentation. The thermoelectric
              figure of merit of a single nanorod will be obtained from the measured Seebeck
              voltage by passing a current from a conductive AFM tip through the nanorod to
              the bottom conducting substrate.
Along with the experimental study, several
              theoretical issues will be addressed that include the scaling of material
              properties with specimen size and the validity of constitutive equations of the
              gradient non-local type material behavior at the nanoscale.

This is an
              exploratory research that will test the limit of the scaling concept in
              materials properties thereby providing guidance to the design and discovery of
              new nanoscale material combinations for various applications in future NEMS and
              energy conversion devices. The proposed multidisciplinary approach with
              Physics, Materials Science, and Mechanical Engineering components, if
              successful, will significantly advance the field of mechanical and
              thermoelectric measurements of nanostructures.

