Title       : Modeling Pre-Pleistocene Glaciations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9909187

Award Number: 9909187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Crowley   (Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Hyde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Crowley and Hyde: OPP 9909187

Abstract
This award, provided by the Antarctic
              Geology and Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs, provides funds
              for continued efforts to model pre-Pleistocene glaciations.  The geologic
              record indicates that the earth has been subject to four main phases of
              glaciation in the last one billion years: the late Cenozoic, Carboniferous,
              Ordovician, and Late Precambrian.  In order to develop a uniform theory for
              glacial periods it is necessary to identify the factors responsible for both
              general conditions of glacial inception and growth and retreat of the ice
              sheets.  Over the last several years under the previous award modeling efforts
              have succeeded in identifying plausible boundary conditions for glacial
              inception for the pre-Cenozoic glacial ages.  Separately, other researchers
              have succeeded in simulating the evolution of ice volume during the last
              glacial cycle with an ice sheet model coupled to a two-dimensional energy
              balance model (EBM).  Within the context of the prior grant these separate
              lines of research were combined in order to test whether an ice sheet model
              developed for Pleistocene studies can, without any additional tuning, yield
              changes in ice volume consistent with evidence from the Carboniferous and late
              Precambrian glacial periods. To date, results indicate that this model can
              explain approximately 80% of the glacial deposits in the mid-Carboniferous and
              that a threefold increase in carbon dioxide is sufficient to eliminate ice in
              the subsequent Permian period. Late Precambrian simulations are in an
              intermediate stage of development.  Our first detailed study represents (to our
              knowledge) the first modeling results that obtained a relatively parsimonious
              explanation for ice in low latitudes.  Explicit incorporation of an ice sheet
              model was critical to obtaining these results.  

In the next three years
              under this new award, these results will be built upon with the following
              studies:  (1) continued simulations of the Carboniferous world to examine
              problems of the beginning of the glaciation and whether there was ice in the
              northern hemisphere; (2) simulations of the Ordovician (440 Ma) glaciation,
              when there was an ice sheet apparently coexisting with high CO2 levels; (3)
              continued simulations on the late Precambrian glaciation to develop a more
              comprehensive understanding of factors responsible for glaciation during this
              key interval in Earth history; (4) simulation of intervening time periods in
              the Paleozoic and Mesozoic in order to determine whether the model simulates
              variations of ice volume consistent with the geologic record; (5) investigation
              of an instability in the ice sheet model that may provide insight into times of
              rapid climate transitions; (6) application of a thermo-mechanical ice sheet
              model to the Early Permian (270 Ma) to determine whether inclusion of altered
              model physics modifies conclusions from the model and also to test the response
              of the ice sheet model to significant variations in topography.  The ultimate
              aim of this current work is to simulate the entire Phanerozic to determine
              whether a self-consistent explanation can be developed, with a number of model
              adjustments, for the major periods of glaciation over the last one billion
              years.  If successful this work will constitute a significant stride toward
              developing a comprehensive theory for glaciation in Earth history.


