Title       : U.S-Japan Cooperative Science: Spectroscopic Study of Inter-and Intra-Molecular
               Interactions related to Information Transmission and Peptide-Chain Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a9909198

Award Number: 9909198
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon T. Hougen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald T. Fraser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Suenram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NTIS/Ctr Atomic Mole Opti
	      
	      Gaithersburg, MD  20899    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9909198
Hougen

This award supports a two-year collaborative research project
              between Dr. Jon Hougen of the National Institute for Standards and Technology
              (NIST) and Professor Nobukimi Ohashi of the Kanazawa University in Japan.  The
              researchers will be undertaking a spectroscopic study of inter-and
              intra-molecular interactions related to information transmission and
              peptide-chain folding.  The information transmission part of the project will
              investigate, using primarily the techniques of jet-cooled molecular-beam
              microwave spectroscopy and group-theoretically derived effective tunneling
              Hamiltonians, how information is transmitted between functional groups capable
              of large-amplitude vibrational motion, over distances too large for direct
              steric interactions to be important.  In particular, how does one functional
              group sense changes in conformation or degree of complexation of another
              functional group.  While the study will be limited to rather small molecules in
              the gas phase by their desire to record rotationally resolved spectra, the high
              precision and high certainty of results obtainable from high-resolution
              spectroscopic techniques should partially offset the disadvantage of not
              studying directly the more important related question of conformational changes
              stimulated by docking phenomena in large biological molecules.  The protein
              chain folding part of the project will use jet-cooled molecular-beam terahertz
              spectroscopy to determine vibrational frequencies and potential functions for
              torsional motions around the peptide linkage in small (i.e. vaporizable)
              protein mimetics, coupled with similar microwave studies to determine precise
              folding structures for a number of low-energy conformations.  The structural
              determinations will also be extended to unbranched alkenes or alkanes, which
              represent the simplest straight-chain carbon backbone skeletons.    

The
              project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
              expertise and research capabilities. Results of the research will provide
              important, qualitatively new information.  This research advances international
              human resources through the participation of a postdoc.  Through the exchange
              of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge
              and promote international understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan
              to publish results of the research in scientific journals and report on the
              findings at scientific meetings. 

