Title       : Proteins of Oxygen-Binding and Energy Metabolism in Muscles of Antarctic Fishes:
               Evolutionary Adjustments to Life at Cold Temperature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2001      
File        : a9909055

Award Number: 9909055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Sidell bsidell@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The suborder Notothenoidei is the dominant fish group of the Southern Ocean
              surrounding Antarctica, both in terms of number of species and biomass. For
              about fourteen million years, these highly successful fish evolved under stable
              thermal conditions that result in body temperatures of about zero degrees
              centigrade throughout their life histories. Evolution this cold environment has
              led to unusual physiological and biochemical characteristics. In some cases,
              the characteristics contribute to overcoming constraints of cold temperature on
              biological processes. In other instances, mutations that probably would have
              been lethal in warmer, less oxygen-rich environments than the Southern Ocean
              have been retained in Antarctic fishes. This research project focuses on three
              major objectives that exploit these unusual conditions to identify mechanisms
              compatible with normal cellular function at cold temperature and to gain unique
              insights into the physiological roles of key intracellular proteins. The three
              lines of study proposed are the molecular basis for the failure of the
              myoglobin encoding gene to be expressed in certain Antarctic notothenioid
              fishes, the basis of the substrate specificity of the enzyme fatty acyl-CoA
              synthetase that is involved in the catabolism of fatty acids, and the
              functional roles played by different isoforms of creatine phosphokinase in
              locomotory muscle of Antarctic fish.	Results from this study will not only
              provide insight into the evolutionary biology of the Antarctic notothenioid
              fishes, but will elucidate important general principles that are applicable to
              widely different taxa beyond the Antarctic.						
