Title       : Seismic Energy: Measurement, Mechanism Dependence, and Scaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2001  
File        : a9909479

Award Number: 9909479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120246             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory C. Beroza beroza@geo.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
This project proposes to study the measurement, mechanism dependence, and
              scaling of seismic energy.  Estimates of the seismic energy have large
              potential errors, with different estimates for the same earthquake commonly
              varying by a factor of 10 or more, and the scaling properties and focal
              mechanism dependence of seismic energy reported by different studies are
              contradictory.  Some studies find that the earthquake stress drop (calculated
              by dividing seismic energy by the seismic moment) varies with earthquake size,
              while other studies find no variation.  Some studies find a systematic
              variation of earthquake stress drop with focal mechanism, while others find no
              mechanism dependence.  Several studies have suggested that teleseismic
              estimates of seismic energy are about an order of magnitude lower than
              near-source estimates, yet the source of this discrepancy has not been
              identified and corrected.  Seismic energy is difficult to estimate because it
              is a broadband measure of the strength of the earthquake source and hence one
              must account and correct for both wave propagation effects and source
              excitation over a wide frequency range.  In the proposed study, the research
              will take advantage of modern broadband digital data to resolve discrepancies
              in estimates of the seismic energy.  These improved estimates will be used to
              test for possible scaling and mechanism dependence and explore their
              implications for the earthquake process.

