Title       : Shelf and Bottom Water Formation Near East Antarctic Polynyas and Glaciers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9909374

Award Number: 9909374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497723             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Fairbanks   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley S. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909374
Fairbanks

This study will investigate how the formation of dense
              water masses on the antarctic continental shelves is affected by the periodic
              flushing by relatively warm circumpolar deep water, and whether the intrusion
              of warm water cna enhance the rate of formation of dense antarctic water.  The
              study involves the observation of water mass modification processes on the
              continental shelf off the Adelie Coast in East Antarctica, near a
              quasi-permanent area of open water in the vicinity of the Mertz and Ninnis
              Glacier tongues - the so-called Mertz polynya.

Antarctic coastal polynyas,
              formed by strong offshore winds, are often referred to as major sea ice and
              salt "factories" because the newly formed ice is blown seaward, allowing more
              ice to be formed along the coast, and because the freezing process increases
              the salinity of the continental shelf water.  The thin ice, or even open water,
              implies significant heat losses from the ocean to the atmosphere, which also
              increases the density of the shelf water.  The shelf water sinks, fills any
              depressions in the bottom, and is gravitationally driven down the continental
              slope.  An additional process is identified for this study and is expected to
              be at work in this area: the intrusion of relatively warm water onto the
              continental shelf, overriding the shelf water and essentially shutting down the
              densification processes.
    
 The study will make use of the RVIB Nathaniel
              B. Palmer to obtain a closely spaced array of hydrographic stations over the
              continental shelf and slope along the George V Coast in the austral summer. 
              The dat obtained here will complement a similar winter study by the Australian
              National Antarctic Program.
***

