Title       : Interactions Between Streams and Groundwater Along the River Continuum: Scaling
               up to a Stream Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2002  
File        : a9909564

Award Number: 9909564
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299914             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy D. Haggerty haggertr@science.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. Wondzell  (Principal Investigator former)
              Frederick J. Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9909564
Wondzell 


The objective of our study is to assess the relative
              importance of the factors controlling hyporheic exchange flow and provide the
              data needed to refine conceptual models that describe the extent of the
              hyporheic zone and its influence on stream ecosystems across scales ranging
              from individual stream reaches to entire stream networks.  We will use
              extensive stream surveys to characterize the range of variability in channel
              and valley floor morphologic features in mountain stream networks, and use
              MODFLOW as a tool to explore the sensitivity of hyporheic exchange flows to
              morphologic features.  MODFLOW simulations calibrated to existing study sites
              will serve as the starting point for these sensitivity analyses.  A series of
              simulations will be analyzed to determine the sensitivity of exchange flows to
              the presence and absence of secondary channels, differing channel sinuosities,
              sediment depth, saturated hydraulic conductivity (k), and spatial heterogeneity
              of k, presence or absence of log jams, and different combinations of
              longitudinal channel gradient and pool-step structure.  Model predictions will
              be verified using conservative tracer time of stream water to wells in a subset
              of the stream reaches we survey.  We will examine the relative importance of
              these controlling factors in streams of different sizes and with differing
              degrees of channel constraint.  Further, we will compare stream reaches in
              managed forests with those in wilderness areas to determine the effect of land
              management practices on the factors controlling hyporheic exchange flows.

