Title       : FIRE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a9909501

Award Number: 9909501
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $951950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith Vecchione judith vecchione@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9909501
VECCHIONE

WGBH Educational Foundation is producing a four-hour
              documentary special, "Fire," to be broadcast as a NOVA special.  The series
              will present the story of fire as an important but often overlooked key to
              understanding the natural world and our shared environmental history.  Humans
              have used fire in virtually every aspect of our existence:  for heat and light,
              as a tool and a source of power, for the private rituals of spiritual life and
              the monumental reshaping of entire landscapes.  Fire acts as a significant
              agent of change in our world today, and the interaction of fire and humans is
              now acknowledged as a significant part of global climate change research and of
              biodiversity and ecosystem health studies.  Fire will examine these and other
              powerful and fundamental scientific questions related to fire being explored
              today.  The project will integrate fire history with an understanding of the
              scientific principles of fire chemistry and behavior, and it will link that
              knowledge with ecology, agriculture, forestry and resource management.  

An
              integrated outreach campaign will accompany the television series.  It will be
              built around a resource kit, offered in both print and CD-ROM formats, with
              activities and other resources for families and youth organizations at the late
              elementary and early middle school level.  There also will be special web pages
              within NOVA's award-winning web site that will include the "Fire" resource kit
              materials.  

The PI and Series Producer will be Judith Vecchione whose
              credits include the NSF-supported series on women scientists today,
              "Discovering Women."  Paula Apsell, Executive Producer for NOVA, will be
              Executive-in-Charge.  The Film Director will be Kirk Wolfinger whose prior NOVA
              productions include "Submarine!," "Titanic's Lost Sister," "Daredevils of the
              Sky," and "To the Moon."  The Series Senior Advisor is Stephen J. Pyne,
              Professor of History at Arizona State University.  Dr. Pyne is an environmental
              historian and author of the five-book "Cycle of Fire" suite.  Other advisors
              include:  Norman L. Christensen, Dean of the Nicholas School of Environment at
              Duke University; Johann Georg Goldammer, Senior Scientist and leader of the
              Fire Ecology and Biomass Burning Research Groups of the Max Planck Institute
              for Chemistry; Robert Huggins, Servicewide Education Coordinator for the
              National Park Service; Elizabeth A. Povinelli, Associate Professor of
              Anthropology at the University of Chicago; Marcella Russell, Regional Liaison
              for the Massachusetts Parent Involvement Project; and Brian Stocks, Senior Fire
              Research Scientist at the Canadian Forest Service.


