Title       : Collaborative Research: Geomorphic-Geodynamic Coupling at the Orogen Scale: A
               Himalayan Transect in Central Nepal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a9909382

Award Number: 9909382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295031             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil F. Humphrey neil@auk.gg.uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9909382
Humphrey

One of the most provocative - yet largely untested - recent
              hypotheses concerning orogenic evolution is that regional variations in climate
              strongly influence spatial variations in the style and magnitude of deformation
              across an actively deforming orogen.  Recent progress in quantifying rates of
              both tectonic and geomorphic processes and in modeling surface and lithospheric
              processes sets the stage for an integrated, quantitative, field-and model-
              based investigation of the interactions and feedbacks between geomorphic,
              climatic, and tectonic processes.  This project involves an examination of
              these interactions where they are likely to be most clearly expressed:  the
              Nepalese Himalaya.  Not only is this the quintessential colloisional orogenic
              belt, but its topographic growth and erosional history have been suggested as
              key controls on global climatic changes.  The integrated study focuses on a
              major transverse catchment, stretching from the edge of the Tibetan Plateau to
              the foreland and traversing some of the highest topography in the world.  This
              transect spans the major structural elements of the Himalaya, as well as
              monsoon-to-rainshadow climatic conditions.  The Principal Investigators bring
              together expertise in process-based geomorphology, glaciology, climatology,
              structural geology, thermochronology, cosmogenic radionuclide dating, modeling,
              and documentary film making for a multi-pronged approach intended to evaluate
              one overarching, but largely untested hypothesis:  Rates of erosion vary
              spatially as a function of climate and this spatial variability in erosion
              controls the partitioning of deformation within an orogen.
*** 




