Title       : Active Learning as a Basis for Reform of Undergraduate Life Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a9909411

Award Number: 9909411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $458422             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold I. Modell modell@physiologyeducation.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Physiology Ed Rsrch Consor
	      P.O. Box 51187
	      Seattle, WA  981151184    206/522-6045

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Meaningful reform in science education is onlly possible if we sucessfully
              translate knowledge gained from educational research to practical applications
              in the classroom.  Guided by emerging theory, we must determine what classroom
              approaches will best faculty to help students attain more meaningful learning. 
              It is through this applied research that we will reach the goal of a general
              population that understands science.  The first steps in detemining if more
              "meaningful learning" is occurring is to measure the knowledge and skills base
              of students as they enter our courses (the input state) and to define, in
              explicit terms, measurable outcomes that reflect the desired learning (the
              output state).
     This project focuses first on developing appropriate tools
              for measuring conceptual change and conceptual learning in physiology.  The
              project then uses these measurement tools to examine the effectiveness of
              active learning techniques (helping students build and test mental models) in
              helping students remedy existing misconceptions and improve conceptual
              learning.  The project consists of three studies.  The goal of Study 1 is to
              gain a better understanding of the actual knowledge and skills base of
              undergraduate students entering physiology courses and to determine the
              prevalence of misconceptions held by these students.  Study 2 examines the
              types of instructor-students interactions that lead to successful conceptual
              change (remedy of existing misconceptions) in the student laboratory
              environment.  Study 3 examines two approaches to helping
students build
              appropriate mentals models of physiological systems (i.e., conceptual
              learning). One set of experiments is designed to determine if helping students
              build and apply general models of recurring in physiology (as opposed to
              viewing the concepts in terms of situationally specific models) leads to
              greater conceptual learning.  A second set of experiments focuses on two
              questions related to the use of problem solving as a vehicle for promoting
              conceptual learning.  First, do problem solving exercises provide a conceptual
              framework that enhances conceptual learning?
Second, is the manner in which
              the problems are used (i.e., to provide a contexual framework during mental
              model building or as a culminating exercise requiring application of the mental
              developed)  a significant factor in determining the degree of conceptual
              learning attained?  
      The results of this project are relevant to all
              science education.  To help students gain the broadest understanding of
              science, we must discover, in the context of the actual classroom, what
              instructional techniques best help them build and use appropriate mental
              models.
