Title       : Methods of Uncertainty Analysis of Complex Non-Linear Components in Integrated
               Systems Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2000   
File        : a9909139

Award Number: 9909139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Stone phstone@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jochem Marotzke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The PIs propose to test a methodology for conducting uncertainty analysis of
              complex, highly non-linear models with discontinuous states and apply the
              techniques to better characterize the likelihood that greenhouse gas forcing
              could cause a highly non-linear response in large-scale earth systems. 

The
              PIs will utilize two approaches: (i) a Monte Carlo approach in which thousands
              of runs of a given complex model are required, and (ii) the Deterministic
              Equivalent Modeling Method (DEMM). DEMM will be applied to a coupled
              ocean-atmosphere model, viz the ocean general circulation model (OGCM) of
              Marshall (MIT) coupled to a two-dimensional representation of the atmosphere
              (the Integrated Global System Model or IGSM). The OGCM is a complex model that
              exhibits nonlinear behavior, including the shutdown of the thermohaline
              circulation (THC). The IGSM includes the Emissions Prediction and Policy
              Analysis (ESSA) model that predicts economic activity, energy use and resulting
              anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions in response to given climatic changes; a
              coupled model of atmospheric composition and climate prediction that includes a
              two-dimensional land-ocean model based on the atmospheric GCM developed at
              Goddard Institute for Space Studies; and the Terrestrial Ecosystem Model that
              simulates the ecosystem response, i.e., carbon and nitrogen fluxes and
              reservoir sizes in response to changes of climate and CO2. The work is
              important because it will yield useful insights into the quantification of
              climate model uncertainties. The results will be of interest to policy makers
              as well as scientists involved in climate modeling.  

The award is funded
              under NSF's Methods and Models for Integrated Assessment (MMIA) initiative.

