Title       : Contradictory Trends in the History of Cenzoic Corals and Coral Reefs:
               Oceanographic Change and Biotic Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a9909485

Award Number: 9909485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy B. Jackson jbjackson@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth G. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909485
Jackson
A fundamental question in paleontology concerns the
              consistency of biotic responses to environmental perturbations that occur
              repeatedly but in different contexts in earth history.  The aim of this
              research project is to document the response of Cenozoic Caribbean reef coral
              communities to changes in paleoceanographic conditions during two episodes of
              rapid biotic change.  Large numbers of coral species became extinct during both
              the Early Miocene and Early Pleistocene, and extensive reef tracts disappeared
              from the Caribbean during the Early Miocene transition and did not return until
              after the Early Pleistocene extinction.  Therefore, the regional development of
              constructional coral reef ecosystems is apparently not correlated with coral
              species diversity.  This paradox suggests that these two episodes were
              associated with alternating paleoceanographic conditions.  One model proposes a
              switch from predominant benthic to planktonic productivity during the Early
              Miocene followed by a switch back to more oligotrophic conditions during the
              Pleistocene.  We will explore this hypothesis through rigorous documentation of
              the changing patterns of reef-coral diversity and by regional analysis of the
              biotic component of sediments.
Exposures of Late Oligocene to Middle Miocene
              coral bearing rocks will be examined along an east-west transect extending from
              the gulf coast of North America to the windward isles.  Large new collections
              of fossil corals will be made to supplement existing museum collections and a
              new database of species level occurrences will be compiled.  This database will
              be added to the existing Late Neogene data to determine rates of species
              appearance and disappearance in the Northern Caribbean.  The relative
              contribution of heterotrophic and phototrophic/mixotrophic organisms to near
              shore sediments provide a proxy for paleoproductivity that is independent of
              coral diversity.  This will be evaluated using lithological samples from each
              of the study sites.



