Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Shimura varieties and Automorphic Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a9909797

Award Number: 9909797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Zucker zucker@math.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909797
Zucker

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Steven Zucker of Johns Hopkins University in
              Baltimore, Maryland and Professor Hiroyuki Yoshida of Kyoto University in
              Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study of shimura varieties and
              automorphic forms.  Shimura varieties comprise the number-theoretical
              elaboration on the locally-symmetric varieties of complex geometry.  The
              importance of the later spaces comes from applications to number theory and
              moduli problems.  Most locally-symmetric varieties are non-compact, so it
              becomes necessary to study their compactifications.  The goal of the project
              will be research into the interplay between the various compactifications and
              automorphic forms.  There will be a series of workshops, one of which will be
              accessible to graduate students, postdocs and faculty.  They will also arrange
              for weekly meetings and presentations. They hope to foster interaction between
              mathematicians working on different aspects of the subject and the
              communication of recent progress.  

The project brings together the efforts
              of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
              capabilities.  This field draws from complex geometry, algebraic geometry,
              harmonic analysis, topology, and number theory (both algebraic and analytic). 
              According to conjecture of Langlands, the theory of automorphic representations
              controls a large class of motives.  Therefore, the field holds a rather central
              place within mathematics as a whole.  The project advances international human
              resources through the participation of postdocs and graduate students. Through
              the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of
              basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation.  
              Results of the research will be published in international scientific journals
              and also presented at scientific meetings in the U.S. and abroad.

