Title       : Developing, Supporting, and Aligning Classroom and Large-Scale Assessment to
               Substain Education Reform: Phase One
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a9909370

Award Number: 9909370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1505125            (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Myron Atkin atkin@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Shavelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Standards-based reform in science education continues to move forward at
              the national, state, and local
levels.  The increasing numbers of
              standards-based initiatives not withstanding, a serious obstacle to continued
              progress is a sparseness of classroom assessment practices that both comport
              with the National Science Education Standards and lead to improvements in
              student learning.  This project, therefore, investigates an innovation that has
              the potential to raise student achevement in science education to the level and
              quality espoused in standards-based reform efforts:  the development of models
              and practices to  enhance teachers' formative assessment repertoires.

    
              Using a variety of research methods, this projects investigates and develop
              assessment procedures that teachers can employ to promote the quality of
              science teaching and learning, and related areas of mathematics. 
While the
              focus initially is on formative assessment practices - paying particular
              attention to the impact of these types of classroom assessments on student
              learning, engagement, and sense of purpose -it then moves to teachers'
              summative judgements (assignments of grades, for example) and their link to
              formative work.

     An additional aspect of the project is to identify
              issues associated with broader implementation of programs for teachers that
              support these assessment practices, then develop and test model plans for high
              quality professional-development activities about classroom assessment
              procedures that comport with the research findings.  The research also
              investigates the challenges associated with promulgating these models and
              practices to large numbers of teachers.  Thus the study aims for wide
              dissemination of ways in which students respond to changes in science
              instruction and assessment that aim to enhance their roles in classroom
              assessment, including in peer - and self assessment.

     Toward the end of
              the initial three-year period, the study begins to probe how classroom
              assessment and large-scale assessment might be mutually reinforcing to raise
              educational quality.  A second phase - to study and formulate alternative
              large-scale assessment systems that integrate classroom assessments with
              examination data for accountability and monitoring purposes - may follow if
              evidence warrants.

