Title       : HBCU: Enhancing Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (SMET)
               Education at Clark Atlanta University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a9909014

Award Number: 9909014
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Winfred Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark Atlanta University
	      223 James P. Brawley Dr. S.W.
	      Atlanta, GA  303144358    404/880-8000

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1594,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              CLARK ATLANTA UNIVERSITY

Clark Atlanta University (CAU) proposes a program,
              Enhancing Science, Mathematics,
Engineering and Technology Education
              (SMET-Ed), that will increase the number of minority
students enrolling in,
              and successfully completing baccalaureate programs that will prepare them
to
              pursue graduate degrees in SMET disciplines. This will be accomplished through
              faculty
enhancement, curriculum reform and enhancements, infrastructure
              development, undergraduate
research experiences and critical transition
              activities. Specific desired outcomes are to achieve by
2004, at least, an
              undergraduate SMET enrollment of 1500, graduation classes with 250
              SMET,
majors, better than 80% retention of SMET students and 60% of each SMET
              graduating class
continuing to graduate school. The proposed program, SMET-Ed,
              will support 30-50 students
per year and impact over 1500 SMET students at the
              Atlanta University Center. It will ensure
that all students have access to an
              excellent undergraduate SMET education and are taught
through direct
              experiences and inquiry-based learning.

Faculty enhancements will be
              accomplished through sabbatical/exchange programs, rewards for the best student
              mentors, visiting faculty programs, seminars and release time for SMET
              enhancement activities. Curriculum enhancements will involve development of
              courses/labs, revisions and assistance programs for SMET gate-keeping
              bottleneck courses, and integration of research into the curriculum. The new
              courses will include Preparatory General Chemistry, Problem Solving,
              Introduction to High Performance computing and environmental management and
              treatment technologies, precalculus, and electives in Astronomy and
              semiconductor devices. The revision and assistance program will affect all the
              introductory bottleneck courses in the SMET disciplines. A Design and Research
              Integration Learning Lab (DRILL) will be initiated to enhance research
              integration into the curriculum. Scientific writing and GRE Workshops will be
              organized to better prepare SMET students for graduate school. SMET students
              will be encouraged to seek a minor in information science and technology. The
              computer and network-based distance learning activities will enhance access to
              networked computer labs that provide greater instructional capabilities and
              support distance learning as part of a retention strategy.

Infrastructure
              development will involve the purchase of equipment/instrumentation and the
              strengthening of the abilities of technical support personnel. Undergraduate
              research experiences will be enhanced through the Program for Undergraduate
              Research Experience (PURE), the Summer Undergraduate Research Exchange (SURE)
              and the Annual Competition for Originality in Research and Design (ACORD).
              SMET-Ed will ensure that every undergraduate SMET major participates in a
              research experience. It will also provide bridging strategies to address high
              school/undergraduate, undergraduate/graduate, and university/job market
              transitions. Planning, formative and summative evaluations will be conducted to
              measure the project outcomes, ascertain the merit and value of the activities,
              determine how mid-corrections will be made, and ensure that NSF policies and
              guidelines are strictly adhered to. Professor Y. D. Yeboah who has management
              training from the MIT Sloan School of Management and over 20 years of project
              management experience will direct the program. A Leadership Team of the chairs
              of the SMET departments and an Advisory Committee of internal and external
              experts will assist Professor Yeboah. The commitment of CAU is evidenced from
              the participation of Deans, release time for faculty, reduced indirect cost,
              and matching of equipment cost. CAU intends to become a leading institution in
              the production of well-prepared recipients of baccalaureate degrees in SMET
              disciplines who matriculate in the best research universities for advanced
              degrees. SMET-Ed will have a major impact in reversing the current decline in
              African American graduate enrollment.

