Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Evolution of Evolutionary Rates: A Genomic
               Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a9909348

Award Number: 9909348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Thorne thorne@stat.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5921,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9909348
Thorne

This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project between Professor Jeffrey Thorne of North Carolina State University in
              Raleigh and Professor Hirohisa Kishino of the University of Tokyo in Japan. 
              The researchers will be undertaking a study of the evolution of evolutionary
              rates: a genomic perspective.  Estimating times since common ancestry of DNA
              and protein sequences (i.e. divergence times) is typically accomplished by
              assuming that all evolutionary lineages change at identical rates.  In reality,
              closely-related evolutionary lineages are more likely to experience similar
              rates of evolution than distantly related lineages.  The researchers are
              developing statistical methods for estimating divergence times that lack the
              restrictive and implausible assumption that rates of evolution have been
              constant over time.  Future directions will include incorporation of  fossil
              information into the method and its extension to data sets containing
              information from multiple genes.  Other plans include simulation studies of
              proposed and existing methods and a careful statistical treatment of prior
              information regarding divergence times and other model parameters.

The
              project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
              expertise and research capabilities. Results of the research will have
              important applications in evolutionary biology (estimating species divergence
              times) as well as in epidemiology.  For example, it will help in estimating the
              times at which different strains of a pathogen arose.  This research advances
              international human resources through the participation of graduate students. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  A web page will be constructed at
              http://statgen.ncsu.edu/thorne/divtime.html.  This page will have a brief
              description of the methodology being supported by this project as well as
              directions for downloading the resulting software.



