Title       : Development of Accurate Radiocarbon Chronologies for Antarctic Margin Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2001  
File        : a9909782

Award Number: 9909782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Hayes jhayes@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy I. Eglinton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for development of improved methods
              for determination of the ages of sea-floor sediment layers. These methods are
              needed particularly for use with samples from Antarctic coastal environments.
              The results will lead to better reconstruction of the locations of the
              Antarctic ice margins during the past 20,000 years. In turn, that information
              will lead to a better understanding of relationships between the Antarctic ice
              sheets and global climate, including sea-level changes both in the past and in
              the future. 

Present estimates of the timing of Antarctic environmental
              changes during the past 20,000 years are based largely on radiocarbon ages of
              organic materials. On the Antarctic continent, most of these dates have come
              from recognizable remnants of biological materials for which the origin is
              clear. In contrast, when samples have come from coastal oceanic sediments, most
              dates have been based on the analysis of total ("acid-insoluble") organic
              carbon, which can derive from multiple sources. In particular, the mixing of
              old organic material, eroded from the continent, with fresh products from
              oceanic surface waters can lead to sediment layers with apparent ages
              significantly greater than the time that has elapsed since their deposition.
              The extent to which such effects explain discrepancies between continental and
              oceanic chronologies in Antarctica is not known. Resolution of these
              discrepancies is crucial to reduction of uncertainties regarding Antarctic
              effects on climate and sea-level change.

Accurate dates for organic
              materials in sea-floor sediments can already be obtained by use of chemical
              techniques in which single organic compounds are isolated and submitted for
              radiocarbon analysis. The requirements of such techniques in terms of sample
              size, operator expertise, and time are, however, prohibitively high, given that
              large numbers of dates are needed. To circumvent that problem, this project
              will develop a streamlined procedure in which biologically related groups of
              compounds, securely identified as fresh, oceanic products, are isolated for
              dating. These will include both specific classes of compounds and, in a
              parallel project, materials trapped within an inorganic matrix of marine
              origin, namely the opal produced by diatoms. Very substantial increases in
              sample throughput should result. Compound-specific radiocarbon analyses will be
              used to guide the development of these techniques and to check the results.
              Accelerator mass spectrometry will be used for all determinations of the
              abundance of carbon-14.


