Title       : Boundary-Oriented Precipitation Model: Toward Developing Instantaneous
               Representation of Global Precipitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a9909258

Award Number: 9909258
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222414             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick T. Newell Patrick.Newell@jhuapl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Sotirelis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks continuation of support, to characterize global electron
              precipitation patterns.  Earlier results include basic research findings, such
              as suppression of intense discrete aurora in sunlight, and surprising results
              about solar cycle dependencies, as well as the development of a
              boundary-oriented precipitation model.

The boundary-oriented model has
              several advantages, including that diffuse aurora is compared only to diffuse
              aurora, discrete to discrete, polar rain to polar rain, and so forth.  A
              powerful advantage of the boundary-oriented model is that it allows
              extrapolation from observations at a few given local times to the rest of the
              oval on a much more reliable basis (e.g., intense discrete aurora at
              premidnight are not interpreted as implying much about diffuse aurora
              postmidnight).  Thus the boundary-oriented model should prove more adaptable to
              estimating global precipitation patterns.

Instead of organizing the
              precipitation data by solar wind inputs or magnetometer indices (KP or AE
              levels), the data is self-organized, in the sense that a particle boundary
              (b2i, corresponding to the stretching of the magnetotail) is used.  Making the
              model a bivariant function, including the open flux in the polar cap extends
              this self-organization.  These two variables, b2i (magnetotail stretching) and
              open flux collectively represent the instantaneous state of the magnetosphere
              better than does simply knowing the input (solar wind) or ground magnetometer
              values.  Moreover, the self-organizing nature of the approach also lends itself
              well to using individual pairs of DMSP satellite oval crossing (giving four
              local time snapshots) to infer the global precipitation pattern.

