Title       : Quantitative Assessment of the Economic and Institutional Impacts of Climate
               Change on the Upper Rio Grande Valley Using an Integrated Geographic
               Information System Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9909140

Award Number: 9909140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $674400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Scuderi Tree@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janie Chermak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Olen P. Matthews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Campana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Brookshire  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1317,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Water availability is a critical issue to the viability of the Rio Grande Basin
              of the south central U.S. and northern Mexico as well as to many other regions
              in the world.  As in most semi-arid regions, precipitation is highly variable
              from year to year, and such variability is readily apparent in significant
              environmental and economic impacts throughout the region.  Institutions have
              evolved to cope with complex water-allocation issues in the Rio Grande Basin
              and elsewhere.  Within Colorado, New Mexico, and Texas, the three states
              through which the Rio Grande flows, the water-allocation system protects
              private-property rights while recognizing public rights in the same water,
              reallocation in times of shortage becomes an especially difficult issue. 
              Although reallocation already is occurring, it will accelerate and become a
              policy priority if climate variability increases in association with other
              facets of climate change.  With institutional and economic changes already
              occurring, models of water availability and use must be refined in order to
              better understand the complex interdynamics of these linked human and natural
              systems.  This interdisciplinary research project will use coupled physical,
              biological, and human system models in an integrated framework employing a
              geographic information system (GIS) in order to provide a quantitative
              assessment of the consequences of climate change and its impacts on water
              availability in the Rio Grande Valley in Colorado and New Mexico north of
              Elephant Butte Reservoir.  This integrated assessment will operate entirely
              within a GIS to permit efficient access to and processing of the required
              spatial data.  The modeling framework to be used in this study will be a
              raster-based distributed water-balance approach in which each raster (an areal
              unit) will effectively represent a bucket through which inputs and outputs will
              be routed.  The raster structure will permit variable spatial resolution, with
              smaller cells in some locales and larger cells in others.  The four major
              linked components of the integrated model will deal with water rights,
              climatologic and vegetation inputs, hydrologic response, and economic use and
              valuation of water resources.  Because water law and economics will be
              integrated with physical and biological components, the assessment method will
              be used to evaluate the economic consequences of different kinds of
              environmental policies as well as physical and institutional changes.  In
              addition to providing valuable new insights into the complex dynamics of human
              and natural systems, the project also will further knowledge regarding how
              effectively scale-flexible GIS-based modeling efforts can address critical
              environmental and resource-management problems.

