Title       : Nanostructured Material Synthesis in a Self-Assembled Surfactant Mesophase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a9909912

Award Number: 9909912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $469247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay T. John vijay.john@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arijit Bose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. McPherson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9909912
John, Vijay/Tulane U.

We propose a collaborative
              project to develop new nanostructured materials by exploiting the potentially
              templating environment of a self-assembled surfactant gel phase.  The novelty
              of the gel is the fact that it contains equal volumes of water and an oil
              phase, thus opening up several possibilities of synthesis in dual hydrophobic
              and hydropbilic microenvironments.  Our hypothesis is that the spatial
              immobilization of the hydrophobic and the hydrophilic regions will allow the
              formation of extended structures that are organized over multiple length
              scales.  Our research thus seeks to systematically understand the gel phase and
              to exploit its features for materials synthesis.

The gel mesophase is formed
              by adding lecithin (phosphatidylcholine) to AOT-in-isooctane reverse micelles
              and increasing the water content of the system.  The gel is formed when the
              volume fractions of water and isooctane become approximately equal, and
              continues to be stable upon further increase of the water content.  The gel is
              optically clear and rigid.  Our objective therefore is to synthesize materials
              in the hydrocarbon and aqueous microphases, or to exploit the properties of an
              oil-water interface that is immobilized over large length scales, for
              interfacial synthesis, We propose the synthesis of (a) polymer and inorganic
              materials with extended nanostructures, (b) polymer-inorganic nanocomposites
              where the polymer is synthesized in the oil phase or at the oil-water
              interface, and the inorganic component is synthesized in the aqueous phase, and
              (c) polymer-polymer structured nanocomposites using hydrophobic and hydrophilic
              monomers.  Four different examples of materials synthesis are chosen.  If these
              can be successfully demonstrated, the conceptual framework for generating an
              array of other important materials will have been developed.

Together with
              materials synthesis, we will concurrently carry out extensive studies to
              understand the microstructure of the gel phase and to correlate the gel
              microstructure with the morphology of the materials synthesized in the gel. 
              The proposed work will use the AOT reverse micellar system as a reference point
              and seek to understand the transition to the gel phase.  The synthesis of
              nanoparticles in AOT reverse micelles has been well-studied and it will be of
              interest to follow morphology evolution as the system follows the composition
              trajectory to the gel phase.  Thus the research will seek to provide an
              understanding of how materials morphology can be systematically changed by the
              microstructure evolution of the templating medium.

The research is a
              collaboration between researchers at Tulane University and the University of
              Rhode Island.  It is anticipated that such collaboration will expose the
              students involved, to a broad range of scientific experimental techniques and
              expertise.  The PIs will seek to integrate their research with education both
              at the graduate and at the undergraduate level.

