Title       : Collaborative Research: Paleoceanography of Eocene Decapod-Rich Rocks in
               Antarctica and Southern South America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2000    
File        : a9909719

Award Number: 9909719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. Bice kbice@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Feldmann: OPP 9909184
Bice: OPP 9909719

Abstract
This award, provided by
              the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs,
              supports a paleoceanographic investigation of Eocene rocks from the Antarctic
              Peninsula region. In order to evaluate the question of whether intervals of
              relative warmth in polar latitudes were seasonal or year-round, to determine
              seasonal temperature estimates for near-shore marine habitats, and to refine
              global paleoceanographic models, fossil mollusks will be collected from Eocene
              rocks in Antarctica and southern South America that are known to contain
              decapod crustaceans (crabs and lobsters). The sites at which decapod-rich rocks
              occur are targeted because the decapods provide a unique, diverse database on
              biogeographic distribution throughout the high southern latitudes. Collection
              of mollusks intimately associated with the decapods will permit determination
              of oxygen isotopic compositions (del-18-O values) necessary to provide proxy
              seasonal temperature estimates at the time and in the precise habitat that the
              decapods lived. Concomitant with that work, a series of oceanic and atmospheric
              circulation models will be run in which boundary conditions of atmospheric
              carbon dioxide and mean heat transport in climate model simulations of water
              circulation will be adjusted, using the GENESIS v. 2.0 atmospheric and GFDL MOM
              v. 2.0 ocean models.  The water temperature data derived from analysis of
              fossil material will be used to select the most reasonable atmospheric and
              oceanic circulation models and to evaluate the effects of various gateways to
              circulation in the Antarctic region. The work will provide detailed information
              on seasonal variation in water temperature in near-shore environments of the
              high southern latitudes and will result in refined paleoecological
              interpretations for the decapods that will be essential to make comparisons
              between related fossil and extant species. The study provides a unique
              opportunity for paleontologists and modelers to work together in developing
              efficient ways to utilize specified seasonal sea surface temperature data when
              models are constructed. This program is collaborative between Kent State
              University, the lead institution, and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.
              Furthermore, the work is collaborative with scientists from the Instituto
              Antartico Argentino.

