Title       : Collaborative Research: Exhumation of the Transantarctic Mountains: Constraints
               from (U-Th)/He Dating of Apatites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9909436

Award Number: 9909436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49833              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Farley farley@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909436										
Farley

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and
              Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports an investigation
              of the uplift history of the Dry Valleys segment of the Transantarctic
              Mountains. The overall goal is to further constrain the exhumation history of
              the Transantarctic Mountains by using the newly developed apatite (U-Th)/He
              dating method on samples collected in vertical profiles. This approach,
              combined with existing apatite fission track information will constrain the
              rate and patterns of exhumation across the Transantarctic Mountains since their
              inception as a rift-flank uplift in the early Cenozoic.

This project will
              complement other projects and build on previous interpretations of the
              exhumation and tectonic history determined using apatite fission track
              thermochronology. It will bridge the gap between information on erosion rates
              determined from fission track thermochronology and from cosmogenic surface
              exposure dating and integrate the exhumation history of the mountains with
              their landscape evolution. As such, the results from this project will address
              an outstanding problem in Antarctic science; namely the stability of the East
              Antarctic Ice Sheet, and the timing of the transition from a "warm" dynamic ice
              sheet to a cold polar ice sheet. Highly relevant to this issue is the landscape
              evolution of the Transantarctic Mountains because many diverse lines of
              evidence for the rate of landscape evolution have been used to argue for a
              dynamic ice sheet up until either the Pliocene (the "dynamic" ice sheet model)
              or the middle Miocene (the "stable" ice sheet model). Understanding the past
              stability or dynamic fluctuations of the East Antarctic ice sheet with respect
              to the climate record is, of course, important for understanding how the
              present ice sheet may respond to global warming.

The specific objective of
              this project is to determine apatite (U-Th)/He age versus elevation trends for
              a number of vertical profiles from locations within the Transantarctic Mountain
              front and across the structural grain of the range. Fission track data already
              exist for all of these profiles, with apatite fission track ages ranging from
              150-30 Ma. The greater precision of the (U-Th)/He technique and the fact it
              records information at lower temperatures (closure temperature of ~70 degrees
              Celsius; limits of 40-85 degrees Celsius for the He partial retention zone)
              will allow examination of the exhumation history of the TAM in more detail from
              ca 130 Ma to ~20 Ma. Another facet is to examine areas where Cretaceous
              exhumation is recorded and areas where the fission track profiles indicate
              periods of thermal and tectonic stability and minimal erosion throughout the
              Cretaceous. The variation of timing of the onset of more rapid exhumation
              accompanying uplift and formation of the Transantarctic Mountains in the early
              Cenozoic will also be examined.

