Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Deep Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2001   
File        : a9909583

Award Number: 9909583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig E. Manning manning@ess.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-9909583
Manning

The liberation and movement of aqueous fluids is
              important in many high-pressure geologic processes. For example, aqueous
              solutions are produced during deep-crustal metamorphism, and their migration
              redistributes geologically important elements in the crust. Similarly, in the
              mantle, the source regions for diverse magma types show signs of the passage of
              water-bearing fluids. The transport of substantial quantities of matter arises
              from the increasing solubilities of most minerals in water-rich solutions with
              increasing pressure. However, despite abundant evidence that these processes
              occur in the Earth, systematic study remains limited because the properties of
              the solutes dissolved in the fluid are poorly known at high pressure.

This
              project involves experimental and theoretical investigations of the chemistry
              of aqueous fluids and their dissolved constituents at high pressures (>5 kb).
              The approach is to use recent advances in prediction of the thermodynamic
              properties of aqueous species in deep fluids to compute model phase relations
              in the presence of fluid in different environments. The predictions are then
              used to guide experimental studies on solubilities of major rock-forming
              minerals. In addition, we are determining solubilities of selected
              trace-element oxides to identify elements that should readily be redistributed
              during high-pressure fluid flow. Finally, we are studying the effect of Cl and
              CO2 on fluid transport in deep environments by measuring mineral solubility in
              aqueous solutions containing these components. When completed, the combined
              theoretical and experimental studies will provide a quantitative framework for
              studying the physical and chemical aspects of fluid flow in deep geologic
              environments.


