Title       : Exploring Source Codes for Network Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1999  
File        : a9909026

Award Number: 9909026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99871              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Effros effros@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Network systems and applications, including both established technologies 
like
              wireless voice networks, the internet, and video services and emerging
              
technologies like wireless multimedia, distributed computing, and ubiquitous
              
computing, are undergoing explosive growth.  While these systems differ in
              
many ways, a key bottleneck is common to all of them:  The utility of each
              
of these technologies is limited by the amount of information that can be
              
sent through the corresponding network. Since bandwidth is scarce, making
              
the best use possible of the data rates available is critical.  Thus use of
              
efficient data representations, or source codes, is imperative for maximizing
              
system performance in network technologies.  


This research considers
              new paradigms for source coding in network systems 
and compares those
              paradigms to existing approaches.  The analysis involves 
theoretical proof of
              concept, demonstration of practically achieved gains on 
real data sets, and
              development of efficient codes to achieve those gains.  
Current work focuses
              on source coding for broadcast systems.  Broadcast 
systems play a central
              role in all of the above network technologies, where 
one system node
              ``broadcasts'' both common information (intended for all 
users) and specific
              information (intended for a subset of the users) to the 
other nodes in the
              network.  Existing methods for source coding in broadcast 
systems use
              collections of traditional (single-transmitter, single-receiver) 
source codes
              within the (single-transmitter, multiple-receiver) broadcast 
system.  Current
              work aims to demonstrate and quantify the gains achieved by 
abandoning this
              approach in favor of source codes optimized for broadcast 
systems.
