Title       : LGM Late Pleistocene to Holocene Glacial History of West Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a9909734

Award Number: 9909734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432046             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Anderson johna@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9152,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9909734
Anderson

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and
              Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports research on the
              glaciomarine geology of the continental shelves of West Antarctica and the
              Antarctic Peninsula. It is hypothesized that the different glacial systems of
              the Antarctic Peninsula region have been more responsive to climate change and
              sea-level rise than either the West Antarctic or East Antarctic ice sheets.
              This is due mainly to the smaller size of these ice masses and the higher
              latitude location of the peninsula. Indeed, ice shelves of the Antarctic
              Peninsula are currently retreating at rates of up to a kilometer per year. But
              are these changes due to recent atmospheric warming in the region or are they
              simply the final phase of retreat since the last glacial maximum?

This
              project hypothesizes that the deglacial history of the Antarctic Peninsula
              region has been quite complex, with different glacial systems retreating at
              different rates and at different times. This complex recessional history
              reflects the different sizes as well as different climatic and physiographic
              settings of glacial systems in the region. An understanding of the Late
              Pleistocene to Holocene glacial history of the Antarctic Peninsula glacial
              systems is needed to address how these systems responded to sea-level and
              climate change during that time interval. This investigation acquire new marine
              geological and geophysical data from the continental shelf to determine if and
              when different glacial systems were grounded on the shelf, to establish the
              extent of grounded ice, and to examine the history of glacial retreat. The
              project will build on an extensive seismic data set and hundreds of sediment
              cores collected along the Peninsula during earlier (1980's) cruises. Key to
              this investigation is the acquisition of swath bathymetry, side-scan sonar and
              very high-resolution sub-bottom (chirp) profiles from key drainage outlets.
              These new data will provide the necessary geomorphologic and stratigraphic
              framework for reconstructing the Antarctic Peninsula glacial record.
              Anticipated results will help constrain models for future glacier and ice sheet
              activity.

