Title       : The Mobilization and Transport of Particles and Particle-Associated Contaminants
               in the Unsaturated Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a9909553

Award Number: 9909553
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph N. Ryan joe.ryan@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9909553
Ryan

Many of the hazardous contaminants introduced into the natural
              environment bind strongly to soil surfaces; hence, their mobility is limited by
              sorption.  Clay-and silt-sized particles in soils are primarily responsible for
              the sorption of sorption of contaminants owing to their high surface areas.  In
              the unsaturated zone, these particles are susceptible to mobilization and
              transport by infiltrating rainfall.  If these particles are mobilized, the
              migration of the associated contaminants will increase.  For transport of
              contaminants associated with particles to be significant, three prerequisites
              must be met: (1) there must be a source of particles (mobilization), (2)
              contaminants must sorb to the remain sorbed to the particles (sorption), and
              (3) the particles must migrate downward.  This research plan focuses on
              improved understanding of the source, or mobilization, of particles in the
              unsaturated zone.

We hypothesize that two major factors control the
              mobilization particles in the unsaturated zone: (1) heterogeneity in soil
              structure and (2) characteristics of rainfall events.  Soil structure
              heterogeneity leads to preferential flow paths, or routes of high permeability
              through a matrix of lower permeability.  In soil, these preferential flow paths
              are often referred to as macropores. Macropores are typically formed by soil
              desiccation, root growth, and burrowing fauna.  The flow of infiltrating water
              is funneled through macropores at velocities much greater than those occurring
              in the surrounding soil matrix.  The greater velocities lead to greater shear
              on attached particles and greater particle mobilization.  For rainfall, the
              intensity, duration, and frequency are important.  The intensity of rainfall
              will control the velocity of water flow through the soil and, hence, the extent
              of particle mobilization.  The duration of rainfall events will affect the
              kinetics of particle mobilization, causing a change from a rapid particle
              release during the initial pulse of infiltrating water to a slower steady-state
              rate.  The frequency of rainfall events will control the regeneration of the
              particle supply.

The research plan outlines tests of these hypotheses in
              model systems and real soils.  The model systems will consist of particles and
              media of known size and geometry.  The real soil will extracted from sites at
              which particle-facilitated transport of contaminants may be significant. 
              Measurements focus on the amount, size, and composition of the mobilized
              particles.  Knowledge of these key particle properties will aid in assessment
              of contaminant sorption and particle transport.

