Title       : Inflow Boundary Layer of Atlantic Hurricanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1999 
File        : a9909011

Award Number: 9909011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Businger businger@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary M. Barnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to characterize the evolution of the energy
              content of the marine boundary-layer inflow to hurricanes and its relationship
              with hurricane intensity changes.  This effort will be accomplished in
              cooperation with reconnaissance missions currently planned by the NOAA
              Hurricane Research Division to investigate the energetics of landfalling
              hurricanes.  The key novel feature of this research is the planned deployment
              of NOAA/U of Hawaii Smart Balloons as part of a Lagrangian experimental
              strategy.  The Lagrangian experiment leverages the availability of new
              high-resolution Global Positioning System (GPS) dropwindsondes, turbulent flux
              sensors, and the Doppler radar on the NOAA WP-3D aircraft.

Since there may
              be significant cross-stream variability in the inflow, the plan includes
              acquisition of critical in situ data on the thermodynamic history and
              trajectories of air parcels in the inflow layer.  Meteorological and GPS
              position data will be collected by a proven balloon-borne instrument platform
              (Smart Balloon), developed at NOAA's Air Resources Lab, Field Research
              Division.  The data will be transmitted via satellite cellular telephone to the
              National Hurricane Center (NHC) and the WP-3D aircraft. The Smart Balloon has a
              large dynamic lift range (sea level to 6 km), provided by a high strength
              spherical shell and a pump and release valve on an internal pressurized air
              bladder. This design allows the balloons to remain within prescribed altitude
              operating limits in the boundary layer despite precipitation loading and
              effects of radiative heating and cooling on balloon lift. The instrument and
              transponder package will be contained within the outer shell of the balloon to
              protect them from environmental hazards.

At the outset of each field
              experiment, two smart balloons will be deployed from a coastal location within
              250 km of a passing hurricane. This strategy will allow the NOAA WP-3D aircraft
              to make a series of measurements in the vicinity of the balloons as they
              approach the hurricane eyewall.  Balloon release sites and times will be chosen
              based on storm-track predictions from NCEP and forecasts of air-parcel
              trajectories made at the University of Hawaii. Sites along the affected US
              coast will serve as release points to investigate the evolution and impact of
              air streams of continental origin, while island sites (e.g., Puerto Rico) can
              serve as release points to investigate trajectories that remain over the open
              ocean. This research will improve our understanding of how the thermodynamics
              and angular momentum fields in the core of hurricanes are related.  Real-time
              data, especially wind data, collected by the Smart Balloons and aircraft during
              the experiment will be made available to the National Hurricane Center and the
              National Center for Environmental Prediction to aid in preparation of hurricane
              intensity forecasts, watches, and warnings prior to landfall.

