Title       : SGER: Development of a Research Agenda for Biomedical Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9909874

Award Number: 9909874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Floyd H. Grant hgrant@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) provides funding for the
              exploration of the unique research needs of biomedical manufacturing and the
              definition of an appropriate research mechanism for delivering those needs. 
              The biomedical industry is one of the largest and fastest growing segments of
              the world economy.  It includes highly sophisticated products, which are
              complex to manufacturing and have relatively short product lives.  This is
              particularly true of electronic products, with product lives similar to the
              computer industry.  Additionally, it will include many products, which are not
              currently possible to manufacture, such as a tissue-engineered liver.  Two
              companies are currently marketing manufactured skin.  As part of this project,
              biomedical companies will be interviewed and included in an advisory board to
              help define the biomedical manufacturing research needs along with
              representatives from government and academe.  The state of the art in
              manufacturing research relating to the biomedical industry will be defined. 
              Government regulatory requirements will be investigated and the impact of these
              requirements on biomedical manufacturing will be characterized. 

The
              successful conclusion of this research will lead to improved biomedical
              manufacturing processes and improved efficiency in the transfer of biomedical
              prototype products and processes to full-scale production.  It will define the
              unique research requirements for biomedical manufacturing and transfer those
              requirements to academic and industrial research groups for implementation. 
              Further, this project will define the most appropriate research mechanism for
              performing biomedical manufacturing research which will deliver the research
              results to industry.
 
