Title       : Investigations of Abandoned Penguin Colonies in Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a9909274

Award Number: 9909274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79371              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Emslie emslies@uncwil.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Factors which influence the distribution and long-term success of populations in
              the marine ecosystem are of current interest to those studying the relationship
              between climate and population dynamics in Antarctica. The focus of this
              project is Adelie penguins and population response by this species to late
              Holocene climatic change. The study will integrate date from the ecological,
              geological and paleobiological records with satellite imagery analyses to test
              the hypothesis that Adelie penguins have been responding to climate change over
              decades to centuries in a predictable manner and that fluctuations in sea-ice
              extent and marine productivity are the primary parameters from which to measure
              these responses. Thus, past responses by penguins to climate change as
              indicated by the paleoecological record should reflect those observed today
              with regional warming over the past twenty to fifty years. The study will
              include field and laboratory investigations of abandoned colonies along coastal
              Antarctica. Excavations of field sites which are located within current
              population centers of Adelie penguins will be conducted in the Ross Sea Region
              and along the Antarctic Peninsula. The occupation history of each abandoned
              colony will be determined by collecting surface and subsurface bones, feathers,
              and eggshell fragments preserved in these sites for identification and
              radiocarbon analyses. Sediments sifted from each site will allow recovery of
              organic remains (such as squid beaks and fish otoliths) that represent the
              former diet of penguins. These remains can be quantified statistically to
              assess changes in prey consumption by penguins in relation to past episodes of
              climate change that are well documented for the late Pleistocene and Holocene
              in ice-core and marine-sediment records. The multidisciplinary approach lends
              strength to the approach to test hypotheses related to population distribution
              and climate change.
