Title       : GOALI: Integrating Industry Perspectives into University Research by Creating
               Teams of Academic-Industry Technology Specialists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9909015

Award Number: 9909015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph I. Goldstein jig0@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda L. Slakey  (Principal Investigator former)
              Sam Orlando  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Hallock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zvi Rozen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9147,9290,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) provides
              funding to create four different teams combining faculty and graduate student
              scholars at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst with Kollmorgen Technology
              Specialists by bringing the latter to the campus for a two month, full time
              assignment at the University and subsequent six month period of part-time
              interaction.  Each team will focus on a different technology taking advantage
              of an existing alliance to advance innovative concepts that could serve as a
              model for other institutions in developing stronger ties between industry and
              academe.  The technical areas to be undertaken will include:  (1) Motion
              Technology-Components and Systems; (2) Digital Video Processing; (3) Imaging
              Sensors;  (4) Human-Machine Interfaces; (5) Real Time Software, Embedded
              Computer and Logic Devices; and  (6) Advanced Structures and Materials. 
              Industry/Academic teams will expose faculty and students in the industry
              perspective and the integrative skills needed by engineers in the market.  The
              University will gain short-term research participants who have been designated
              by Kollmorgen to be in-house experts in the technologies undertaken during the
              project.  The presence of industry specialists in the laboratories and the
              integrative program support will act as a catalyst for faculty and graduate
              student teams to broaden their scope and consideration of research applications
              at the same time.  

The industry residency and team creation program is
              designed to help bridge the gap between practice and scholarship in rapidly
              changing fields of technology.  The research includes an assessment component
              to examine the milestones of the effort at the nine-month and eighteen-month
              points of progress.  The lessons learned will be shared with other research and
              academic organizations upon which to build long term research and support
              models.

