Title       : Collaborative Research: Comparing Upper Ordovician-Lower Silurian Carbonate
               Platforms in Estonia and the Great Basin: A Test of Synchrony of Sequences and
               Faunal Changes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a9909286

Award Number: 9909286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. Harris mtharris@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5915,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative Research: Comparing Upper Ordovician-Lower Silurian Carbonate
              Platforms in Estonia and the Great Basin: A Test of the Synchrony of Sequences
              and Faunal Changes


	The principal investigatorsU previous work in the
              Great Basin documented unconformity-bound rock units (sequences) that correlate
              to those described elsewhere in North America.  Reorganizations of faunal
              communities coincided with sequence boundaries, suggesting a causal link
              between maximum physical disruption and community-level changes.  This study
              will test the correlation of sequences to community reorganizations in other
              continental blocks, the extent of community changes in endemic
(localized)
              versus cosmopolitan (worldwide) faunas, and the possible mechanisms for
              community change. 
	The heart of the proposal is a detailed sedimentological,
              sequence stratigraphy, and paleontological study of the Baltic section through
              a collaborative study with five Estonian colleagues.  The Estonian section was
              located on a different continental block, contains both endemic Ordovician and
              cosmopolitan Silurian faunas, and brackets one of the major Paleozoic
              extinction events at the end of the Ordovician.  In addition, there is a large
              amount of existing paleontological and sedimentological data (including isotope
              stratigraphy), and it can be studied in both outcrop (providing good faunal
              information) and core (providing nearly complete stratigraphic coverage from
              shelf areas into the basin).  These characteristics will allow development of a
              stratigraphic model within
which faunal distributions can be readily
              established and compared to the Great Basin patterns. 
	The proposal includes
              funding for a three-year collaboration among nine scientists: two principal
              investigators, one post-doctoral investigator, one MS student, and five
              Estonian scientists.  (Some costs may be covered by NSFUs Division of
              International Programs.)  It will significantly foster international
              collaboration between US and Eastern European scientists, and provide the
              principal investigators and the MS
student international research experience. 
              In addition, the Ordovician part of this study will also contribute to the
              newly established International Global Correlation Project 410 (Ordovician
              Global Biodiversity) in which both the principal investigators and
              Estonian
scientists are active.


