Title       : Collaborative Research: WinDSSOcK: Winter Distribution and Success of Southern
               Ocean Krill
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a9909956

Award Number: 9909956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305471             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eileen E. Hofmann   (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Klinck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ricardo A. Locarnini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is a contribution to a coordinated attempt to understand the
              interactions of biological and physical dynamics by developing relationships
              among the evolution of the antarctic winter ice and snow cover, biological
              habitat variability, and the seasonal progression of marine ecological
              processes.   The work will be carried out in the context of the Southern Ocean
              Experiment of the Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics Study (Globec), a large,
              multi-investigator study of the winter survival strategy of krill under the
              antarctic sea ice in the vicinity of Marguerite Bay on the western side of the
              Antarctic Peninsula.

There are two aspects to this project:  the
              characterization of the regional hydrography, and the development of a
              hierarchy of models to organize and integrate the physical and biological
              observations.

The water masses on the continental shelf off Marguerite Bay
              consist of inflowing Upper Circumpolar Deep Water, which is relatively warm,
              salty, oxygen-poor, and nutrient-rich.  In winter atmospheric processes cool
              and freshen this water, and recharge it with oxygen to produce Antarctic
              Surface Water which is diffused seaward, and supports both a sea ice cover and
              a productive krill-based food web.  This project will define these water masses
              with repeated regional temperature, salinity, nutrients, and oxygen surveys,
              supplemented by a moored current meter and temperature array, and by acoustic
              surveys to observe the upper ocean current structure.

The modeling effort
              will provide a mechanism to link water column and sea ice processes with the
              biology of krill and its predators.  It will further help to link these winter
              observations to similar observations made in summer and elsewhere around
              Antarctic in the international context of the Globec program.  Three major
              types of models will be used to order the various observations: (1)
              time-dependent biological models - e.g. species interaction models; (2)
              depth-time models of both physical and biological characteristics - e.g. effect
              of snow, ice, and water turbidity on the distribution of light, and (3)
              three-dimensional and time-dependent models synthesizing physical and
              biological models over the continental shelf.   The specific objective is to
              develop a comprehensive ecosystem in order to test our understanding of the
              system, determine its sensitivities, and to provide an organizing mechanism for
              integrating the Southern Ocean Globec observations.	
***

