Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Physiological and Cellular Functions for the
               Signaling Enzyme Phospholipase D
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a9909888

Award Number: 9909888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Frohman Michael@pharm.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909888
Frohman

This award supports a two year collaborative research
              project between Professor Michael Frohman of the State University of New York
              (SUNY), Stony Brook and Professor Yasunori Kanaho of the Tokyo Institute of
              Technology in Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a study of the
              physiological and cellular functions for the signalling enzyme phospholipase D
              (PLD).  PLD is a recently identified mammalian signal transducer that is
              believed to play important roles in agonist-induced cellular responses
              including membrane vesicular trafficking (secretion and endocytosis),
              proliferation, and differentiation.  Recent studies have demonstrated to some
              extent the mechanism through which PLD is regulated.  However, the
              physiological and cellular functions of PLD remain to be clarified.  The aims
              of this project are to determine the signaling pathway(s) in which PLD is
              involved and the consequence(s) of PLD activation, using biochemical, molecular
              biological, cell biological, and transgenic approaches.  The researchers will
              identify effectors downstream of PLD activation and determine how their
              activity changes in the absence of PLD, or when wild type, dominant negative,
              and constitutively active PLD mutants are over-expressed.  

The project
              brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
              expertise and research capabilities.  The U.S. researchers' expertise is in the
              area of molecular biology and the Japanese have expertise in biochemical
              probes.  Results of the research will provide a greater understanding of
              cellular stimulus response pathways.  As these pathways are defined and their
              metabolic intermediates identified, therapeutic advances are being realized as
              specific new pharmaceutical agents are discovered.  This research advances
              international human resources through the participation of postdocs and
              graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project
              will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of the
              research in scientific journals. 

