Title       : Collaborative Research: Space-Time Variability of Rainfall and its Effects on
               Rainfall Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a9909696

Award Number: 9909696
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180809             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Smith jsmith@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthias Steiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Smith - 
9909696

This work is a collaborative research effort between
              Princeton University, the University of Washington, and the University of
              Oklahoma, supported by collaboration with the USDA/ARS National Sedimentation
              Laboratory.  The central theme of the proposed research is on the
              characterization of the variability of rainfall in space and time, how that
              depends on the storm environment, and how this space-time variability affects
              our capability to estimate surface rainfall and rainfall kinetic energy.  Radar
              observations at very high spatial (tens of meters) and temporal (tens of
              seconds) resolution will be made over the dense rain gauge network of the
              Goodwin Creek research watershed in northern Mississippi.  These detailed
              observations are embedded with the larger-scale NEXRAD WSR-88D radar
              observations, and measurement of the storm environment.

This work entails
              detailed Lagrangian, radar-based analyses of storm cells, their evolution and
              motion, and how that results in the observed spatial rainfall distribution..
              These space-time analyses of rainfall at the regional scale will be linked to
              physical properties of the storm environment.  At the Goodwin Creek watershed
              scale, key error sources of the different approaches (i.e., rain gauge, radar,
              and radar-gauge combined) to estimate rainfall rate and kinetic energy flux in
              space and time will be investigated.  In particular, we seek to determine how
              much of the variance of radar-estimated versus rain gauge-accumuluated rainfall
              amount can be explained by the sampling volume difference in combination with
              the subgrid-scale rainfall variability, which is linked to physical parameters
              that characterize the atmospheric storm environment.  We anticipate that our
              results will lead to a better understanding of how data obtained at different
              resolutions in space and time can be compared and merged.

