Title       : Dissertation: The Role of Surplus Production and Storage in the Emergence of
               Social Inequality in Northern Greece During the Bronze and Iron Age
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2000        
File        : a9909355

Award Number: 9909355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla Sinopoli sinopoli@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Carla Sinopoli, MS Despina Margomenou will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. Archaeologists wish to understand how
              civilization arose and have noted a similar progression in many parts of the
              world. Small scale farmers living in village communities aggregate into larger
              social groupings and develop centralized political and economic structures.
              Associated with this, in most instances, are associated with monumental
              architecture and craft specialization. While this pattern is well documented,
              researchers still do not understand the changes in social organization which
              set the groundwork for this development. Attention has focused on the emergence
              of social differentiation and the appearance of an "elite" class since this is
              a widespread feature which occurs early in the process. Several theories have
              been proposed to explain how small groups rise to power but the data are
              insufficient to select among them. One group of models emphasizes the
              importance of force and coercion. Another focuses on the potential
              administrative role which elites may have played and hypothesize that this
              group served essentially managers who redistributed essential food resources to
              even out shortages and surpluses over space. It has also been proposed that
              with the development of agricultural surpluses, storage mechanisms were
              developed to buffer fluctuations over time and that elite groups played a
              central managerial role in this process.

MS Margomenou will collect data
              from ongoing excavations in Northern Greece to examine this question. Although
              Northern Greece is less well known than its Southern counterpart, small Bronze
              Age villages increased in size and complexity during the succeeding Iron Age
              and egalitarianism gave way to a more hierarchical form of social organization.
              MS Margomenou will use both excavated material as well as data collected from
              ongoing investigations and will focus on the question of storage. Through
              analysis of in-ground storage units as well as large pottery containers she
              will learn how food storage strategies changed over time. She will reconstruct
              not only the extent to which storage was practiced but also the degree to which
              it was removed from individual families and is placed under centralized
              control. This, she believes, is a crucial variable which will shed light on the
              role and emergence of elites.

This project is important for several reasons.
              It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and increase
              understanding of the processes which lead to social complexity. It will also
              assist in training a promising young scientist.

