Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Frontiers of Engineering Symposium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a9909802

Award Number: 9909802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48620              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet R. Hunziker jhunzike@nae.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909802
Hunziker

This award supports the participation of young American
              engineers in a U.S.-Japan seminar on the frontiers of engineering, to be held
              in Nagoya, Japan, in November 2000.  The co-organizers are Janet Hunziker of
              the National Academy of Engineering in Washington, D.C. and Hiroshi Sakurai of
              the Engineering Academy of Japan in Tokyo, Japan.  Participants will be from
              universities, industry, and government.  The four engineering areas that will
              be covered at the meeting are:  1) ceramics;  2) bioengineering, with some
              coverage of microbioreactors;  3) manufacturing, with emphasis on robotics,
              quality control, and/or micromachining/nanoprocessing; and  4) civil
              engineering with an emphasis on disaster mitigation and simulation techniques. 
              Speakers will focus their remarks on cutting-edge research and innovation. 
              They will be asked to address questions of the following kind: What are the
              frontiers in their field?  What experiments, prototypes, and design studies are
              completed or in progress?  What new tools and instruments are being used?  What
              are the motivating factors for the work?   What is the data that is being
              measured and seen?  What are the major problems?  What are the current
              limitations on advances?  What is the theoretical, commercial, societal, and
              long-term significance of the work?  

The primary outcome of this symposium
              is the interaction it will facilitate among the best young American and
              Japanese engineers from different fields and sectors.  Today's most exciting
              and powerful engineering developments are occurring at the intersections of
              disciplines.  Thus, regardless of the nationality of the attendees involved, by
              creating the opportunity for sharing of research insights and techniques across
              a range of fields, this symposium facilitates leaps in knowledge and
              applications that otherwise would take longer to achieve.  Second, because the
              attendees come from different professional sectors, the meeting will support
              more rapid knowledge transfer among researchers in academia, industry,
              government, and other research institutions.  Finally, it is right for these
              times when advances in information technology, unprecedented political
              collaboration, and the integration of national economies have created the
              phenomenon of "globalization."   The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese
              experts in the engineering field will enable U.S. participants to advance their
              own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative projects. It is
              anticipated that dissemination of information from the meeting will be
              published thru the National Academy Press.

