Title       : Luminescence Timing of Paleoenvironmental Changes in Quaternary Lake Sediments
               from the Arctic Taymyr Peninsula, Siberia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a9909686

Award Number: 9909686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn W. Berger gwberger@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909686
Berg
The arctic is a predicted highly sensitive region to future
              global climatic change, yet its harshness and remoteness have limited our
              knowledge of the geological record of past climatic/environmental changes in
              this region.  The region of arctic Central Siberia is largely unexplored in
              this regard.  German and Russian scientists have conducted geological,
              geochemical and geophysical studies over the last 6 years from the Taymyr
              Peninsula to the arctic islands of Severnaya Zemlya, on a south-north transect
              -1400 km long.  Their objective has been to unravel the climatic and
              environmental history of northern Central Siberia over the last several tens of
              thousands of years.  Long (up to -22 m) sediment cores have been recovered from
              several existing lakes, providing the most important paleoenvironmental data
              archive of the entire project, but they have proven to be difficult or
              impossible to date by the various radiocarbon procedures, mainly because of
              very low carbon concentration, or the presence of contaminating coal particles.
               The PI proposes to provide an alternative dating tool:
              infrared-stimulated-luminescence direct dating of the last exposure of sediment
              grains to daylight.  Based on extensive experience with Alaskan and other North
              American lake cores, the PI will analyze in Reno about 29 lake-core samples
              with NSF support.  Samples will first be collected (under separate funding) by
              the PI from a lake-core storage site in Potsdam, Germany.  The proposed
              luminescence method has been shown to be accurate elsewhere, and with sediments
              much older than those expected in the Siberian lake cores.  Luminescence dates
              are expected to provide the first direct, accurate chronology for these lake
              cores, and hence for the time series of several paleoenvironmental data sets
              already measured by German colleagues.  These dates should also settle a
              controversy about the size (extent) of the last ice sheet (Eurasian Ice Sheet)
              in the area of central arctic Siberia.  Glacial sediments are present in some
              of the lake cores, but the age of such sediments is unknown or highly
              speculative at present.  Dating results are expected to provide also the first
              opportunity for across-Arctic-Ocean correlation to Quaternary pollen
              stratigraphies from Alaska that the PI has been involved with.  Accurate time
              series of paleoenvironmental records from circum-arctic Quaternary sediments
              are essential for a fuller (quantitative) understanding of the past role of the
              arctic in global changes.

