Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Present-Day Kinematics and Dynamics of the
               Eastern Mediterranean/Caucasus: Interaction of the Arabian, African, and
               Eurasian Plates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2000     
File        : a9909619

Award Number: 9909619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Reilinger reilinge@erl.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1304,5915,5940,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9909619
Reilinger

Description: This award is to support the collaboration of
              Dr. Robert Reilinger, Principal Research Scientist, Earth Resources Laboratory,
              Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences at Massachusetts
              Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, and several scientists from
              the Middle East and the Caucasus regions.  The primary collaborator is Dr.
              Aykut A. Barka, Professor of Geology at Istanbul Technical University,
              Istanbul, Turkey.  Other collaborators include Dr. Salah Mahmoud, Associate
              Professor at the National Institute of Astronomy and Geophysics, Helwan, Egypt,
              Professor Mikhail Prilepin, United Institute of Physics of the Earth, Moscow,
              Russia, and Dr. Merab Nadariya, Department of Geodesy and Cartography of
              Georgia, Tibilisi, Georgia.  The research is to expand on results obtained by
              the PI and his MIT team using Global Positioning System (GPS) to quantify plate
              motions and inter/intra-plate deformation in the zone of the interaction of the
              Arabian, African, and Eurasian plates.  The project has provided new
              constraints on the kinematics of this complex region, which in turn are
              providing new information on dynamic processes and the rheology of the oceanic
              and continental lithosphere.  The new work is to further the delineation of the
              forces driving plate motions and intraplate deformation, and the rheological
              character of the continental and oceanic lithosphere responding to these
              forces.

Scope:  This project will support important research for which the
              primary support is provided by NSF's Division of Earth Sciences.  This award
              will support the travel and living expenses of the US and the foreign
              scientists identified above who are involved in this project.  The
              participation of these foreign scientists in field research and in meetings at
              MIT is expected to lead to improvement in the fieldwork and in the
              interpretation of the results obtained and in the conclusions to be reached. 
              The multinational and regional nature of the research team is significant
              because of the synergetic effect.  The project fits well with the objective of
              the Division of International Programs for encouraging mutually beneficial
              collaboration on research of important scientific problems.
