Title       : Large-Eddy Simulation studies of Land-Atmosphere Interaction over Complex
               Terrain, Using New-Generation Dynamic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a9909679

Award Number: 9909679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc B. Parlange mbparlange@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles V. Meneveau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9909679
Parlange 

Similarity theory of the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL)
              is the main practical approach in hydrology to obtain regional-scale
              evaporation.  The theory is based on a uniform land surface, yet it has been
              found to work in field studies over heterogeneous natural land surfaces due to
              the turbulent flow in the ABL, which efficiently blends the various sources and
              inhomogeneities across the landscape.  It is not well understood how internal
              boundary layers formed over various patches on the land surface are blended in
              the ABL and what surface and boundary layer features are critical to
              controlling ABL dynamics and structure.  Large eddy simulations (LESs) of
              turbulent flow and transport in the ABL will be conducted over heterogeneous
              sources of heat and water vapor to identify the blending properties of
              turbulent mixing under various conditions of stratification.  Heterogeneous
              roughness properties will also be considered.  Numerical simulations will
              employ and adapt new-generation subgrid-scale models that are particularly well
              suited to capture unresolved small-scale turbulence physics in complex
              environments in which turbulence deviates from the classical assumptions of
              isotropic inertial-range behavior.  The models are based on a combination of
              (a) the dynamic procedure which eliminates the need to specify tunable model
              coefficients, (b) a generalization of the dynamic model to account for scale
              dependence of the coefficients for applications outside of the inertial range
              of turbulence such as the near-ground dynamics of the ABL, (c) the Lagrangian
              averaging method, which allows applications of the dynamic model to spatially
              non-homogeneous flow conditions, and (d) the mixed similarity or nonlinear
              model, which provides more realistic descriptions of subgrid-scale  
              
processes, including reverse cascade of kinetic energy and scalar variance,
              and the relationship between coherent structures and subgrid-scale fluxes and
              dissipation.  High-resolution LES will be conducted to identify the role of
              land surface scale on atmospheric dynamics and transport.  The results will
              first be compared with well-known field observations over statistically
              homogeneous land surfaces and extended to more general land surface patterns
              and stability conditions.  Through a series of simulations, where surface
              humidity, temperature, roughness and geometric arrangements are varied
              systematically, we will quantify those features which drive the dynamics of
              land-atmosphere exchange over heterogeneous terrain.  Ultimately, this
              information will be used in new strategies for obtaining regional-scale
              evaporation over complex terrain

