Title       : A Minimal Cell Model to Determine Genomic Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a9909133

Award Number: 9909133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Shuler mls@cheme.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to develop a dynamic mathematical model of a
              minimal cell as a tool to identify the organizing rinciples which relate the
              static linear sequence information of the genome to the dynamic non-linear
              functioning of the cell.  This model will be developed in two stages.  First, a
              prototype 
minimal cell model will be created from an existing mathematical
              model of a single E. coli cell.  This model is based on parameters which
              represent groups of related chemical species and has been shown to accurately
              predict cell size, shape, growth rate, and composition.  In the second stage of
              development, exhaustive detail on networks of pathways will be added to the
              prototype minimal cell model so that chemical species and chemical reactions
              are described individually and explicitly.  During this period of the project,
              details on the networks associated with chromosome replication, ribonucleotide
              and deoxyribonucleotide synthesis, transport, transcription will be added. 
              This project is to also experimentally determine the relationship between a
              gene's expression and the position of that gene in the three-dimensional packed
              chromosome so that this information can be included in mathematical
              descriptions of gene expression.  Synchronized cell 
populations will be used
              to study the relationship between position and expression during different
              phases of the E. coli division cycle.   
 


