Title       : The World Technology Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a9909707

Award Number: 9909707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melinda Ward mward@pri.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Hills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Public Radio International
	      100 North Sixth Street
	      Minneapolis, MN  55403    612/330-9232

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9909707
WARD

Public Radio International (PRI) is developing and producing a
              three-year technology initiative in the internationally distributed news and
              information radio series, "The World."   The series is co-produced by PRI, the
              BBC World Service, and WGBH/Boston.  PRI will establish a Technology Desk and
              assign a reporter full-time to covering technology.  In addition, "The World"
              will benefit from the full resources of the BBC Science Unit.  Technology
              reports will be produced in several radio formats including:

 At least 26
              direct news reports annually (approximately four minutes each)
 Technology
              updates in daily newscasts (approximately 52 minutes per year)
 A weekly Lab
              Report highlighting emerging technologies (approximately three minutes each)

              Three monthly in-depth features (Approximately five minutes each) 
 Two major
              annual in-depth series of five installments each (approximately six minutes
              each)

This emphasis on the latest technology developments will provide
              listeners with up-to-date information about important developments in such
              areas as nanotechnology and micro-electrical machines, quantum cryptography and
              genetic manipulation of agricultural products.  In depth reports would cover
              topics such as the Human Genome Project and the influence of technology on
              archaeology.
  
PRI will work with the Exploratorium in San Francisco to
              design and produce outreach components for the project.  A web resource will be
              developed to extend and deepen technology covered in broadcasts over the radio.
               It will include further information about topics, directions for conducting
              experiments, transcripts of technology reports and bibliographies of additional
              resources.  

PRI and the Exploratorium also will implement a three-year
              pilot project to involve children from economically disadvantaged neighborhoods
              in the creation of online broadcasts (webcasts) on technology-related themes. 
              This element of the project will determine whether programming derived from a
              news program and produced by children for children is an effective production
              model and whether the model is appropriate for replication.

