Title       : The Physics of the Earthquake Source and Radiated Waves: Frequency Dependence,
               Spatial Distribution, and Directivity in Elastodynamic Models of Repeated Fault
               Ruptures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2000    
File        : a9909287

Award Number: 9909287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leigh S. House                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96421              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Shaw shaw@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
This proposal examines the extension of a new class of elastodynamic models,
              which have already been successful at simulating a wide range of earthquake
              behaviors, to the study of the radiated energy produced during earthquakes. 
              Because radiated energy is the richest source of observational data, it will
              ultimately provide the most significant constraints on earthquake models. 
              Previous work has examined how total radiated energy can be sensitive to the
              earthquake source physics, showing differences for slip weakening versus
              velocity weakening friction in elastodynamic fault models.  This project
              proposes to look deeper into the radiated energy field to look for further
              signatures of the source physics.  First, rather than looking only at the total
              radiated energy, the project will investigate the spectral content of the far
              field radiated energy, examining this as a function of moment, and for a range
              of frictions.  Here we can expect to see further differences for slip versus
              velocity weakening friction.  Next the research will examine the spatial
              dependence of the radiation, looking at how the radiated energy changes as one
              moves from the far field to the near field.  Here, the project will examine the
              average spectral energy density for a fixed radius and angle relative to the
              event hypocenter, averaging over events of similar size.  Interesting distance
              dependence effects are expected, particularly for distances of order a crustal
              depth away.  Finally, the research will look for correlations in the motions on
              the fault with aspects of the radiated energy field.  Specifically, the models
              show slip and propagation velocity variations as slip pulses pass through
              stress heterogeneities on the fault; how are these variations manifested in
              directivity effects and spectral content?


