Title       : National High Field FT-ICR Mass Spectroscopy Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9909502

Award Number: 9909502
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5760558            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan G. Marshall marshall@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Eyler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Emmett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher L. Hendrickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9198,BIOT,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF)
              Program, Alan G.  Marshal,  Christopher L. Hendrickson and Mark R. Emmett of
              Florida State University (FSU) and John R. Eyler of the University of Florida
              will continue to operate the Fourier-Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance/Mass
              Spectrometry (FT-ICR/MS) Facility, housed in the National High Magnetic Field
              Laboratory (NHMFL) at FSU.  Studies to be carried out using the FT-ICR/MS
              facility during the next grant period include isotopic resolution of proteins;
              highly accurate mass spectra of complex mixtures such as petroleum feedstocks;
              analysis of environmental mixtures (oil spills; bioremediation); and studies
              exploring the use of magnetic fields to control ion/molecule reactions.  Design
              and development efforts will focus on the installation of a matrix-assisted
              laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) FT-ICR/MS instrument into an 11 tesla
              magnet; installation of an electrospray ionization (ESI) FT-ICR/MS instrument
              using a 17 tesla magnet; and the development of mass-selective external ion
              accumulation, which should lead to improvements in sensitivity and dynamic
              range.  The PIs also plan further development of optical spectroscopy of
              mass-selected gas phase molecular ions using FT-ICR.  They will continue to
              provide access and services to the external user community, including provision
              of funds for visiting graduate students and postdocs; and mass analysis for
              non-FT-ICR MS experts and industrial concerns.  Education and outreach efforts
              will continue, such as regular publication of newsletters, organization of
              biennial conferences, and participation of undergraduates in summer research
              programs.  

The Fourier Transform-Ion Cyclotron Resonance/Mass Spectrometry
              Facility at Florida State University is a unique national resource that
              provides state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation and mass spectral analysis
              to chemists and biochemists in US academic and industrial institutions. 
              Studies that are carried out at the facility lead to a better understanding of
              the behavior of biomolecules, and the structure of biomolecules, complex
              mixtures important in environmental chemistry, and petroleum products.  This
              facility also makes an important contribution to the training and education of
              significant numbers of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in the use of
              advanced mass spectrometry.  



