Title       : Collaborative Research: Formation of the Dry Valleys, Antarctica: Linking
               Thermochronometric (U-Th/He) and Cosmogenic Constraints on Landscape
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9909435

Award Number: 9909435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Farley farley@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha A. House  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909435
Farley

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports an investigation of uplift
              and landscape evolution of the Dry Valleys segment of the Transantarctic
              Mountains. The time when mountains form as topographic features is a crucial
              factor for understanding their role as gravitational driving forces for crustal
              deformation, as well as for assessing their influence or dependence on climate
              variations. Yet, this aspect of orogenesis remains poorly documented because
              the geomorphologic expressions or sedimentation record associated with
              increasing surface elevations may be modified by later erosion. Similarly,
              geochemical tools used for tracking erosion and landform development (e.g.,
              surface exposure dating) are seldom useful for this purpose because they
              usually provide information on only the most recent (<1 million year (Ma))
              history. As a result, a large gap in our understanding of the temporal and
              physiographic/tectonic evolution of mountain belts remains. In the absence of
              direct constraints on the geomorphology of evolving mountain ranges, episodes
              of rapid cooling deduced from techniques like apatite fission track
              thermochronometry are often attributed to the topographic rise of mountain
              belts. This practice assumes that exhumation (movement of a rock upward with
              respect to the earth's surface) and bedrock uplift (movement of the rock upward
              with respect to the geoid) inferred from cooling data represent an equivalent
              increase in elevation at the earth's surface (and relief), even though workers
              have shown that such a correlation does not always hold. 

One way to address
              the problem of long-term landscape evolution is to combine low-temperature
              thermochronometry with surface exposure dating. The Dry Valleys region of the
              Transantarctic Mountains is an ideal place for such an exercise because many of
              the modern land surfaces in the region may be as old as 15 Ma, clearly
              requiring very low erosion rates since the mid-Miocene. Apatite fission tracks
              indicate that rocks in the Dry Valleys cooled through approximately 105 degrees
              C as recently as about 45 Ma, leaving a gap of about 30 Ma in our knowledge of
              the evolution of this mountain range. Application of the newly developed
              apatite (U-Th)/He thermochronometer (closure temperature of 70 degrees C) can
              further close this gap because the technique is sensitive to even lower
              temperatures and more importantly apatite helium ages can provide a uniquely
              sensitive record of the time at which topographic relief develops. 

This
              project is a tightly focused study designed to combine thermochronometric
              indications of river valley incision with cosmic-ray exposure ages to better
              constrain the formation and geomorphologic evolution of the Dry Valleys region.
              The apatite (U-Th)/He and exposure age data that will be collected will provide
              a much-needed link between the large amounts of data already available from
              apatite fission track studies on bedrock uplift and exhumation on the one hand,
              and landscape evolution on the other. In particular, by constraining the
              formation age of the Dry Valleys, this project will determine when the
              Transantarctic Mountains formed as a topographic feature. The results of this
              work should have general implications for the geodynamic evolution of the
              region, and will contribute to the debate regarding Cenozoic paleoclimate
              changes influencing the growth and stability of the East Antarctic ice
              sheet.


