Title       : Dissertation: Landscape and Experimental Perspectives on the Technological
               Organization of Oldowan Hominids in the Paleo-Olduvai Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1999   
File        : a9909908

Award Number: 9909908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Blumenschine rjb@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Blumenschine, MS. Joanne Tactikos will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze a large sample of lithics
              (stone tools and their manufacturing byproducts) from two time horizons at
              Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania. Over the course of a multiyear NSF supported project,
              Dr. Blumenschine has concentrated on two units approximately 1.83 and 1.75
              million years ago. Because these paleo- land surfaces are clearly defined in
              the geological sequence, it has been possible to follow them over many
              kilometers of sediment and to sample them systematically for both human shaped
              lithics and for faunal remains. Based on the fauna and on sedimentological
              characteristics the paleogeography has been reconstructed and it is possible,
              in principle, to map hominid activities in ecological context. While
              archaeologists traditionally focus on "sites", dense concentrations of lithics
              and faunal remains, Dr. Blumenschine's team has recognized that many hominid
              activities occur in a non-site context and leave only a modest imprint on the
              landscape. Thus his study incorporates both dense and more sparse material
              scatters. MS Tactikos will contribute to this larger endeavor through the
              systematic analysis of the lithic remains. She will categorize the two levels
              of Olduvai lithics according to standardized archaeological typology. She will
              then collect raw materials employed in their manufacture, duplicate the
              production techniques and then use the replicas to perform a variety of tasks
              such as cutting and scraping wood. On the basis of knowledge gained it will
              then be possible to refine and modify the original typology. With this
              information she can then examine the distribution of types on the reconstructed
              Olduvai landscapes to gain insight into early hominid land use
              patterns.

While early Olduvai hominids shared many attributes such as
              upright posture and tool use with their present day counterparts, they were in
              many ways behaviorally distinct. Because it is from such a base that modern
              humans developed, scientists wish to understand essential characteristics of
              early hominid lifestyle and large scale geographic studies such as Tactikos
              have the potential to help accomplish this. The research is also important
              because it will help to train a promising young scientist.

