Title       : HBCU: Implementation of Effective Systemic Approaches Integrating the Use of
               Technology to Significantly Increase the Number of SMET Graduates at Bennett
               College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a9909030

Award Number: 9909030
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2192172            (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna H. Oliver   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bennett College
	      East Washington and Benne
	      Greensboro, NC  27420    919/273-4431

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              BENNETT COLLEGE

Bennett College is a small Afro-American women's liberal arts
              college with a student population of 624 (Fall 1998) located in Greensboro,
              North Carolina. Like most other colleges, ratio of graduates in SMET fields and
              the number of entering freshmen with SMEET fields as the intended major is very
              small. Only about 21% of entering freshmen complete graduation in SMET fields
              in stipulated period of four-years.

This project is designed to minimize the
              concerns contributing to this situation including: inadequate preparation of
              freshmen, lack of appropriate technology infrastructure and its integration in
              SMIET curriculum, traditional instructional approach that does not motivate
              students to deal with the SMET curriculum challenges, and lack of good study
              habits. The strategies proposed to alleviate these concerns are summarized
              below.

1. Develop a Pre-freshman Summary Academy (PSA) for entering freshmen
              to thoroughly prepare them through fast review and academic enrichment
              activities and engage these core group of students as project assistants for
              faculty research, computer lab assistants, and cooperative learning group
              leaders.

2. Provide technology infrastructure in the form of testing and
              tutorial center, mounted projection systems for the classrooms, upgrading
              science labs, mini computer laboratories in dormitories, and computers/printers
              for the departments.

3. Revamping the SMET curriculum and instructional
              delivery system especially for gateway courses, and incorporating research
              component in all junior/senior level SMET courses. The delivery system for
              gateway courses will include the use of multimedia electronic lecture notes
              with simulated lab experiments that will also be used by students as tutorials,
              and on-line testing and management system that will provide tools for frequent
              quizzes, practice tests, and actual simulated tests*.

4.	Faculty training in
              the' use of technology for modification of the materials and for implementing
              IIDS.

The PSA for 50 students every year and reduction in attrition expected
              because of the use of EIDS in all SMET course at freshmen and sophomore level
              courses is expected to significantly increase the number of SMET graduates even
              before the tenure of this project.

Bennett College is committed to provide
              all additional resources not requested in this project to ensure successful
              implementation of the initiatives proposed in this project and to maintain the
              same after the funding period.


