Title       : HBCU: Undergraduate Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a9909028

Award Number: 9909028
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2565527            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellis E. Sykes elsykes@asurams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albany State University
	      504 College Drive
	      Albany, GA  317052717    912/439-4604

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1594,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Albany State University

Albany State University is requesting support from
              the National Science Foundation's HBCU Undergraduate Program to assist with the
              implementation of our goal of providing systemic approaches that will
              strengthen the institution's Science, Mathematics, Pre-engineering and
              Technology (Computer Science) Programs. To facilitate the enhancement of the
              knowledge of students in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
              (SMET) the following objectives have been proposed for this program: (1) reduce
              the attrition rate of students in gateway (SMET) courses by two fold, (2)
              establish a technology based resource center that supports students and
              teachers, (3) increase the infusion of technology in all phases of SMET
              instruction, (4) increase the number of SMET students participating in
              Internship and Co-op Programs by 250% and (5) develop a bridge program between
              high school students and Albany State University (ASU).

The implementation
              of the goal and objectives that have been established for this initiative will
              increase the number of graduating seniors through the enactment of strategies
              which will enhance the retention and recruitment of underrepresented minority
              students who earn baccalaureate degrees in the sciences and mathematics.
              Additionally, competencies will be provided to those students matriculating in
              special programs (e.g. Pre-engineering) who transfer to other baccalaureate
              granting institutions. The students will concentrate their studies in various
              programs in science, mathematics, pre-engineering and technology areas in which
              minorities have traditionally been underrepresented. Targeted students will
              also include ASU Summer Bridge (high school students entering ASU'S summer
              [2000] semester class) participants and SMET majors who are presently
              enrolled.

