Title       : Collaborative Research: Colloid Mobilization and Transport in the Vadose Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2000       
File        : a9909491

Award Number: 9909491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166547             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet S. Herman jherman@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Hornberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9909491
Herman

Colloids, mobilized within the vadose zone during rainfall
              events, scavenge and carry contaminants to underlying groundwater.  Despite the
              importance of colloids as agents of vadose-zone contaminant transport, the
              factors influencing colloid movement through partially saturated porous media
              have not been rigorously explored nor formalized into a quantitative model.  In
              particular, the role of flow transients on colloid interactions at solid-water
              interfaces, at air-water interfaces, and within thin films of water has not
              been adequately investigated to date.  This research, carried out jointly by
              investigators at Yale and at UVA, will integrate laboratory-scale and
              field-scale experiments with mathematical modeling.  We will measure colloid
              transport in laboratory experiments conducted with ideal media and with intact
              cores, and we will use these data to guide the development of a numerical model
              for the coupled advective-dispersive transport and mass transfer of colloids in
              unsaturated soils.  The structure of the numerical model identified from
              analysis of the laboratory-scale experiments will form the foundation for a
              stochastic streamtube model, a model capable of accounting for the effects of
              spatial variability in soil properties on colloid fate and transport.  The
              streamtube model will be tested against data from a field experiment in which
              colloid mobilization and transport is measured in response to transient flow
              events induced by controlled sprinkling over an instrumented field plot.  Our
              work represents the first systematic approach to identifying the controls on
              colloid movement in water-unsaturated media under transient-flow conditions and
              provides a means to evaluate the contribution of the colloid track to
              contaminant fluxes within vadose-zone environments.

