Title       : A New Joint Weather Research and Prediction (WRF) Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2000   
File        : a9909007

Award Number: 9909007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming Xue mxue@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick H. Carr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative research effort will contribute to the development of a new
              Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) Model that will advance the state of the
              art in mesoscale numerical weather prediction and provide a common modeling
              system for use in both research and operations.  In addition to the support
              provided to the University of Oklahoma's Center for Analysis and Prediction of
              Storms under this award, the other collaborators include: the National Center
              for Atmospheric Research Mesoscale and Microscale Meteorology Division; the
              National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) National Centers for
              Environmental Prediction (NCEP); and the NOAA Forecast Systems Laboratory
              (FSL).

The WRF Model is being designed to provide a high-resolution forecast
              system that will accurately predict significant weather over a broad range of
              scales, with particular emphasis on precipitation systems.  It will contain
              advanced numerics for the model solver, and several new prototypes will be
              evaluated as candidate architectures.  A parallel implementation for the model
              is being designed within a single source code that is flexible and efficient
              across a diverse spectrum of computer architectures.  A new variational data
              assimilation system will be developed for WRF that will include observations at
              smaller scales, such as Doppler radar and mesonetwork data.  In the area of
              model physics, the involvement of the broader research community will he
              actively solicited in developing and evaluating improved physics for
              high-resolution applications.

Within the three year time frame a full
              physics, research quality WRF modeling system will be made available and
              supported for broad use as a community research model.  Development will
              continue beyond this proposal period, with the expectation that the WRF Model
              will become a candidate for replacing the regional operational models in about
              five years.  Through the joint development and use of WRF, this project has the
              potential to enhance significantly the interactions between research and
              operational scientists, and in particular, to streamline the transfer of
              research advances into operations.


