Title       : Dissertation Research: Behavioral Ecology of Howling Monkeys (Alouatta palliata)
               in Nicaraguan Coffee Plantations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a9909022

Award Number: 9909022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9950               (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford J. Jolly cjj1@is.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Colleen M. McCann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will document and explain the feeding ecology, ranging behavior,
              activity patterns, and group structure of mantled howling monkeys (Alouatta
              palliata) that live in shade coffee plantations.  Our results will allow us to
              both make valuable contributions to the understanding of how habitat affects
              primate ecology and social structure, as well as to develop plans for primate
              conservation that successfully incorporate economic development in habitat
              countries.

Coffee cultivation has not resulted in widespread destruction of
              Latin America's forest ecosystems because coffee generally grows best when
              shaded from direct sunlight by trees.  Forest trees are therefore left standing
              to shelter the coffee; such plantations are known as shade coffee.  Although
              they differ from undisturbed forest in tree species composition and density,
              shade coffee plantations account for a significant portion of forested areas in
              Latin America, and provide habitat for birds and other forest animals.  

The
              researchers will conduct a 15-month study of howling monkeys that live in shade
              coffee plantations on Mombacho Volcano, southwestern Nicaragua.  They will
              collect approximately 1500 hours of detailed observational data on three groups
              of howlers that will detail their feeding ecology, ranging behavior, and
              activity patters.  Along with detailed data on the vegetation in the
              plantation, these data will allow them to determine which tree species and
              habitat features are vital to the survival of monkeys in coffee plantations. 
              These data will also allow the researchers to explore theoretical issues
              regarding the effects of plant food abundance and diversity on primate foraging
              strategies.  Ultimately, they hope to use these data to create a certification
              program for "eco-friendly" coffee using the howling monkey as an indicator
              species and focus for creating community support for wildlife conservation in
              agricultural lands, within and beyond Nicaragua.

