Title       : Sixth World Biomaterials Congress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9909900

Award Number: 9909900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Society for Biomaterials
	      13355 Tenth Ave North
	      Minneapolis, MN  55441    612/543-0908

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909900
Anderson
The Sixth World Biomaterials Congress is scheduled for May
              15-20, 1999 in Kamuela, Hawaii. The goal of the  Congress is to provide an
              international forum for biomaterial professionals and students to present new
              educational and scientific information in the multi- and cross-disciplinary
              area of biomaterials which also includes biomimetics and tissue engineering. 
              The Sixth World Biomaterials Congress will serve as a forum for the
              dissemination of rapidly evolving scientific information and knowledge in these
              areas.  The congress will be composed of plenary and invited speakers, special
              symposia, workshops and presentations in both oral and poster formats organized
              in topic areas.  The Congress will provide a unique opportunity for
              professionals and students to present and discuss their research with leading
              engineers, scientists, clinicians and health care industrial and governmental
              representatives.  In addition, the congress provides opportunities for
              professionals and students to network on research, technical and employment
              issues from a global perspective.   

This award provides support for ten
              students and young professionals to travel to the Congress. The experience will
              provide unique educational and career opportunities and thus significantly
              impact student and young professional career development as well as encourage
              innovation and collaboration on an international level.  Students and young
              professionals will be exposed to novel engineering and science tools in the
              field and they will be challenged by stimulating discussion and workshop
              topics.  The participation in scientific meetings is an essential activity in
              the academic endeavor of students working in the biomaterial area.  Not only is
              it important for them to be recognized as scientists and engineers of value
              through their presentations, but their participation also teaches them
              professional principles that are essential for a successful career.  The travel
              award also emphasizes the importance of acquiring cutting-edge knowledge and
              research tools, presentation skills and networking skills as a foundation for a
              successful career in biomaterials.   
 
Proceedings of the Congress are to be
              available in Book and CD-ROM format at the time of the meeting. Also, the
              recipients of support from this award are expected to provide a letter to the
              Biomedical Engineering and Research to Aid Persons with Disabilities Program
              describing the benefits received from participation in the Congress.



