Title       : Origin of Diamonds and Their Host Xenoliths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2000   
File        : a9909430

Award Number: 9909430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Taylor lataylor@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909430
Taylor
The mantle, although making up over 75% by volume of the Earth,
              remains relatively unstudied in hand sample.  Fortunately, kimberlites (the
              source-rock of diamonds, named after Kimberley, So. Afr.) bring precious mantle
              samples to the surface.  These eclogite and peridotite xenoliths (Gr. foreign
              rocks) were incorporated into the kimberlite at great depths and can contain
              diamonds.  The origin of these diamond-bearing xenoliths, particularly
              eclogites, and their diamonds from deep within the mantle of the Earth is the
              subject of our research.  There is some controversy over the reliability of
              diamond-bearing rocks as indicators of the conditions under which the diamonds
              formed, because these rocks may have been subjected to post-diamond
              metasomatism and/or partial melting.  Mineral inclusions within diamonds are
              considered pristine samples of the mantle because these inclusions were
              isolated from post-diamond-formation mantle processes. It appears that each
              diamond can indicate a possible different set of P-T-x conditions for its
              formation, all of which may not be represented by the host mineralogy.  The
              host eclogite may only record the most recent residence locale for the diamond
              and not the original conditions of its formation.  The proper manner with which
              to study diamonds and their inclusions is together on polished surfaces,
              involving sophisticated micro-instrumental chemical techniques, coupled with
              isotopic analyses of the diamond, all within the context of the intricate
              crystal growth patterns of the diamonds.  A comprehensive geochemical and
              petrologic study of inclusions within diamonds is proposed, with the key
              distinction that the growth-histories and chemical characteristics of the
              diamonds will also be documented, as placed within the 'stratigraphy' of the
              diamonds.  Diamonds will be used as recorders of the evolution of the Earth's
              mantle.  To this end, an international consortium of scientists has been
              assembled with expertise in most aspects of diamond genesis.  This constitutes
              the first truly integrated study of the petrogenesis of diamonds, their mineral
              inclusions, and their host xenoliths.  This integrated approach to the study of
              diamonds, their inclusions, and host xenoliths, will make a significant
              contribution to the knowledge of mantle conditions necessary for diamond
              formation and the evolution of the mantle

