Title       : Collaborative Research: Fast Hardware Encryption
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9909259

Award Number: 9909259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71082              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Mark Goresky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Advanced Study
	      Einstein Dr.
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              High speed, high volume cryptographic systems will form the basis for the
              security of video, wireless,
and computer communications of the next decade. 
              This research involves the design and development of such
systems, especially
              that of hardware-based stream ciphers.  High speed hardware-based stream
              ciphers can
be easily manufactured, programmed, and implemented.  They can be
              used to encrypt data (such as voice or
video) in real time and are used as
              embedded components in cellular telephones, GPS satellites,
radar, and radio
              systems.  Most stream ciphers, however, have been found to be vulnerable to
              various
cryptoanalytic attacks.  This research involves the development and
              analysis of new architectures for
stream cipher generators which have all the
              above advantages but which are much more secure than
traditional
              architectures.

Linear feedback shift registers have proven especially useful
              for the generation of pseudorandom sequences
for high speed communications. 
              They have been intensively studied for over forty years and their
usefulness
              does not appear to have any end in sight.  Recently a fundamentally new
              architecture for feedback
shift registers was discovered, the so-called
              feedback-with-carry shift register or FCSR.  This
architecture shares all the
              advantages of the linear feedback architecture such as high speed and ease
              of
implementation, but the resulting pseudorandom sequences are also more
              secure.  This research
involves a number of implementation issues for the new
              architecture including (1) the development of parallel circuitry for high speed
              generation of pseudorandom sequences, (2) the design of combiners and
              feedforward functions to further increase the security of FCSR sequences, (3)
              the design of clock-controlled FCSR circuits, and (4) the analysis of the
              cryptographic security of the FCSR sequences which are generated in this way.  
              

