Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Neuroplasticity, Development and Steroid Hormone
               Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a9909858

Award Number: 9909858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : January 1,  1900     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Handa rhanda@cvmbs.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ei Terasawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909858
Handa

This award supports the participation of American scientists
              in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Neuroplasticity, Development and Steroid Hormone
              Action, to be held in Hawaii from September 29 to October 3, 2000.  The
              co-organizers are Professors Robert Handa at Colorado State University, Boulder
              and Professor Shinji Hayashi at the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of
              Neuroscience in Japan.  The focus of this seminar will be in elucidating the
              effects of steroid hormones on neuroplastic changes in the brain throughout the
              lifespan of the animal.  The five major topics to be discussed include:  1)
              development and differentiation of the hypothalamus and LHRH neuronal systems; 
              2) steroid dependent brain differentiation;  3) central regulation of hormone
              secretion;  4) steroid hormones and neuroplasticity in the mature brain; and 
              5) steroid mediated mechanisms of cell growth and survival.

Steroid hormones
              are key modulators of the intercellular communications network used by the
              central nervous system.  These simple hormones have the capacity to influence
              virtually all neural functions from the maintenance and organization of neurons
              and their connections during development to the activity and function of
              neurons in adulthood, to the death of neurons during aging and neuropathology. 
              Steroid sensitive neural circuits are implicated in reproductive function,
              stress responses, emotion, aggression, cognition, activity, feeding and others.
               The Seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve younger
              researchers as both participants and observers.  The exchange of ideas and data
              with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to advance
              their own work, and will set the stage for future collaborative projects.  It
              is anticipated that dissemination of proceedings of the meeting will be
              published in the journal "Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology.  The information
              will also be available on the website
              http://lamar.colostate.edu/~bhanda/us-japan.htm.

