Title       : Stratigraphic Simulation Using Fuzzy Logic to Model Sediment Dispersal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9909336

Award Number: 9909336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert V. Demicco demicco@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George J. Klir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

STRATIGRPAHIC SIMULATION USING FUZZY LOGIC 
TO MODEL SEDIMENT
              DISPERSAL 

Robert V. Demicco and George Klir

Fuzzy logic was initially
              developed by systems engineers in the 1960s.  Since the 1980s, fuzzy logic has
              been extensively used in robotics control and is one of a number of emerging,
              very powerful, "soft computing" techniques.  Scientists have recently started
              to adopt fuzzy logic to solve a variety of complicated physical, chemical and
              biological problems.  The purpose of this research is to use fuzzy logic to
              model sediment production, erosion, transportation and deposition to produce
              synthetic stratigraphic models of how sedimentary rocks are deposited in
              subsiding basins.  Using fuzzy logic instead of more traditional numerical
              solutions to partial differential equations holds the promise of rapid and
              efficient modeling of extremely complex natural processes which heretofore were
              intractable or required extensive computational power.  In addition, because
              fuzzy logic is based on natural language, it is easy to understand and use. 
              Moreover, fuzzy logic is computationally efficient, and allows many different
              combinations of input variables to be modeled rapidly.  
The utilitarian goal
              of this research is to produce synthetic geologic cross sections which can be
              compared to incomplete data sets (such as drill core data or shallow seismic
              data).  The complete model stratigraphy can then be used to "fill in the gaps"
              to give exploration geologists or engineering geologists the information they
              need to better explore for and exploit hydrocarbon resources or design
              remediation plans for contaminated groundwater plumes.  From a theoretical
              standpoint, synthetic stratigraphic models increase our fundamental
              understanding of how sedimentation varies in space and time in response to
              tectonic processes, sea level changes, climatic changes, and other
              environmental variables.    

