Title       : Journey To Planet Earth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2002  
File        : a9909265

Award Number: 9909265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1146689            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn Weiner screenscope@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hal Weiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SCREENSCOPE, Inc.
	      4330 Yuma Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20016    202/364-0055

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9909265
WEINER

Screenscope, Inc., is producing three programs in the PBS
              series, "Journey to Planet Earth."  The series has the goal of helping the
              general public understand and cope with the difficulties of developing a global
              agenda that addresses the environmental concerns of the next millennium.  The
              series will examine the earth using the latest satellite imagery as well as
              from providing a more closeup view through the eyes of people who inhabit the
              many different regions of the world.  It will use intimate personal portraits
              to show how people's every day lives are affected by both local and global
              environmental pressures.  The series will link the sciences with economics,
              politics, geography, and history.  Each episode will feature four to five
              related stories and case studies selected from different geographic regions and
              about people from different ethnic and cultural backgrounds.

The television
              series will be supported by an informal, community-based outreach program in
              science museums and neighborhood centers, activity kits and teaching guides,
              interactive workshops on the World Wide Web, and strategic partnerships with
              environmental organizations to raise public awareness of the series and the
              outreach activities.  The Co-PIs and producers of the television series are
              Marilyn and Hal Weiner.  They will work closely with a group of advisors
              including:  Chet Cooper, Battelle/Pacific Northwest National Laboratory; Edward
              Frieman, Director Emeritus of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography and Vice
              Chancellor of the University of California; Nay Htun, United Nations
              Development Programme; Tom Lovejoy, Counselor to the Secretary for Biodiversity
              and Environmental Affairs, Smithsonian Institution; Per Pinstrup-Andersen,
              International Food Policy Research Institute; and Maurice Strong, Chairman of
              the Earth Council and former Secretary-General of the United Nations Earth
              Summit in Rio de Janeiro.  In addition, each episode will have two research
              scientists who are experts on specific disciplines being featured.  Outreach
              will be developed in association with the Chicago Academy of Sciences.


