Title       : Computer-Supported Graphical Representations for Learning Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9909744

Award Number: 9909744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1030798            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Forbus forbus@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce Sherin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to create a visual representation system with
              computer support that helps students learn how to articulate and reason with
              models of complex phenomena and systems.  Learning to create, test, and revise
              models is a central skill in scientific reasoning.  There is ample experience
              suggesting graphical representations can provide a natural expression and
              communication medium for modeling ideas.  Three families of graphic
              representations have been used in educational modeling environments (concept
              maps, dynamic systems notations, and argumentation environments), each focused
              on different aspects if modeling, but none alone are sufficient for capturing
              the range of activities and knowledge involved in modeling.  Moreover, none of
              them address three key issues in modeling:  (1) The importance of broadly
              applicable principles and processes, (2) understanding when a model is revelent
              and (3) qualitative understanding of behavior.

This project will use ideas
              from qualitative modeling to create a suite of graphical notations, with
              computer support, that enables middle-school students to learn both particular
              areas of  science and the process of modeling itself.  Students will use the
              software to create, analyze, modify, discuss, and desseminate their models. 
              The software will be modeling what word processors are to writing essays and
              spreadsheets are to mathematical analyses:  A tool for creating, revising, and
              disseminating student ideas, creating an artifact
that captures their evolving
              understanding and that can serve as a focus for disscussion.

The software
              will use a "construction kit" metaphor for reifying abstractions, enabling
              students to express their knowledge in an ever-expanding collection of
              principles and processes, thus emphasizing the underlying
unity and systematic
              structure of scientific knowledge.  The software will provide multiple levels
              of computer support, ranging from simple drawing and publishing tools to
              sophisticated coaches.  Using a combination of analogical and qualitative
              reasoning, the software coaches will compare student models to normative
              models, point out discrepancies between the predictions of a student model and
              simulator behavior, and prepare assessment reports for teachers summarizing
              class progress and patterns of misconceptions.  As many urban schools have
              outdated or minimal computer equipment, to make such software practical and
              scalable we are using a client/server architecture, with lightweight clients in
              the schoolroom communicating to server-based coaches and assessment software
              via email.  At the end of the project, all software and documentation will be
              made available as open source.  

This project interacts synergistically with
              the work we are doing in the NSF Center for Learning Technologies in Urban
              Schools.  A key focus of the Center is creating and deploying an alternate
              middle-school science curriculum in the Chicago and Detroit public school
              systems that is inquiry-based and supports national standards, through the
              medium of work circles, collaborative arrangements involving researchers and
              teachers that support these efforts.  We are currently operating two work
              circles that are developing currucula that will be used to explore  these
              ideas, and already carrying out pilot studies with pencil and paper to explore
              design issues in visual notations for modeling.  Initial deployment of our
              software will be in the 1999-2000 school year with our teacher collaborator's
              schools, and expanded in subsequent years to a broader range of schools (and
              curricula) in Chicago and Detroit plus other schools as appropriate.
