Title       : Dissertation Research: Building Chan Chan: Project Management Analysis of
               Ancient Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1999   
File        : a9909320

Award Number: 9909320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9480               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Moseley moseley@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Michael Moseley, Mr. Richard Smailes will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. Mr. Smailes has a background in
              construction contracting and is familiar with modern computer assisted
              techniques to aid in design, cost estimation and scheduling. These provide the
              framework within which modern building takes place. In this highly innovative
              project he will take this set of techniques, adapt them and apply the
              retrospectively to the construction of a prehistoric royal compound at the site
              of Chan Chan Peru. This ancient city located on Peru's arid North Coast
              contains a number of monumental structures consisting of walled enclosures
              which surround multiple buildings and storerooms. Archaeologists believe that
              early compounds were occupied by multiple successive rules while later ones
              served only one: each king constructed his own which was abandoned after his
              death. It is unclear however how long such a compound took to build given
              available construction techniques and methods of labor organization. Previous
              attempts in both Peru and other regions of the world to estimate labor involved
              in monumental construction have been rudimentary and based solely on amount of
              earth and other material involved in construction. Issues of the types of tasks
              involved, crew size and scheduling have not been considered. Modern contractors
              have computer based techniques which assist in planning and managing
              construction and in estimating costs. Mr. Smailes will use these to analyze a
              Chan Chan royal compound. The site has been carefully mapped and Mr. Smailes
              will use these data to construct a three dimensional computer model of the
              compound. This will provide the basis from which estimation will proceed. He
              will also conduct ethnoarchaeological research in Peru to gain insight into
              traditional construction practices such as adobe brick
              making.

Archaeologists not unreasonably assume that a correlation exists
              between the size and complexity of a construction and the level of complexity
              and social organization of the society which built it. Therefore they often
              attempt to estimate the amount of labor required for a particular monumental
              structure and use this to speculate about other aspects of the society. Mr.
              Smailes' research will constitute a significant improvement to the
              methodologies employed to date and, if successful will likely be applied in
              many archaeological situations in many parts of the world. Thus its
              methodological impact will likely be significant. This research will increase
              our understanding of one of the cradles of civilization and assist in training
              a promising young scientist.

