Title       : Modeling Mesoscale Convection by Coupled Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a9909009

Award Number: 9909009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255071             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Gluhovsky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest M. Agee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The study of fundamental aspects of atmospheric systems is made difficult by the
              fact that these systems are nonlinear and sometimes chaotic in nature. 
              Accordingly, numerical systems (known as low order models; LOMs) that lend
              themselves to relatively simple mathematical solutions while still maintaining
              the fundamental characteristics of the atmospheric flows are valuable research
              tools for understanding the underlying physics. 

Preliminary studies by the
              Principal Investigators indicate that low order models of atmospheric phenomena
              may be presented in the form of mathematical systems known in classical
              mechanics as Volterra gyrostats.  A building block approach for the
              construction of LOMs of atmospheric circulations is proposed, whereby simple
              well-understood components are used to construct models of complex phenomena. 
              These possess fundamental conservation properties of fluid dynamic equations
              and have various fluid dynamic interpretations, the celebrated Lorenz model
              among them.  

The proposed research will address the problem of developing
              physically sound low-order models of atmospheric circulations with particular
              attention to modeling mesoscale shallow convection (MSC).  MSC results from a
              complex mix of various processes whose roles in the evolution of MSC remain
              unclear.  The goal is to eventually assemble a model of MSC from gyrostats, or
              blocks of gyrostats, responsible for particular processes.

