Title       : Assessment of Machining Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a9909130

Award Number: 9909130
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: K. P. Rajurkar                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Ivester ivester@nist.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew A. Davies  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : NIST
	      Building 226 Rm B226
	      Gaithersburg, MD  20899    301/975-2000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Machining involves very extreme physical phenomena that occur over a wide range
              of time and length scales.  This has hindered progress in predictive modeling
              of machining processes.  Many different types of models ranging from
              theoretical to empirical have been developed, but the wide variety of the
              models makes inter-comparison difficult. Better predictive models of
              manufacturing processes could enable manufacturers to: (1) eliminate or reduce
              empirical testing when developing new manufacturing process plans for new
              products; (2) improve understanding of the physical limitations of processes;
              (3) reduce variability of performance; and (4) allow operations to be performed
              more aggressively. The goal of this project is to provide a clear, consistent,
              well-measured and relevant data set, and use that data set to benchmark the
              predictive capability of machining models.  The project will involve four
              participating laboratories from Ford, General Motors, NIST and Caterpillar.
              These labs will generate machining data, and machining modeling research groups
              will be invited to make predictions of the generated data.  The predictions
              will be collected and compared to the experiments, and the results will be
              disseminated broadly to the research community.  A workshop based on the effort
              will then be held at NIST, and a roadmap for future research in modeling will
              be developed.

If successful, this effort could enable manufacturers to
              identify means to more accurate prediction of tool wear in turning processes,
              resulting in significant cost savings for the machining operation.  Companies
              will no longer need to use conservative settings and conservative tool-change
              policies when machining.  

