Title       : Mulitdisciplinary Collaborative Research Project: Amines and Agonistic Behavior
               in Crustaceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9909883

Award Number: 9909883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Edwards   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1054,1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal has the overall goal of understanding the roles served by
              neurohormones in a complex behavior, like aggression. It involves investigators
              from 3 universities: E. A. Kravitz (Harvard Medical School), D. H. Edwards
              (Georgia State University), and B. S. Beltz (Wellesley College) who use
              crustacean model systems (lobsters, crayfish) for their interactive studies. 
              Crustacean models allow the analysis of behavior to be brought to the level of
              the individual nerve cells involved, an advantage not readily available in
              higher forms.  The studies focus on serotonin, an amine derived from the common
              amino acid tryptophan, which has been implicated in aggression in all animal
              species.  They explore the effects on fighting behavior of raising and lowering
              serotonin levels, ask whether neurons utilizing this amine function differently
              in dominant and subordinate animals, and address the question of whether these
              neurons change their properties over individual molt cycles (the annual
              shedding of the cuticle) along with behavioral changes that are seen.
              
Aggression is a universal feature of the behavior of social animals,
              necessary for access to shelter, food and mates.  Among humans, the
              consequences of its abuse are well known (witness Kosovo).  Despite the
              importance of this behavior, however, little is known of its neural mechanisms.
               Models, like the crustacean systems used here, offer the possibility of highly
              detailed analyses of this complex behavior, thereby yielding valuable insights
              into its underlying neural roots.

