Title       : Dissertation: Regional Settlement Patterns and Social Complexity in the Cinti
               Valley, Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9909047

Award Number: 9909047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc P. Bermann bermarc+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Marc Bermann, MS Claudia Rivera-Casanovas will
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct an archaeological
              survey of the Cinti Valley of Bolivia. The goal of the research is to gain
              insight into the range of variation which characterized prehistoric Andean
              societies., This region served as a hearth for both the domestication of
              indigenous plants and animals and for the development of complex societies.
              While best known for the Inca, this civilization was only the last in a
              millennium long sequence of such entities. Archaeologists have noted that a
              similar process occurred independently in many parts of both the Old and New
              Worlds and have searched for the underlying organizing principles which explain
              the transformation of once small scale agricultural groups into larger more
              complex societies. The prevailing theories emphasize the development of social
              hierarchies and the consolidation of power in the hands of a limited number of
              individuals. While such a process probably did occur in many places, including
              parts of the Andes itself, some ethnohistoric data recorded by early Spanish
              settlers as well as archaeological information itself, indicate that the
              situation is more complicated and that relatively large numbers of individuals
              can be successfully integrated into functioning social and economic entities
              without the development of elaborate mechanisms of centralized control. It has
              been suggested that in regions such as the Cinti Valley essentially independent
              kinship-based groups developed methods of collaboration which did not involve
              control by limited numbers of people over essential resources. MS
              Rivera-Casanovas will collect archaeological data to reconstruct essential
              aspects of the prehistoric social system to test this idea. She will conduct a
              systematic 100% survey of an area of 150 square km., note the size and
              distribution of sites and collect surface materials. She will also carry out a
              catchment analysis to determine the relationship between population
              distribution and potential agricultural productivity. Based on variation in
              household size and contents she will reconstruct the extent of status
              differentiation and political centralization.

This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide data on a poorly known Andean region and thus
              generate information of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light
              on the processes which led to social complexity and contribute to the training
              of a promising young scientist.

