Title       : Engagement, Assessment & Epistemological Reconciliation in Technology Supported
               Learning Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2000      
File        : a9909732

Award Number: 9909732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $443744             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Hickey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This study builds on prior research of a genetics learning environment to
              consider how motivation and learning are impacted by new formative assessment
              practices and by the practices associated with accountability-oriented reforms.
               Secondary life science teachers will implement the GenScope computer software
              within a curricular context that is consistent with contemporary views of
              learning and instruction (such as outlined in the recent National Research
              Council report, How People Learn).  Within this context, students in different
              classes will be presented with increasingly explicit learning standards and
              increasingly salient recognition or \rewards for performance on a set of
              formative assessments.  Following the framework advanced by Greeno, Collins and
              Resnick in the 1996 Handbook of Educational Psychology, engagement and learning
              in each class will be examined using three competing models of knowing &
              learning.  The results should provide comprehensive evidence regarding new and
              controversial assessment practices-when employed in contemporary curricular
              contexts. More broadly, the entire set of results will be used to compare
              different approaches for reconciling competing models of knowing and learning. 
              This is expected to help clarify the relations between competing perspectives
              and practices, particularly concerning engagement and the motivation.  This
              clarification is critical for developing a new pragmatic model of motivation
              that is relatively consistent with contemporary models knowing and
              learning.


