Title       : Seismic Anistropy and Mantle Flow In An Active Backarc System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a9909690

Award Number: 9909690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79525              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gideon P. Smith gideon@izu.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Wiens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project proposes to perform high resolution mapping of seismic anisotropy
              across the Lau basin active back-arc system.  The project will apply a variety
              of advanced analysis techniques to data from recent experiments in the
              Tonga-Fiji region to better resolve the anisotropic structure of the Lau back
              arc basin and address specific questions concerning mantle flow within such a
              system.  Anisotropic analyses combining data from land seismic stations and an
              ocean bottom seismometer (OBS) deployment will provide good coverage of the
              basin.  S-wave splitting analyses will help map regions of consistent
              anisotropic fast directions.  This information on regionalization will be used
              to aid in inversions for Pn and surface wave azimuthal anisotropy.  Advanced
              techniques to be used include stacking of splitting results, use of 2-station
              travel time information for Pn measurements, and surface wave techniques
              specifically designed for making inter-station phase velocity measurements
              where station spacing is small.  The final mapping of anisotropy will be used
              to answer such questions as what is the size, direction, and depth extent of
              anisotropy and how does this vary across the backarc basin?  What is the
              relationship of seismic anisotropy with processes associated with the
              backarc-spreading center and subduction of the Pacific plate?


