Title       : Hierarchical Redundancy-Based Monitoring and Robust Seismic Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2000     
File        : a9909247

Award Number: 9909247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry T. Yang susan.cochran@chancellor.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9909247
Yang
A redundancy-based monitoring system for civil structures such as
              bridges, towers, chimneys, dams and buildings with uncertain dynamic properties
              located in regions that are susceptible to nature disasters is investigated. 
              This Hierarchial Intelligent Monitoring System is projected as an integrated
              entity consisting of three principal software components which interact
              seamlessly with each other in real time and are interfaced with the physical
              structure.  These components have data processing and decision-making
              capabilities organized into a hierarchy of shielded layers, with each layer
              employing a decentralized topology of information processing units.  The
              shielding of the layers provides data abstraction and the decentralized
              topology in each layer creates a mechanism of redundancy.  In turn, these
              factors improve the overall performance and reliability of the monitoring
              system.  The elements of the monitoring system are referred to as the
              Multilayer Expert Module (MEM), the Multilayer Identification Module (MIM), and
              the Multilayer Control Module (MCM).

The Multilayer Expert Module assists in
              structural health monitoring (both in 'normal' time and also during
              earthquakes) and employs advanced damage detection and assessment using
              neuro-fuzzy logic techniques.  The Multilayer Identification Module is
              primarily responsible for maintaining an active database of system models,
              which are updated appropriately.   The control signals developed in the
              Multilayer Control Module are implemented by the control system hardware on the
              actual structure, using devices such as active tendons, active variable
              stiffness systems, active mass dampers, active base isolators, etc., or
              combinations of these.  Model selection in the MIM and control algorithm
              selection in the MCM are achieved via fuzzy logic based decision
              support.

The main objectives of this project are to develop a sophisticated
              expert system which can monitor structural health, and which can detect and
              accommodate failures needing corrective action despite inaccurate sensory data
              and to build a reliable identification system which interfaces with the
              physical structure and which can synthesize accurate structural models in real
              time, despite the presence of structural uncertainties.

The investigation
              addresses several key aspects of structural monitoring practice and will
              contribute to the development of safer and more reliable infrastructures.


