Title       : Global Positioning System Measurements of Crustal Motion in Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a9909467

Award Number: 9909467
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60015              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Raymond carol.raymond@jpl.nasa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erik R. Ivins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald F. Argus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael B. Heflin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jet Propulsion Laboratory
	      4800 Oak Grove Drive
	      Pasadena, CA  91109    /   -

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909467
Raymond

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for continuation of an
              effort, in collaboration with NASA, to develop autonomous, continuously
              operating Global Positioning System (GPS) stations in Antarctica. The
              objectives of the project for the coming year are to maintain operations at the
              two existing autonomous GPS stations, carry out further development work on the
              power and electronics systems for the stations, and analyze and publish
              existing data. The purpose of the Transantarctic Mountains (TAM) continuous GPS
              array is to measure vertical and horizontal displacement components resulting
              from glacial isostasy, viscoelastic, and elastic response to recent ice mass
              changes, and tectonic forces. The array will provide critical independent
              constraints on post-glacial rebound models, which in turn will improve the
              estimate of present-day ice mass balance from future satellite missions. These
              include the Gravity Recovery and Atmospheric Change Experiment (GRACE) dual
              satellite-to-satellite tracking gravity mission, and repeated measurements of
              the topography of the ice sheet to be made using the Geoscience Laser Altimeter
              System (GLAS) by the Ice, Cloud and land Elevation Satellite (ICESat) mission.
              During the next year, we propose to: (1) maintain operations at these two
              stations, by performing necessary repairs and maintenance; (2) perform
              maintenance at the wind generator test site at the McMurdo Transmitter Site;
              (3) perform static and dynamic finite element analysis (FEA) of a vertical axis
              wind turbine (same as is currently deployed at Mt Coates), and incorporate it
              into a system test-bed for end-to-end system testing at ambient and liquid
              nitrogen temperatures. The FEA will reveal the expected failure modes of the
              turbine to allow us to better understand the suitability of the unit to the
              harsh conditions expected, and also guide design modifications that may improve
              the design for the extreme conditions (winds in excess of 150 mph [66 m/s]).
              Finally, we will perform further in-depth data analysis to evaluate the results
              of our two sites and other permanent GPS sites in terms of existing predictions
              of post-glacial rebound induced deformation of the Antarctic plate.

