Title       : Small Grant for Exploratory Research: Effect of Confinement on Reaction
               Equilibrium in Porous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9909126

Award Number: 9909126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44670              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Gubbins keg@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to carry out a study to determine the effects of
              confinement in porous media on chemical reactions.  Although there has been
              much progress in understanding the effects of confinement in porous media on
              physical properties, there has been no fundamental theoretical or molecular
              simulation work on chemical effects, particularly on chemical reaction
              equilibrium.  Direct experimental investigations are complicated by
              difficulties in measuring compositions in the confined phase and in
              differentiating equilibrium from rate limitations.  Confinement may have a
              substantial effect on the yields of reactions in which there is a net change in
              the number of moles because of increased density in pore volume or strong
              selectivity effects near the pore walls; molecular orientation may also play a
              role.  However, the magnitude of these effects is currently unknown.  A goal is
              to elucidate the fundamental principles that underlie confinement effects on
              chemical equilibrium.  The reactions chosen for study are the nitric oxide
              dimerization reaction and the reduction of nitric oxide to nitrogen and oxygen.
               These reactions will be carried out in activated carbons and in carbon
              nanotubes.  Reactive canonical Monte Carlo simulations will be performed to
              investigate the effects of pore size, pore shape, temperature, and pressure on
              the reaction yield, composition profiles and heats of reaction.  Porous
              materials are widely used in chemical, oil, gas, and pharmaceutical industries
              as catalysts and in chemical processes such as adsorption separations, drying,
              and removal of pollutants from gas and liquid streams; the fundamental
              principals determined in this study may have application in these areas.
