Title       : Dissertation: Large Mammal Resource Depression and Agricultural Intensification:
               A Test in the Mimbres Valley, New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1999   
File        : a9909399

Award Number: 9909399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10546              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald K. Grayson grayson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Donald Grayson, Mr. Michael Cannon will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. The focus of this archaeological research is a
              series of sites in the Mimbres Valley of New Mexico which span the time period
              from ca. 500 to 1,300 AD. This approximately 800 year span witnessed the
              development of complex society which is echoed in many other parts of the
              Southwest. Settlement patterns changed from small pithouse villages to large
              multistory pueblos and both population and cultural complexity increased
              significantly. In common with similar situations in many part of the world,
              this process was also accompanied on increased reliance on agriculture at the
              expense of traditional hunting and gathering. While this fact is well
              established, the reason for this shift is poorly understood. Some
              anthropologists argue that agriculture using traditional methods produces
              higher returns that hunting and gathering and that with increased population
              pressure forced change in this direction. Others believe that depletion of
              large game through increased sustained hunting rather than any intrinsic
              advantage in agriculture is the causal factor. In his study Mr. Cannon will
              evaluate these two alternative hypotheses. He will analyze faunal remains
              recovered from a series of Mimbres archaeological sites to determine changes in
              species composition over time. He will examine changes in ratio between larger
              more highly valued species vs. smaller ones with less caloric return. He will
              also reconstruct age distributions to determine hunting pressure and body part
              distributions which provide information on how far from a settlement hunters
              are forced to range. (As large game becomes scarce, the number of younger
              animals obtained increases; the further hunters go from camp the fewer less
              meaty parts from kills are carried back to it.) These data will be interpreted
              within a framework derived from optimal foraging theory. 
       This research
              is important for several reasons. It will shed new light on an important aspect
              of the American prehistoric record and provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists It will yield new insight into the shift from hunting and
              gathering to agriculture - a process which was repeated independently in many
              parts of the world. It will also assist in training a promising young
              scientist.

