Title       : Diurnal Modulation of Moist Processes in Summertime Droughts and Floods over the
               Central United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2001  
File        : a9909650

Award Number: 9909650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond W. Arritt rwarritt@bruce.agron.iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Moti Segal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zaitao Pan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tsing-Chang Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	This team of investigators will evaluate both the relative and combined effects
              of various processes contributing to summer rainfall and its diurnal
              variability in the central United States.  Diurnal variation has important
              effects on the summer hydrologic cycle in the mid-latitudes with the nocturnal
              low-level jet and mesoscale convective systems playing significant roles. 
              Three hypotheses will be examined:  (1)  The large-scale diurnal variation
              changes from year to year such that rainfall-inducing processes peak during the
              nighttime (daytime) in flood (drought) years.  (2) During flood years, the
              contributing processes phase together to produce enhanced precipitation and a
              stronger nocturnal maximum, while in drought years the components are out of
              diurnal phase.  (3) Large-scale forcing in flood years favors organization and
              upscale growth of convection, which shifts peak precipitation to late
              night/early morning.

	The principal investigators will employ both
              observational analysis and numerical modeling approaches to examine the
              hypotheses.  The numerical studies will be used to isolate and filter
              perturbations in both the spatial and temporal domains so that their influences
              can be systematically examined in regional climate simulations.  The study will
              cover a selection of normal, drought, and flood years in the Midwest.

	This
              research is supported as part of NSF's Water and Energy:  Atmospheric,
              Vegetative, and Earth Interactions (WEAVE) effort.

