Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Studies of Mantle Electrical Conductivity
               Beneath the Pacific Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a9909931

Award Number: 9909931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18438              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. Chave achave@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909931
Chave

This award supports a two year collaborative research project
              between Professor Alan Chave of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute in
              Massachusetts and Professor Hisashi Utada of the University of Tokyo in Japan. 
              The researchers will be undertaking a study of mantle electrical conductivity
              beneath the Pacific basin.  Due to the recent turn down of analog submarine
              telephone cables by their commercial operators, an opportunity has arisen to
              make planetary scale measurements of the geoelectric field on unpowered cables
              at many places around the world.  Currently, investigators have instrumented a
              total of six Pacific Ocean and two Atlantic Ocean cables and the Japanese are
              making similar measurements on four other western Pacific cables.  These data
              will be merged and used for two purposes:  1) a study of the size and spatial
              variability of the poloidal electric field produced in the core using time
              series that are at least 4 times longer than any previously available, and  2)
              a study of mid-mantle electrical conductivity and its lateral variability
              beneath the Pacific basin using a combined magnetotelluric/geomagnetic depth
              sounding approach.  Substantial progress has been made in using cable data for
              deep magnetotelluric sounding of Earth's conductivity structure and they hope
              to extend and improve that type of result.      

The project brings together
              the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research
              capabilities.  Very long period submarine cable data have application to
              studies of core processes by detecting leakage currents from the toroidal
              magnetic component of the geomagnetic dynamo (whose magnetic field vanishes at
              the earth's surface).  This research advances international human resources
              through the participation of a younger scientist.  Through the exchange of
              ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and
              promote international understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to
              publish results of the research on  the web (www.whoi

