Title       : Monitoring Mass Reactions to Democratization During the East Asian Economic
               Crisis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9909037

Award Number: 9909037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Doh C. Shin shind@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The recent collapse of economic powerhouses in East Asia has generated a very
              rare opportunity to study the impact of economic crisis on the democratization
              of authoritarian regimes that produced economic miracles.  The survey research
              project proposed here seeks to examine the dynamics of mass culture during the
              East Asian economic crisis in comparative perspective.  To this end, the
              project undertakes annually a mass public opinion survey in South Korea for
              each of the next two years.  Based on these annual surveys, it monitors and
              unravels the dynamics of popular orientations toward both democratic and
              authoritarian politics throughout the arduous process of the economic crisis. 
              The patterns and sources of political attitudinal dynamics among the Korean
              mass public are compared and contrasted with what is observed in Central and
              Eastern Europe where authoritarian rule brought about economic poverty instead
              of prosperity.  These research endeavors provide a new perspective on the
              continuing debate over whether "economic crisis undermines nascent
              democracies."  They also provide a true test of whether citizens of those
              democracies are politically sophisticated enough to distinguish between the
              quality of governmental performance and the legitimacy of democracy itself. 
              Most importantly, functional, institutional learning, and other theories of
              democratic cultural change are tested with a set of annual surveys conducted in
              the most prominent East Asian dragon state in order to expand and refine the
              literature on the third wave of democratization that builds on research
              conducted mostly in the West. 
