Title       : HBCU: The Howard University Science, Engineering and Mathematics Program (HUSEM)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a9909040

Award Number: 9909040
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4199908            (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Toy Caldwell-Colbert toycc@howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antoine M. Garibaldi  (Principal Investigator former)
              Don M. Coleman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1594,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Howard University

Howard University has a long and dedicated history of
              awarding African Americans degrees in science, engineering and mathematics
              (SEM). However, in spite of the efforts of Howard and other institutions, there
              remains a definite shortage of underrepresented minorities earning degrees in
              SEM fields. Howard University proposes to build upon existing SEM-related
              projects to double the production of Bachelor of Science degrees in SEM over
              the next five years and to increase the numbers of SEM graduates who are
              academically prepared and motivated to pursue advanced degrees. Specifically,
              Howard intends to implement the Howard University Science, Engineering and
              Mathematics (HUSEM) program.

HUSEM is a program that integrates enhanced
              educational activities and dedicated mentoring and advising activities that
              include technology-based introductory mathematics and science courses,
              undergraduate research-for-credit, and teamwork-based learning environment.
              Through HUSEM, SEM faculty will be introduced to emerging SEM pedagogy in
              formalized seminars, workshops and short courses in Howard's Center for
              Excellence in Teaching and Learning. HUSEM will collaborate with the
              NSF-supported Minority Graduate Education (MGE) Program, housed in the Graduate
              School of Howard University, to provide a natural transition in preparing
              students for graduate school.

A comprehensive evaluation program will focus
              on SEM retention rates, number of SEM majors involved in research, and the
              academic preparedness of students for graduate study.


