Title       : Collaborative Research: Development of a Luminescence Dating Capability for
               Antarctic Glaciomarine Sediments: Tests of Signal Zeroing at the Antarctic
               Pennisula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a9909665

Award Number: 9909665
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn W. Berger gwberger@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909665
Berger

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports project to test and develop
              approaches for using thermoluminescence techniques to determine the age of
              Antarctic marine sediments. 

Quaternary (last 2 million yrs) marine
              sediments surrounding Antarctica record the waxing and waning of ice shelves
              and ice sheets, and also other paleoclimatic information, yet accurate
              chronologies of these sediments are difficult to obtain. Such chronologies
              provide the essential foundation for study of geological processes in the past.
              Within the range of radiocarbon (14C) dating (less than 30-40 thousand yrs,
              note - "ka" below means 1000 yrs) 14C dates can be inaccurate because of a
              variable 14C reservoir effect, and beyond 30-40 ka few methods are applicable.
              Photon-stimulated-luminescence sediment dating (photonic dating) of eolian and
              waterlain deposits in temperate latitudes spans the range from decades to
              hundreds of ka, but marine sediments in and around Antarctica pose special
              difficulty because of the potentially restricted exposure to daylight (the
              clock-zeroing process) of most detrital grains before deposition. This proposal
              will test the clock-zeroing assumption in representative Antarctic glaciomarine
              depositional settings, and thereby determine the potential reliability of
              photonic dating of Antarctic marine sediments.

Limited luminescence dating
              and signal-zeroing tests using glaciomarine and marine deposits have been
              conducted in the northern temperate and polar latitudes, but the effects on
              luminescence of the different glaciomarine depositional processes have never
              been studied in detail. Furthermore, the depositional settings around
              Antarctica are almost entirely polar, with consequent specific processes
              operating there. For example, transport of terrigenous suspensions by neutrally
              buoyant "cold-tongue" (mid-water) plumes may be common around Antarctica, yet
              the effect of such transport on luminescence zeroing is unknown. Typical marine
              cores near Antarctica may contain an unknown fraction of detrital grains from
              cold-tongue and near-bottom suspensions. Thus the extent to which the polar
              glaciomarine depositional processes around Antarctica may limit the potential
              accuracy of photonic dating of marine cores is unknown (age overestimates would
              result if grains are not exposed to daylight before deposition).

This
              project will collect detrital grains from a variety of "zero-age" (modern)
              marine depositional settings within the Antarctic Peninsula, where
              representative Antarctic depositional processes have been documented and where
              logistics permit access. Suspensions will be collected from four fjords
              representing a transect from polar through subpolar conditions. Suspensions
              will be collected from two stations and from up to 3 depths (surface and 2 deep
              plumes) at each station. Sediment traps will be deployed at two of these fjord
              settings. As well, core-top sediments will be collected from several sites. All
              samples will be shielded from light and transported to Reno, Nevada, for
              luminescence analyses.

Systematic study of the effectiveness of
              luminescence-clock-zeroing in Antarctic glaciomarine settings will determine if
              photonic dating can be reliable for future applications to Antarctic marine
              sediments. Refined sedimentological criteria for the selection of future
              samples for photonic dating are expected from this project. A photonic-dating
              capability would provide a numeric geochronometer extending well beyond the age
              range of 14C dating. Such a capability would permit answering a number of
              broader questions about the timing and extent of past glaciations near and on
              the Antarctic shelves.

