Title       : Enhancing the Perfomance of a Submersible Holographic Camera and Automating
               Analysis for Determining Particle Location and Turbulance in the Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a9909170

Award Number: 9909170
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $481822             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Katz katz@titan.me.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin Malkiel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Osborn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909170
Katz

This ocean sciences technology development project builds on
              previous work to develop and test a submersible holographic camera system using
              lasers to produce holograms, from  which the motion and distribution of small
              particles can be studied.  A submersible "holocamera" system for recording
              in-situ holograms in the ocean presently operates in an in-line mode utilizing
              a ruby laser as its light source. It is powered by onboard batteries and is
              controlled via two fiber optic cables, which also provide real time data from
              other onboard environmental sensors. The system is designed to minimize the
              effect the system has on the sampled water volume. The present effort focuses
              on enhancing the performance of the holocamera and continuing the development
              of hologram analysis procedures. Holography is a unique tool that can provide
              the instantaneous location of microscopic particles over a large sample volume
              as well as the shape, size and orientation of each particle. A series of
              holograms can also be used to determine the full 3 -D velocity field of the
              liquid in that sample volume and the relative velocities of larger particles.
              

The data analysis procedure consists of reconstructing a recorded hologram
              to create a 3 - D frozen image of the original sample volume. By scanning the
              reconstructed image at high magnification, one can observe and measure desired
              details down to less than 10 mm within a sample volume of about 1000 cm3. Work
              will be undertaken to automate and improve the efficiency of the analysis
              procedures by incorporating and developing software tools that will perform 1)
              image enhancement using a variety of histogram-based, non-linear and
              morphological filters; 2) particle detection involving use of blob analysis
              subroutines; and 3) particle classification based on size and shape.  A further
              enhancement will provide the capability for Holographic Particle Image
              Velocimetry by providing the holocamera with a separate, off-axis reference
              beam, and a spatial, high pass filter inserted between the sample volume and
              the film. 

The ability to measure the 3-D liquid velocity distribution in
              the ocean and the relative motion of selected particles will be developed using
              methods used for laboratory applications where the liquid flow field is
              measured using the displacement of small particles. In situ methods will be
              developed to obtain all three velocity components from a single hologram by
              determining the axial displacement of particles accurately using their exact
              location in space (particle tracking); and by using the continuity equation
              that enables computation of the axial component from the spatial distribution
              of the other two. Methods to address the overlap problem for in-line holography
              and for off-axis holography are proposed.

Field tests will be performed in
              conjunction with investigators from Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institute.
              Their research requires data on the local shear strains (i.e. 3 - D velocity
              distribution) in the scale of planktonic organisms as well as correlation
              between copepod abundance and marine snow and/or other resource abundance. Both
              can be simultaneously provided by the holocamera. This sensor could be applied
              to other physical and biological oceanographic problems such as small scale
              turbulence, microscale patchiness of organisms, capture of food particles, and
              describing the size and motion of bubbles including those smaller than
              multi-frequency acoustical techniques can measure.  


