Title       : Learning from Lesson Study, A Japanese Approach to Developing Teaching Skills
               and Innovations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a9909475

Award Number: 9909475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384759             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clea Fernandez cf170@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Teachers College Columbia
	      525 West 120th Street
	      New York, NY  10027    212/678-3000

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Recent international studies have elicited a great deal of interest in
              Japanese educational practices.  For example, researchers and practitioners
              alike have expressed excitement about uncovering better approaches to teaching
              mathematics by examining the Japanese lessons that were collected as part of
              the Third International Math and Science Study (TIMSS). 

Japanese models of
              professional development are also receiving growing attention.  We now know
              quite a bit about how Japanese teachers develop and refine their teaching by
              working together in school based groups to carefully plan, implement, and
              revise lessons.  In fact a number of researchers have argued that that this
              popular form of practice-based inquiry, called jugyokenkyu [lesson study],
              could be of great interest to American educators. 

In this project we argue
              for combining these two trends.  Looking at the TIMSS tapes in and of itself is
              not likely to affect practice in any significant way.  The conversations that
              these tapes engender need to be built upon by having teachers engage in a
              meaningful and goal directed follow up activity.  We suggest that lesson study
              can provide such an activity and argue for embedding teachers' analysis of
              TIMSS tapes in the broader context of doing lesson study.  

More
              specifically this project has three main goals: 1) understanding how to adapt
              lesson study to a US context, 2) assessing the impact on individual teachers of
              participating in lesson study, and 3) exploring how to bring lesson study to
              scale in US schools.


