Title       : Magnetic Properties and Differentiation of the Antarctic Crust: Constraints From
               a Rock Magnetic Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9909712

Award Number: 9909712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Grunow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909712
Grunow

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports development of an Antarctic
              rock-magnetic database. The Antarctic Digital Magnetic Anomaly Project's
              (ADMAP) goal of creating an Antarctic digital magnetic database will help
              evaluate the sub-ice bedrock geology of Antarctica.  An integral part of the
              ADMAP program is to assemble the rock physical property data from the few but
              very important bedrock exposures in Antarctica. These outcrops represent the
              only ground truth for geophysical surveys. The goals of this project are to
              evaluate published and unpublished rock magnetic site data from Antarctica and
              enter this information into a database. Presently, at least 10,000
              paleomagnetic drill core samples, representing more than 1000 sites have been
              obtained in Archean to Cenozoic Antarctic rocks. Such a collection represents a
              unique source of rock physical property data. The database developed by this
              project would include rock type, site location, NRM, susceptibility,
              anisotropy, declination/inclination, VGP, rock age, likely magnetic carrier,
              regional structural information data, and other related data. Compiling these
              rock physical property data sites would be useful for future interpretations of
              geophysical and paleoclimate data by addressing questions related to:
1) The
              demarcation of potential crustal boundaries in both East and West Antarctica
              (are there terrane boundaries in West Antarctica?, are crustal suture zones
              present in East Antarctica?, etc),
2) The extent of the Cambro-Ordovician
              magmatic arc in the Transantarctic Mountains,
3) The geometry and extent of
              Jurassic Ferrar Group magmatic rocks,
4) The extent of Cenozoic volcanic
              rocks, and
5) Provenance analyses for paleoclimate research.
The database
              will be accessible on the Internet. The general format will be based on the new
              US Antarctic Geologic Database (AGD) but modified to include the rock magnetic
              information. The server for the AGD is located at the Byrd Polar Research
              Center and can accommodate the Antarctic rock magnetic database (ARMD) as well.
               Individual investigators will be able to enter new rock magnetic data in the
              future. The ARMD will be linked to existing paleomagnetic and Antarctic
              databases.

