Title       : Antifreeze Proteins in Antarctic Fishes: Ecological and Organismal Physiology,
               Protein Structure-Function and Mechanism, Genetics and Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9909841

Award Number: 9909841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570961             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur L. DeVries adevries@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chi-Hing C. Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Southern Ocean represents the world's coldest marine environment and its
              near-shore waters are perennially at the freezing point of seawater and replete
              with ice crystals. The group of marine teleost fishes are hypo-osmotic to
              seawater and therefore would readily freeze in these waters from nucleation by
              environmental ice. Cold-adapted fishes have more serum electrolytes, but these
              are insufficient to prevent freezing in Antarctic fishes. A number of polar and
              subpolar fish evolved special biological antifreeze proteins to avoid freezing
              and successfully colonized their frigid habitats. The impact of the evolution
              of the antifreeze function on organismal success is particularly clear in the
              Antarctic notothenioids. This research project involves ongoing and new
              research on the role of antifreeze glycopeptides, antifreeze peptides and a
              newly discovered antifreeze potentiator protein in freezing avoidance of
              Antarctic fishes. The specific areas of research include: the relationship
              between the severity of environment and exposure of fish to ice in the water
              column, the uptake of endogenous ice and its fate, structure of antifreeze
              proteins, the molecular mechanism of antifreeze adsorption to ice and
              inhibition of ice crystal growth, and comprehensive analyses of the antifreeze
              capacity at both the protein and gene levels across the suborder
              Notothenioidei. Research specific to antifreeze glycopeptides includes the
              chromosomal locus of the gene family and its protease progenitor gene,
              calibration of the rate of notothenioid nuclear protein coding sequences to
              arrive at a more precise time estimate of the gene evolution and the temporal
              aspects of antifreeze glycopeptides during embryogenesis and early larval
              stages. The multidisciplinary approach will lead to major advances in the
              molecular biology and evolution of the antifreeze systems and will be
              applicable to a wide range of disciplines.
