Title       : A Theoretical Analysis of SEDEX-type Ore Formation McArthur Basin, Australia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1999  
File        : a9909292

Award Number: 9909292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grant Garven garven@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909292
Garven
Sedimentary basins provide about three-quarters of the Earth's
              base-metal resources. Three major types of lead-zinc mineralization are
              observed: 1) shale-hosted ore deposits of the SEDEX type, 2) limestone and
              dolomite-hosted ore deposits of the MVT type, and 3) limestone and
              dolomite-hosted ores of the Irish type. All three types of ores are known to
              have formed by the deep  migration of metal-bearing brines in sedimentary
              basins where zinc and lead was leached from older sandstone and fractured
              crystalline basement. Major faults appear to have played an important role in
              guiding the transport of metal-bearing brines in both SEDEX and Irish ores,
              which are found in rifted tectonic environments. Unresolved issues regarding
              the origin of these lead-zinc deposits include the timing, rates and patterns
              of fluid flow, the geochemical and thermal aspects of fluid mixing and ore
              deposition, and the effects of faults on ore genesis. Until now, no group has
              tackled these issues for SEDEX-type ores so this topic forms the foundation of
              my project.  The McArthur Basin in northern Australia hosts one of the world's
              largest SEDEX-type ores, the HYC deposit. To understand the effects of faults
              and rift-basin geology on ore formation, we plan to develop a series of
              numerical experiments wherein processes of hydrothermal fluid flow, heat
              transfer, and geochemical reactions are simulated for HYC using mathematical
              modeling. Basic parameters such as fault permeability, zinc concentration, etc.
              are poorly constrained for ancient rift settings like the McArthur Basin and so
              computer-based simulations allow us to explore parameter effects and couple
              complex processes like chemical reactions with the subsurface hydrology. I plan
              to collaborate with experts at the Centre for Ore Deposit Research in Hobart,
              Australia, who have been studying the geochemical and geological attributes of
              metal deposits in the McArthur Basin over the past decade. Together we hope to
              develop a better understanding of how these giant ore deposits form, and this
              in turn will help build better exploration models for rift basins in Australia,
              the USA, and Canada. I also hope that some of this research will benefit new
              studies by the US Geological Survey of the Red Dog deposit, Alaska, another
              giant SEDEX-type ore system.  
 

