Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: High Precision Spectroscopy of Lambda
               Hypernuclei by (e,e'K) Reaction and Gamma-Ray Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9909188

Award Number: 9909188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Liguang Tang tangl@jlab.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampton University
	      
	      Hampton, VA  23668    804/727-5000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510304   Electron & Energy Sources               
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909188
Tang

This award supports a two year collaborative research project
              between Professor Liguang Tang of Hampton University and Professor Hirokazu
              Tamura of Tohoku University in Japan.  The researchers will be undertaking a
              study of high precision spectroscopy of Lambda hypernuclei by (e.e.K) reaction
              and gamma-ray measurement.  The project will consist of both experimentalists
              and theorists.  The goal of the proposal is to probe the limits of conventional
              models of elementary interactions or models where these interactions are
              imbedded within the nuclear medium.  The nucleus is used as a strongly
              interactive rich hadronic many body system.  The inserted "impurity", a strange
              particle or quark, is the probe to explore the perturbation of a known
              interaction by this environment.  This is termed "Hypernuclear Physics", in
              which models of higher order interaction forces (such as multi-pion exchange)
              or of quark and gluon substructure, may be explored more clearly.  Such
              phenomena are usually described dominantly by a lower order single pion
              exchange picture in conventional nuclear physics.  Significant knowledge has
              been gained from all the previous works.  However, high precision experiments
              and data are extremely important to attack the unresolved issues.  This project
              will provide systematic information in great detail and precision.  

The
              project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
              expertise and research capabilities. Results of the research have the potential
              of making a major impact in the field by resolving the long standing unsolved
              puzzles in understanding the fundamental hyperon-nucleon interaction.  This
              research advances international human resources through the participation of
              postdocs and graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology,
              this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of the
              research on their web page (HTTP://www.jlab.org/~tangl).

