Title       : HBCU: 21st Century Integration of Science and Mathematics: Training Great Minds
               for the Future
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a9909038

Award Number: 9909038
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2106000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hattie Lamar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miles College
	      P. O. Box 3800
	      Birmingham, AL  35208    205/923-2771

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Miles College

	This proposal represents, a strategic plan to address the
              under representation of
minorities in the science, mathematics engineering and
              technology (SMET) related
disciplines. The strategies proposed are intended to
              develop a systematic educational
continuum from the undergraduate to the
              doctorate level.
	Miles College, located in Birmingham, Alabama, is one of the
              nation's
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (MCU). It was founded in
              1905 under the
aegis of the Christian Methodist Episcopal (CME) Church, and
              receives continuing
support from that body. It had a spring 1998 enrollment in
              excess of 1400 students, the
largest enrollment in recent history.
	To
              accomplish the initial goal of increasing the number of minority
              students
enrolling at Miles, the faculty will assist in recruiting qualified
              students and revising the
support system for said students. There will be an
              increased focus in developing research
opportunities for the college students
              with concomitant experiences for public school
students. Monthly science
              seminars will be conducted at the College. Students and
selected faculty will
              mobilize themselves and deliver parallel points of interest in the
public
              school setting as part of the recruitment effort of qualified students.
              Selected
public school students will intern in the summer on the Miles College
              campus for greater
involvement in research.
	The research interest must
              produce the kinds of results that will maintain student
interest and will
              foster community for our programs. As this interest grows, the ability
              to
attract private and public partners will increase concomitantly. The
              private partners will
help in creating internships and cooperative learning
              experiences for Miles College
students. The research commitment is already
              developing and private partners have
indicated that they will begin to make
              arrangements to accommodate the interns from
Miles.
	Faculty development will
              be manifest in multiple facets: recruitment of
researchers interested in
              teaching and training, continuing education and retraining for
seasoned
              professionals, current faculty will sharpen their skills by conducting
              in-service
for peers and students and there will be emphasis for junior
              faculty to earn advanced
degrees. These efforts will harness the type of
              faculty that will set Miles College on the
track to achieve the scientific
              prominence that attains the renown of its sister colleges in
the area and
              beyond.

