Title       : A National model for Curriculum Adaptation and Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9909552

Award Number: 9909552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45633              (Estimated)
Investigator: Comfort Cover cover@ppcc.cccoes.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl J. Klee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pikes Peak Cmty College
	      5675 South Academy Blvd
	      Colorado Springs, CO  809065422    303/576-7711

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SPECIAL PROJECT:  This project develops, tests and validates a national model
              for the adaptation and implementation of an advanced technology curriculum by
              using the current technologies of satellite teleconferencing and Internet
              resources.  This model starts with a three-hour national teleconference event
              featuring a panel discussion and multimedia presentation of a new computer
              networking curriculum. The panelists include faculty who have implemented the
              new curriculum, industry partners, and members of professional organizations,
              such as the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) and the National
              Association of Communications Systems Engineers(NACSE).   

The
              teleconference is a starting point for a series of activities to provide the
              necessary resources to two-year college faculty and administrators to adapt and
              implement an associate degree curriculum in computer networking.   Twenty prime
              sites will be identified to participate in the project and to receive matching
              support to develop this track.   Other sites can also participate as viewers of
              the national teleconference.  This curriculum track is a component of the
              recently completed ACM Guidelines for Degree and Certificate Programs to
              Support Computing in a Networked Environment produced by the ACM Two-Year
              College Education Committee. 

The measurable objectives of this project
              include:   1) identification of a variety of resources to support adaptation
              and implementation of the associate degree and certificate programs in
              networking;    2)  identification of twenty institutions across the United
              States to be prime sites to implement the new curriculum;  3) dissemination of
              information and strategies for adapting and implementing the new curriculum by
              means of the teleconference event;    4) establishment of a uniform evaluation
              protocol to be used across the 20 primary sites to validate the model;  5) 
              establishment of a discussion forum for the participants to enable
              communication and sharing of resources;  and 6) provision of ongoing
              assistance, mentoring and peer support to facilitate the adaptation and
              implementation process. 

