Title       : Collaborative Research: A Broadband Seismic Investigation of Deep Continental
               Structure Across the East-West Antarctic Boundary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9909648

Award Number: 9909648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew A. Nyblade ANDY@GEOSC.PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909648											
Nyblade

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and
              Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to
              evaluate geodynamic models for the tectonic development of Antarctica by
              investigating crust and upper mantle structure beneath the East-West Antarctic
              boundary. This experiment will use a focused broadband seismograph deployment
              to address two outstanding problems concerning the tectonic development of the
              Antarctic continent. 

(1) The origin of the Transantarctic Mountains.
Even
              though the Transantarctic Mountains are widely considered a classic example of
              rift flank uplift, there appears to be little consensus about the exact uplift
              mechanism. Many mechanisms have been proposed, ranging from delayed phase
              changes to transform-flank uplift, all of which make various assumptions about
              upper mantle structure beneath and adjacent to the rift-side of the mountain
              front.  

(2) The structure of the East Antarctic Craton.
East Antarctica
              displays the greatest modal elevation of any major cratonic block when
              corrected for glacial loading.  The anomalous elevation of East Antarctica may
              have been an important factor in the onset of continental glaciation.  
              However, the support mechanism for this anomalous topography is unknown;
              possible models include isostatic uplift from (a) thickened crust, (b)
              anomalously depleted upper mantle, and (c) thermally modified upper mantle, as
              well as dynamic uplift. The lateral extent of the very old continental
              lithosphere is also uncertain.  In particular, it is unknown whether the old
              lithosphere extends to the western edge of East Antarctica beneath the crustal
              rocks deformed during the Ross Orogeny.

To examine details of the crust and
              upper mantle structure across the East-West Antarctic boundary, this passive
              seismic experiment is comprised of three elements:
(1) A 1400 km linear array
              of 17 broadband seismic stations extending from the high central regions of the
              East Antarctic craton to the Transantarctic Mountains (Array 1).
(2) An
              intersecting 400 km linear array of 16 broadband seismic stations extending
              from the coast across the Transantarctic mountains nearly perpendicular to the
              strike of the range in the dry valleys region (Array 2).
(3) An array of 11
              broadband stations in coastal regions around Ross Island and Terra Nova Bay
              (Array 3).

This experiment will be conducted over a three-year period, to
              allow sufficient data collection from naturally occurring earthquakes, and will
              begin in November 2000. Airborne surveys for surface elevation and ice
              thickness will be completed in support of this work. If feasible, aerogravity
              and aeromagnetics data will also be collected. Data will be analyzed using a
              variety of proven modeling techniques, including body and surface wave
              tomography, receiver function inversion, and shear wave splitting analysis. The
              results of these analyses will be maps of the variation in crustal thickness,
              upper mantle structure, anisotropy, and mantle discontinuity topography across
              the boundary of East and West Antarctica.  These results will provide a solid
              foundation for understanding the geodynamics of the Antarctic continent.


