Title       : Advances in Robust Control; and in High Resolution Spectral Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a9909219

Award Number: 9909219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195449             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tryphon T. Georgiou georgiou@ee.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research proposed herein represents a continuation of our current program in
              developing theoretical and computational tools for modeling and control of
              dynamical systems.  Our plan is to investigate two main topics. 
1. Robust
              control of nonlinear systems.
Our approach relies on the concept of the graph.
               Model uncertainty is quantified using a suitable generalization of the gap
              metric which measures potential graph perturbations.  A theory of robust
              control with explicit expressions for robustness margin is in place.  Also, a
              computational approach has been presented in our recent work.  The proposed
              research focuses on how to (i) enhance the effectiveness of the computational
              tools as well as seek more effective ones, (ii) extend the basic robustness
              theory outside the basic paradigm of stability about an equilibrium or a
              prespecified trajectory.  In particular, we want to assess robustness of
              oscillatory systems, and systems in the presence of uncertain biases.
2.
              High-resolution spectral estimation.
The impetus for this direction was
              provided by recent joint work with Chris Byrnes and Anders Linquist.  We have
              introduced filter banks, and subsequently general input-to-state (IS) filters,
              for providing harmonic amplification of selected spectral intervals.  We are in
              the process of completing a general theory which takes advantage of the
              selectivity properties of such filters and allows very high resolution spectral
              estimation.  In particular, for identifying sinusoids in noise, which is a key
              problem in radar and sonar applications, our approach has already permitted
              significantly better resolution than standard state-of-the-art MUSIC and ESPRIT
              algorithms.



