Title       : Dissolved Metal Sulfides in Fully Oxygenated River Waters: Sources,
               Distribution, Composition and Bioavailability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a9909278

Award Number: 9909278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gaboury Benoit gaboury.benoit@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9909278
Benoit

Introduction:  This proposal is for research to investigate
              complexation of heavy metals (Cu, Cd, Zn, Pb, Ag) by dissolved, reduced sulfur
              compounds in fully oxygenated surface waters.  This project will be  the first
              systematic investigation of dissolved reduced sulfides in oxic freshwater
              environments.  Preliminary research suggests that metal-sulfide complexes may
              be the dominant form of many metals in rivers.  Yet, almost nothing is known
              about the identity, distribution, sources, and cycling of dissolved reduced
              sulfur compounds and metal-sulfide complexes in this environment.  While the
              research builds on what is known about in the marine realm, fresh waters
              constitute a different, and possibly more complex, biogeochemical system
              containing groundwater, anoxic sediments, wetlands, and pollution. 

Research
              Overview:  Little is known about sulfides and their interaction with metals in
              oxic fresh waters.  Consequently, the research strategy proceeds in two
              distinct stages, first, basic, then, more process oriented.  In the first
              stage, extensive field sampling will be used to document the spatial and
              temporal variability of sulfides, and new analytical methods will be developed
              in the laboratory.  In the second stage, the refined analytical techniques will
              be applied to samples collected from two carefully selected sites, to clarify
              the biogeochemical cycle of sulfides and their metal complexes in this new
              environment.  Goals are to identify sources, elucidate composition, and better
              understand processes that control the behavior, transport, and fate of the
              dissolved reduced sulfur compounds and the complexes that they form with heavy
              metals in fresh oxic surface waters.  The following objectives will be
              achieved: (1) identification of pools and pathways of interconversion of
              dissolved reduced sulfur in oxic fresh waters, (2) evaluation of the relative
              magnitude of sulfide complexation compared to other ligands, especially DOM,
              (3) appraisal of the nature and magnitude of dissolved reduced sulfur sources,
              (4) assessment of levels of total dissolved sulfides in 20 rivers and lakes
              covering a broad range of biogeochemical characteristics, and (5) development
              and refinement of analytical techniques to identify and quantify a spectrum of
              reduced sulfur and sulfide-metal species.

Methods:  Multiple analytical
              methods will be used to provide reliable identification and quantification of
              several classes of sulfur compounds, including:  (1) five sulfides and
              individual metal-sulfide complexes (voltammetry), (2) free sulfides, precursor
              volatile reduced sulfur species, and dissolved acid-volatile metal sulfides
              (gas chromatography), (3) dissolved reduced sulfur associated with DOM (HPLC
              with combined polarographic/spectroscopic detection), and (4) total dissolved
              sulfides (preconcentration and methylene blue spectrophotometry).  Clean
              techniques will be used at all stages of sample collection, pretreatment, and
              analysis to avoid contamination artifacts.

Significance:  Complexation can
              greatly reduce the reactivity of metals, thereby decreasing their
              bioavailability and tendency to function as micronutrients or toxins. 
              Dissolved sulfides may dominate metal speciation in many rivers and lakes,
              playing a greater role than even DOM.

