Title       : Fluids in the Upper Continental Crust: Static or Dynamic?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a9909277

Award Number: 9909277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164029             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Deming ddeming@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909277
Deming

A major area of uncertainty in our knowledge of crustal
              hydrodynamics concems the temporal and spatial scales over which overpressures
              in the continental crust are generated, maintained, and dissipated.  At the
              present time there is no consensus in either academic or industry circles to
              several fundamental questions.  What is the cause of overpressuring in older
              sedimentary basins which have not undergone active sedimentation for hundreds
              of millions of years?  Do pressure seals exist?  If they exist, how low must
              rock-permeability be to form a seal?  If pressure seals exist, are they created
              by diagenetic alteration, or are they in fact gas capillary seals?
The
              Anadarko Basin in southwestem Oklahoma will be used as a natural laboratory to
              study the conditions under which high fluid pressures may be generated and
              contained.  The Anadarko Basin is anomalous, because it contains extensive
              areas of abnormally high fluid pressures, yet it has been tectonically
              quiescent for more than 100 Ma.  The problem will be approached from a
              conceptual framework which postulates two end-member conceptions of crustal
              hydrogeology.  Static hypotheses explain the existence of high fluidpressures
              in the crust by invoking pressure seals, rock units that are essentially
              impermeable over an appropriate time scale.  Dynamic hypotheses explain the
              existence of overpressures in the crust as a transient imbalance caused by a
              geologic process (e.g., hydrocarbon generation) creating overpressures faster
              than they may be dissipated from low-permeability rocks.  To distinguish
              between these alternative hypotheses, or to determine if they are in fact
              end-member behaviors of a continuum, well log and core data will be gathered
              and used to characterize the thermal, hydrologic, and geologic nature of the
              basin.  Models of pressure generation and dissipation will then be used to test
              different hypotheses and discriminate between contrasting visions of basinal
              fluid regimes.
Obtaining an understanding of how overpressures form and
              dissipate in the upper continental crust could lead to a better understwiding
              of many important physical, chemical, and mechanical processes (e.g.,
              diagenesis, compaction, hydrocarbon generation and migration, seismicity) that
              take place in the continental crust as well as an understanding of how the
              physical properties (e.g. porosity, permeability) of crustal rocks vary in
              time, space, and scale.


