Title       : A Laboratory Study On The Effects Of A Mean Shear Fluid Flow During
               Solidification of Hexagonal Closest Packed Metallic Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2000     
File        : a9909333

Award Number: 9909333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66555              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Bergman bergman@simons-rock.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Simon's Rock of Bard Col
	      Alford Road
	      Great Barrington, MA  01230    413/528-0771

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1031,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Michael Bergman 
9909333 

This is a project to study experimentally the
              effects of a shear flow in the melt during the solidification of a hexagonal
              closest packed (hcp) zinc-rich tin alloy. Such a flow has been observed to
              cause the c-axes of solidifying sea ice, which is also hcp, to lie in the
              direction of the shear flow, and to cause the grains to tilt upstream. However,
              there have been no such studies on metallic alloys.   

The motivation for
              this study is that shear flows are likely in the Earth's solidifying outer core
              because of convection and the Coriolis force; rotation of the inner core is one
              example.  Although the phase of iron under inner core conditions is uncertain,
              hcp is a likely candidate. Moreover, the outer core is an alloy.   In the
              proposed experiments the fluid shear will be provided by Couette flow, with the
              zinc alloy melt contained in a rotating, cylindrical furnace. The heat
              exchanger onto which metal solidifies will be a non-rotating coaxial cylinder.
              Before solidification reaches the sidewall, the casting will be pulled from the
              melt, machined off the heat exchanger, and sectioned. Back reflection X-ray
              diffraction will be used to determine grain orientation, and standard
              metallography and optical techniques will be used to determine grain tilting,
              as a function of alloy percent, flow (rotation) rate, and oscillation rather
              than steady rotation.   Although the timescale and lengthscale of laboratory
              experiments are very different from those associated with the core, the
              experiments will give insight into the ways in which a shear flow in the melt
              can impact the texture that develops during solidification. Solidification
              texturing has been suggested as an explanation for the inner core seismic
              anisotropy, but shear flow effects have not been incorporated into any models. 
