Title       : Support of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Meteoritical Society to be held in
               Chicago in 2000.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9909961

Award Number: 9909961
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Meenakshi Wadhwa wadhwa@fmppr.fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, supported by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, provides funds to help support the 63rd Annual
              Meeting of the Meteoritical Society. The meeting will be held in Chicago, from
              August 28-September 1, 2000, under the organizational sponsorship of the Field
              Museum of Natural History and the University of Chicago. Additional support is
              anticipated from NASA, The Barringer Foundation, JEOL USA Inc., Cameca Inc.,
              Finnigan Inc., and Micromass Inc. The principal scientific focus of the meeting
              is on meteorites as clues to the origin and evolution of the solar system.
              Funding from the National Science Foundation is intended for stipends to enable
              students as well as some established scientists (primarily from former Soviet
              Bloc countries who cannot otherwise afford to attend) to participate in the
              Meeting.

Annual meetings of the Meteoritical Society are technical
              conferences, not conventions, and they attract broad international
              participation. The subject matter of the conference is dominated by
              mineralogical, isotopic and chemical studies of meteorites, theoretical studies
              of early solar system processes, and field and theoretical studies of impact
              phenomena. The overall scientific theme is learning about the formation and
              evolution of our solar system and its components, and solar systems in general.
              Recent topics of great interest at Meteoritical Society meetings have included
              the nature and origin of interstellar grains that have been found preserved in
              chondrite meteorites; the distribution of short-lived radionuclides in the
              newly-formed solar system and their possible role in early planetary melting;
              geochemical and isotopic characteristics of Martian (SNC) meteorites and their
              implications for the geology, atmosphere, hydrosphere and possibly biosphere on
              Mars; the possible astrophysical sites (stellar types) from which
              isotopically-anomalous material known to be present in the early solar system
              was derived; and possible secular variations in the meteorite population
              bombarding Earth over the past several tens of thousands of years.


