Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Predation Rates and Prey Escalation in Paleozoic Marine
               Benthic Ecosystems: The Role of Biotic Factors in the Evolutionary History of
               Marine Biosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9909225

Award Number: 9909225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michal J. Kowalewski michalk@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Bambach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


9909225	Kowalewski
9909565	Baumiller

Collaborative Research:
              Predation Rates and Prey Escalation in Paleozoic Marine Benthic Ecosystems: The
              Role of Biotic Factors in the Evolutionary History of Marine Biosphere

This
              project will test the role of predation in Paleozoic marine ecosystems using
              articulate brachiopods as a target prey group. To quantify predation, we will
              use traces (such as drill holes) left by predators on shells of their
              brachiopod prey using a three-pronged approach. First, illustrations in
              paleontological monographs will be surveyed for traces of predation. Second,
              selected museum collections will be screened for predation traces and the data
              acquired will be analyzed using multivariate statistics and morphometric
              methods. Third, additional data on diversity, taxonomy, and abundance of prey
              and their predators will be obtained from the paleontological literature. The
              specific objectives of this portion of the project are to quantify temporal and
              spatial patterns in (1) drilling predation; (2) shell-crushing predation; (3)
              diversity, taxonomy, and abundance of benthic predators; (4) defensive
              morphological traits developed in the shells of brachiopods; (5) predation
              traces on other potential prey.
	The quantified patterns will be used to
              evaluate the role and history of predation in Paleozoic marine ecosystems. We
              will also assess the hypothesis of escalation for the Paleozoic prey-predator
              system and the exact timing and importance of the mid-Paleozoic marine
              revolution. Causal mechanisms for brachiopod-predator interactions in the
              Paleozoic will be explored as well. This comprehensive insight into the history
              of predation in the Paleozoic will offer complimentary data to those obtained
              previously in extensive studies of the younger (Cretaceous-Cenozoic) fossil
              record of predation. The ultimate goal of this project is to assess the
              long-term importance of predation in controlling the evolution and ecology of
              marine biota.

