Title       : Special Project: IEEE Computer Society International Design Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9909512

Award Number: 9909512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harry G. Hedges                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Shriver   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Marie Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IEEE Computer Soc
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2840,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9909512
Shriver, Bruce D.
Kelly, Ann Marie
IEEE Computer Society

Special
              Project:  IEEE Computer Society International Design Competition

This
              project, the "IEEE Computer Society International Design Competition" (CSIDC)
              is planned as a substantive design competition for teams of undergraduate
              students in computer science, computer engineering, and related fields.  The
              competition is being managed by the CSIDC Committee of the IEEE Computer
              Society.  The competing teams are tasked with design and implementation of a
              selected prototype system that addresses a common problem.  Teams are made up
              of three-to-five full-time undergraduate students who attend the same college
              or university.  Each team receives a project kit, which consists of a number of
              hardware and software components, given by co-sponsoring technology companies. 
              Teams work under the supervision of a faculty advisor over a three to four
              month period.

The projects are judged according to the team's ability to
              achieve the design objective; the creativity of the project; the project's
              usability, marketability, and maintainability; the choice of trade-offs made;
              and other factors.  The detailed judging criteria are published in advance of
              the competition and each project is judged by one of several three-person
              evaluation teams.  Each evaluation team evaluates five submissions and
              identifies the top two to a nine-person judging panel.  The panel selects the
              top ten teams who advance to the Finals.  The top five winners and five
              honorable mentions receive monetary awards.

This grant provides partial
              funding to assist with the costs of administering and running the competition
              for its first two years.  It is planned that the project will become
              self-sufficient in future years.

