Title       : Deciphering the Interconnected Roles of Climate and Tectonics in Reconstructing
               the Early Evolution of a Rifted Continental Margin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a9909308

Award Number: 9909308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. Fedo cfedo@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

9909308
Fedo

Rifted continental margins evolve from tectonically
              and volcanically active early in their history, to a more passive phase once
              the margin matures.  Such geologic events occur on a backdrop of local and
              global climatic conditions that may be linked to the drifting of continents
              into different latitudes.  Consequently, both tectonics and climate could exert
              significant influence on the composition of sediments that result from rifting
              processes.  In this regard, the composition of siliciclastic sedimentary rocks
              deposited during and subsequent to the fragmentation of a continent serve as a
              recording of not only evolving source rock compositions and positions relative
              to rift flanks, but also of the prevailing climatic conditions during the time
              of separation.  The proposed investigation endeavors to critically examine
              Neoproterozoic- and Cambrian-aged siliciclastic rocks in the southwestem United
              States that were deposited during, and in the wake of, the fragmentation of
              Rodinia.  A goal is to determine the relative significance of tectonics and
              climate in shaping the composition of the sediments.  This information, coupled
              with extant sedimentologic and stratigraphic data, will then be used to build a
              comprehensive data bank in which to decipher the early geologic history of this
              rifted continental margin, whose evolution is still in great debate.  Data
              collected in this study will be principally petrographic, geochemical, and
              isotopic, and aimed at tracking mineral and elemental abundances transferred
              from source rocks to sediments by considering chemical weathering and
              diagenetic processes.  The study will also focus on determining the whole-rock
              and detrital feldspar isotopic compositions (Sm-Nd, Pb/Pb), as well as
              single-crystal zircon U-Pb analyses, as mechanisms to identify specific source
              rocks and localities, and their relative abundances through time.


