Title       : Spatial and Temporal Scales of Human Disturbance-McMurdo Station, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a9909445

Award Number: 9909445
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joyce A. Jatko                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1999   
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $731170             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahlon C. Kennicutt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Wolff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 5140      OPERATIONS SUPPORT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty states that
              regular and effective monitoring are required to facilitate the assessment of
              the impact of activities on the Antarctic environment.  This project will
              initiate the monitoring process for the United States Antarctic Program with a
              study of the temporal and spatial scales of various types of disturbances in
              and around McMurdo Station, Antarctica.  This will be accomplished by the
              establishment of an observational system over a three-year period.  The system
              is designed to determine the scales of natural and anthropogenic change in
              terrestrial and marine habitats.  A series of system attributes (or indicators
              of change) within these two habitats will be measured by a combination of
              aerial photography and point-data sampling grids at various spatial scales. 
              The study will determine the spatial and temporal scales of change and its
              origin, the efficiency of the observing system in documenting relevant changes
              in important habitat characteristics, and the utility of various approaches to
              reference or control locations.  Modern Geographic Information System
              techniques and geostatistical methods will be used to organize the diverse
              datasets within a coherent and coordinated framework.  The study will provide
              fundamental scientific information for developing a long-term strategy to
              document and minimize the impacts of scientific research and support operations
              on Antarctic resources and values in the future.


