Title       : GLOBEC: Winter Ecology of Larval Krill: Quantifying their Interaction with the
               Pack Ice Habitat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a9909933

Award Number: 9909933
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $518000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin M. Ross robin@icess.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Langdon B. Quetin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1308,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The U.S. Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics (U.S. GLOBEC) program has the goal of
              understanding and ultimately predicting how populations of marine animal
              species respond to natural and anthropogenic changes in climate.   Research in
              the Southern Ocean (SO) indicates strong coupling between climatic processes
              and ecosystem dynamics via the annual formation and destruction of sea ice. 
              The Southern Ocean GLOBEC Program (SO GLOBEC) will investigate the dynamic
              relationship between physical processes and ecosystem responses through
              identification of critical parameters that affect the distribution, abundance
              and population dynamics of target species.  The overall goals of the SO GLOBEC
              program are to elucidate shelf circulation processes and their effect on sea
              ice formation and krill distribution, and to examine the factors which govern
              krill survivorship and availability to higher trophic levels,  including
              penguins, seals and whales. The focus of the U.S. contribution to the
              international SO GLOBEC program will be on winter processes. This component
              will focus on the under-ice distribution and abundance of larval and juvenile
              krill. The physiological condition of the krill associated with sea ice of
              differing food quality and quantity will be assessed. This research will be
              coordinated with krill components that focus on adults in the water column with
              the goal of  understanding the overall age-specific dynamics of krill in
              winter. The result of the integrated SO GLOBEC program will be to improve the
              predictability of living marine resources, especially with respect to local and
              global climatic shifts.
