Title       : Quaternary Glacial History and Paleoenvironments of the East Antarctic Margin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a9909793

Award Number: 9909793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Manley patmanley@middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9909793
Manley

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a multi-institutional,
              international (US - Australia) marine geologic and geophysical investigation of
              Prydz Bay and the MacRobertson Shelf, to be completed during an approximately
              60-day cruise aboard the RVIB N.B. Palmer. The primary objective is to develop
              a record of climate and oceanographic change during the Quaternary, using
              sediment cores collected via kasten and jumbo piston coring.  Core sites will
              be selected based on seismic profiling (Seabeam 2112 and Bathy2000).
              Recognition of the central role of the Antarctic Ice Sheet to global oceanic
              and atmospheric systems is based primarily on data collected along the West
              Antarctic margin, while similar extensive and high resolution data sets from
              the much more extensive East Antarctic margin are sparse. Goals of this project
              include (1) development of a century- to millennial-scale record of Holocene
              paleoenvironments, and  (2) testing of hypotheses concerning the sedimentary
              record of previous glacial and interglacial events on the shelf, and evaluation
              of the timing and extent of maximum glaciation along this 500 km stretch of the
              East Antarctic margin. 

High-resolution seismic mapping and coring of
              sediments deposited in inner shelf depressions will be used to reconstruct
              Holocene paleoenvironments.  In similar depositional settings in the Antarctic
              Peninsula and Ross Sea, sedimentary records demonstrate millennial- and
              century- scale variability in primary production and sea-ice extent during the
              Holocene, which have been linked to chronological periodicities in radiocarbon
              distribution, suggesting the possible role of solar variability in driving some
              changes in Holocene climate. Similar high-resolution Holocene records from the
              East Antarctic margin will be used to develop a circum-Antarctic suite of data
              regarding the response of southern glacial and oceanographic systems to late
              Quaternary climate change.  In addition, these data will help us to evaluate
              the response of the East Antarctic margin to global warming.  

Initial
              surveys of the Prydz Channel - Amery Depression region reveal sequences
              deposited during previous Pleistocene interglacials.  The upper Holocene and
              lower (undated) siliceous units can be traced over 15,000 km2 of the Prydz
              Channel, but more sub-bottom seismic reflection profiling in conjunction with
              dense coring over this region is needed to define the spatial distribution and
              extent of the units.  Chronological work will determine the timing and duration
              of previous periods of glacial marine sedimentation on the East Antarctic
              margin during the late Pleistocene. 

Analyses will focus on detailed
              sedimentologic, geochemical, micropaleontological, and paleomagnetic
              techniques.  This multi-parameter approach is the most effective way to extract
              a valuable paleoenvironmental signal in these glacial marine sediments.  These
              results are expected to lead to a significant advance in understanding of the
              behavior of the Antarctic ice-sheet and ocean system in the recent geologic
              past.

The combination of investigators, all with many years of experience
              working in high latitude marine settings, will provide an effective team to
              complete the project.  University and College faculty (Principal Investigators
              on this project) will supervise a combination of undergraduate and
              post-graduate students involved in all stages of the project so that
              educational objectives will be met in tandem with the research goals of the
              project.


