Title       : The Fluvial Response to Late Quaternary Climatic Change of Large Rivers in
               France
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a9909597

Award Number: 9909597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195087             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Blum mblum1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,5918,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The mechanisms that produced past climate changes may have been global in
              extent, but the manifestation of such changes in the climate system and on
              terrestrial environments varied regionally.  The need for increased
              understanding of this spatial and temporal variability has become even more
              significant in light of the recent results from ice core and marine records,
              which provide exciting new glimpses of the complexity the transition from the
              last full-glacial to Holocene transition.  Unraveling the spatial and temporal
              variability of terrestrial systems and their responses to climate changes
              requires clearly dated stratigraphic records from representative parts of
              Earth's surface.  Toward that end, this research project involving geographers
              and Earth scientists from the U.S., France, and the United Kingdom will develop
              a region record of late Pleistocene and Holocene landscape evolution for the
              Loire, Rhone, and Garonne rivers of southern France.  Long-term project goals
              are to develop and refine geomorphic, stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and
              paleohydrologic models for the three systems in order to analyze how they
              operated over the course of a complete glacial-interglacial cycle.  More
              specifically, the project will develop a general stratigraphic, sedimentologic,
              and chronologic framework for these river systems during the "Wurm glacial
              cycle."  It also will develop a detailed stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and
              chronologic framework at millennial-scale resolution for the three river
              systems during the very dynamic period of deglaciation and transition to the
              Holocene.  The chronology of glacio-fluvial sediments will be developed through
              the use of optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) and accelerator mass
              spectrometry (AMS) 14C dating procedures,.  These data will be used to evaluate
              the frequency, magnitude, differential sensitivities, and thresholds for change
              in these fluvial systems over that critical time period.  This research project
              will generate a valuable new database and contribute new insights into a range
              of important issues, including (1) linkages between regional climate and
              hydrological systems and global atmosphere-cryosphere-ocean processes and (2)
              regional sensitivities to climate change.  The database will complement
              information gathered from individual river systems elsewhere and from
              relatively small regions, and it will provide a reference standard for future
              studies conducted on a regional scale.  The project is jointly supported by the
              Geography and Regional Science, Geology and Paleontology, and Western European
              programs at the National Science Foundation in collaboration with the French
              National Center for Scientific Research (CNRS).

