Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Molecular Recognition and Separation in
               Nano-structured Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9909994

Award Number: 9909994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Freiser freiser@shiva.ccit.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Subramaniam Muralidharan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909994
Freiser

This award supports the participation of American scientists
              in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Molecular Recognition and Separation in
              Nano-structured Media, to be held in Tucson, Arizona from December 20-22, 2000.
               The co-organizers are Professors Henry Freiser at the University of Arizona,
              and Professor Hitoshi Watarai at Osaka University in Japan. The need for high
              selectivities in separations of organic compounds (biological, chiral and
              achiral) and metal ions and their species in underscored by the difficult and
              complex matrices encountered in many practical separation and sensor
              applications
A major focus of recent research in this area is the design
              characterization of nano-structured separation media that are ordered at the
              molecular level to address selective separation and sensing of target analytes
              from extremely complex matrices such as natural products, biological fluids,
              and wastes for recovery and remediation.  Such media involve ordered layered
              materials, thin films, molecularly imprinted polymers, and the organized
              molecular assemblies micelles, vesicles and dendrimers.  This symposium is
              dedicated to the latest advances in the design of nano-structure materials and
              their molecular recognition efficacies in a variety of separation and sensing
              problems.  The role of the interface and interfacial phenomena in molecular
              recognition will be emphasized.  

Research in nano-structured media is at
              the cutting-edge and includes novel synthetic approaches such as combinatorial
              and directional synthesis, fundamental understanding of the efficacies of the
              nano-structure media for separation, detection, and sensing employing a variety
              of spectroscopic and separation techniques, the detection and separation of
              extremely low concentrations of analytes in very small volumes including single
              molecules, and a detailed examination of interfacial phenomena.  The Seminar
              organizers have made a special effort to involve younger researchers as both
              participants and observers.  The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese
              experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work,
              and will set the stage for future collaborative projects.  It is expected that
              information on proceedings of the meeting will be available.  Both Elsevier and
              Kluwer Academic Publishers have indicated a strong interest in publishing them.
              

