Title       : Characterization of the Fauna of the Middle Cambrian Nelson Limestone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2000     
File        : a9909302

Award Number: 9909302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce S. Lieberman blieber@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909302
Lieberman

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and
              Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs, provides support for a
              study of Cambrian invertebrate fossils from Antarctica. The Cambrian period was
              a time of major tectonic activity within the Antarctic continent. Current
              understanding of the nature of this tectonic activity in Antarctica, and
              Cambrian Antarctic geology in general, has advanced considerably through
              several lines of geological research. However, enigmas still remain, and these
              are partly related to the fact that Antarctica is comprised of some
              micro-continental blocks and fault bounded regions whose position during the
              Cambrian, and the time when they collided with Antarctica, is not precisely
              constrained. The immediate objective of this research is to thoroughly describe
              and analyze (monograph) the Middle Cambrian trilobite fauna from the Nelson
              Limestone based on recent collections made in the Pensacola Mountains. This
              will be an important first step in addressing some of the enigmas of Cambrian
              Antarctic geology because it will allow three objectives to be attained. First,
              the elements of the fauna will be placed into a pre-existing
              sequence-stratigraphic framework for the Nelson Limestone. Second, the elements
              of this fauna will be used to help expand a Middle Cambrian biostratigraphy for
              Antarctica. Third, the elements of the fauna will be used to determine patterns
              of faunal similarity between the Pensacola Mountains and the Middle Cambrian of
              various Antarctic microcontinents and terranes. Objectives 1 and 2 will
              increase our understanding of the timing of events in Antarctica, and these,
              along with the third objective, will help increase our understanding of the
              relative position of the different parts of Antarctica in the Middle Cambrian.
              Each of these objectives will also increase our general understanding of
              Cambrian Antarctic geology. The fauna that will be monographed is in
              collections housed at the University of Kansas, and they are accompanied by
              precise locality data. The work will benefit from collaborations with other
              scientists at the University of Kansas who have significant expertise related
              to Cambrian biostratigraphy. 


