Title       : Collaborative Research: Hunting Behavior and Energetics of Free-Ranging Weddell
               Seals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9909422

Award Number: 9909422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall W. Davis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Markus Horning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this collaborative research project is on the behavioral and
              energetic adaptations enable Weddell seals to forage in the cold, dark,
              Antarctic fast-ice environment.  To answer this question, hypotheses related to
              general foraging strategy, foraging location, searching mode, prey detection,
              locomotor performance, the cost of diving and foraging efficiency of
              free-ranging Weddell seals (Leptonychotes weddellii) will be tested.  In
              addition, locomotor performance and behavior during diving to estimate the
              costs associated with hunting and the benefits gained from hunting (type and
              frequency of prey captures) will be examined.  This study will provide unique
              insight into marine mammal foraging tactics and will contribute to fields of
              physiology (diving and energetics) and ecology (foraging theory and behavioral
              ecology).  The proposed study builds on research on Weddell seals in McMurdo
              Sound using an animal-borne video system/data logger to record the behavior,
              physiology and locomotor performance of marine mammals at depth.  This provided
              first observations of Weddell seal hunting strategies, predator-prey
              interactions and corresponding estimates of diving metabolism.  The
              isolated-ice-hole protocol used in the study allows seals to choose the depth
              and duration of a dive, but they must return to a single place to breathe,
              which limits their range of movement.  In addition, they are unable to haul out
              of the water or interact with other seals and may be exposed to lower prey
              densities than when foraging naturally.  The new focus is the behavior and
              energetics of completely free-ranging seals, for which all significant
              constraints have been removed.  Although the current study has demonstrated
              important new principles in Weddell seal foraging and has increased
              understanding of diving behavior and swimming performance, it is now essential
              to determine whether those principles apply to unconstrained animals.  The
              study will continue to employ a multidisciplinary team of scientists with
              highly skilled technical support.  The results will advance the understanding
              of the foraging ecology of Weddell seals and create a basis for similar
              research on other species of marine mammals that are more difficult to study in
              the open ocean.  Finally, by extending the study from an isolated ice hole to
              completely free-ranging conditions, this research will provide new insight into
              the role of Weddell seals as apex predators in the Antarctic marine
              ecosystem.

