Title       : HBCU: Science and Technology Access to Research and Graduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a9909023

Award Number: 9909023
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3592958            (Estimated)
Investigator: Abdul K. Mohamed   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson State University
	      1400 J R LYNCH ST.
	      Jackson, MS  39217    601/921-21

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1594,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              JACKSON STATE UNIVERSITY

Several sources indicate that HBCUs have been the
              major source of B.S. degrees awarded to African-Americans in Science,
              Engineering, and Mathematics (SEM) disciplines. But the situation is rapidly
              changing. Several data also suggests that SEM bachelor degrees awarded to
              African-Americans by HBCUs have been declining since 1987. Jackson State
              University (JSU) is submitting a proposal to the NSF HBCU Initiative that will
              enhance existing programs and promote the integration of teaching and research.
              The plan will provide resources to greatly improve, throughout the School of
              Science and Technology (SST), the processes and activities that are being used
              in the recruitment, retention and graduation of students, in SEM areas.
              Enhanced/corrective strategies will be implemented using known models which
              have proven to be successful. JSU envisions the implementation of this project
              to be a mechanism for fostering the transformation and integration of research
              and education in SEM fields.

The overall program goal is to enhance and
              strengthen JSU's SEM degree-producing capacity at all levels and increase the
              number of SEM graduates, especially qualified minority scientists/engineers who
              can contribute to advancing the state of SEM knowledge and address the
              technical problems of society. Specific focus will be directed toward enhancing
              faculty development, the curriculum and student development. Activities being
              implemented in support of the project goals include: curriculum restructuring,
              implementation of a comprehensive SEM student support center, integration of
              information technology into the curricula, enhancement of the
              educational/research support infrastructure, and faculty development.

The
              expected outcomes of this project will be improvement in the overall
              programmatic course offerings, enrollment and research activities in SEM
              fields. Through a strong partnership that already exists between JSU and
              various national labs, industry and other universities, significant
              opportunities for quality undergraduate student research and training in SEM
              fields will be available. Other benefits will include:

o	Strengthening the
              program of instruction in the core SEM courses.

o	Revision and updating of
              curriculum as needed, incorporation of Information Technology (IT) in the
              curricula.

o	Expansion and upgrading of educational resources including
              teaching facilities and laboratories.

o	Increase in faculty research
              involvement, publications and grantsmanship.

o	Educating and training
              significant numbers of minority students for successful careers in SEM fields
              to met the needs of related institutions including governmental agencies, the
              academia and the booming demands from industry,

o	Formation of creative
              partnerships with local, state, federal and private institutions, and the
              opportunity for faculty and students to participate in formal internship
              programs at these institutions.

o	An increase in the number and motivation
              of minority students pursuing undergraduate and graduate degrees in SEM
              fields.


