Title       : Making Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a9909573

Award Number: 9909573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1727701            (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas B. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Fontaine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Museum of Science
	      
	      Boston, MA  02114    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9909573
SMITH

The Museum of Science in Boston will develop exhibits and
              programs for visitors to use models as tools for understanding the world around
              them.  It is the 4th stage of a six-part, long-range vision and plan that
              focuses on comprehending science as a way of thinking and doing.  "Making
              Models" will serve over one million visitors per year, mostly families and
              school groups.  The models to be featured include physical, biological,
              conceptual, mathematical, and computer simulation models.  Four (4) specific
              science inquiry skills will be stressed, which are associated with making and
              using models:  recognition of similarities, assessment of limitations,
              communication of ideas, and the creation of one's own models for developing
              personal understanding and appreciation of the world in which we live.

In
              tandem with this new exhibit, some current exhibits and programs will be
              modified to meet these modeling goals.  Demonstrating the application of these
              new exhibit techniques for other museums and science centers, and evaluating
              how visitors learn in this setting will also be performed, with the results
              disseminated on a national level.

The Museum will collaborate with two (2)
              other nationally known sites in this development and evaluation of exhibit
              components, creation of new teacher development programs, and the development
              of models-related web resources.
