Title       : Continental Dynamics of Asia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  2000  
File        : a9909621

Award Number: 9909621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Holt wholt@mantle.geo.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel M. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Holt 
9909621 

The investigators propose to quantify the large-scale driving
              forces influencing active deformation in Asia. They will use observations of
              Quaternary Fault slip rates, Global Positioning System (GPS) velocities,
              topography data, and geoid (gravity) data to quantify the magnitude and style
              of strain rates and stresses within all areas influenced by the India-Eurasia
              continental collision. This work is designed to integrate both modeling and
              observations on a large scale, in which case distances between GPS stations are
              of the order of the thickness of the crust or the entire lithosphere. Much of
              the GPS data will be supplied (in vector form) by colleagues in China. Although
              the investigators will use available GPS velocity vectors to help constrain
              dynamic models, one objective in this research is to identify regions where
              future geodetic observations (or refined measurements at existing sites) are
              needed in order to test alternative tectonic hypotheses. The investigators will
              use a new methodology in which the stress field contributions associated with
              density differences within the lithosphere (near-field) and tectonic plate
              interaction (far-field) are quantified separately. This method should thus lead
              to new understanding about the relative role of collision-induced stresses and
              stresses that result from topography. The quantification of strain accumulation
              and the state of stress will be useful in seismic hazard analysis. Furthermore,
              the investigation of continental dynamics within Asia will yield insight into
              the nature of the dynamics affecting the Pacific-North American plate boundary
              zone in the United States. 

