Title       : Linkage of Laramide Depositional and Deformational Histories of the Sweetwater
               Arch and Adjacent Parts of the Hanna Basin, Wyoming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a9909354

Award Number: 9909354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason A. Lillegraven   (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur W. Snoke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Linkage of Laramide depositional and deformational histories of the Sweetwater
              arch and adjacent parts of the Hanna Basin, Wyoming

Jason A. Lillegraven and
              Arthur W. Snoke, Co-Principal Investigators


This is a renewal grant to
              integrate evidence from paleontological and surface-structural studies along
              margins of the Hanna Basin of south-central Wyoming. Key goals are to explore
              geometric and temporal relationships between oppositely directed thrust systems
              and to test structural models of linkage and interaction between
              basement-involved uplifts and thin-skinned, out-of-the-basin faulting. This
              Group Grant is collaborative among the University of Wyoming (J. A.
              Lillegraven, A. W. Snoke, W. S. Holbrook, and their students), American Museum
              of Natural History (M. C. McKenna), University of Colorado (J. G. Honey), and
              the petroleum industry (geologists and geophysicists at Marathon Oil Company). 
              New elements are integration of seismic-lines from industry across various
              structurally complex margins of the Hanna Basin. Integration of
              seismic-reflection data, we believe, represents the only satisfactory means to
              grasping details of the nature of basement-involvement (within uplifts and at
              the floor of a deep basin) in evolution of Laramide basin-uplift interfaces. We
              suggest that this tiny part of the Rocky Mountains provides an excellent
              setting in which to study fundamentally important crustal-scale processes that
              occurred during regional contraction, including greater appreciation for the
              influence and magnitude of basement-involved blind thrusting. Vertebrate
              biostratigraphy, linked to continued surface mapping, is seminal to
              constraining timing of steps within Laramide basinal subdivision and associated
              deformation.



