Title       : The Effects of Incipient Weathering on Trace Element Distributions in
               Arc-Related Lavas From SE Guatemala, CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a9909493

Award Number: 9909493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51021              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lina C. Patino patinol@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Velbel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909493
Patino
Geochemical composition of arc lavas is frequently used to
              infer changes in the source composition and degree of melting of the magmas.
              These studies have assumed that the original composition of the lavas has been
              preserved during their exposure at the surface. However, there is evidence that
              incipient weathering is capable of modifying the chemical characteristics of
              igneous rocks. For example, in southeast Guatemala, rather young samples (about
              0.5 to 2 my) have developed altered REE profiles, even thought there is no
              clear evidence of alteration either in hand specimen or thin section. We
              propose to carry out a detailed study of the changes in mineral and rock
              chemical composition along weathering profiles of arc lavas in order to
              comprehend how the "primary" geochemical composition of the lavas changes
              during the different stages of alteration. We will focus on exploring the
              geochemical variations in weathering profiles of arc lavas in southeast
              Guatemala, with particular attention given to the early stages of weathering.
              The compositional variations along the weathering profiles will be used to
              reconstruct the weathering history of the samples by identifying the secondary
              mineral phases, and determining trace element mobility. The variations in the
              geochemical composition of the samples will also be used to develop a criteria
              to identify rocks that have been modified by incipient alteration, thus
              improving the accuracy of petrogenetic models for lavas from Central America,
              and other arcs.	

