Title       : SGER: Mapping Perceptual Attibutes of Sound to Product Design Choices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9909166

Award Number: 9909166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99272              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Lyon rhlyon@lyoncorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RH Lyon Corp.
	      691 Concord Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021381002    /   -

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              PI/Institution:  Richard Lyon, R.H. Lyon Corp.
Proposal Number: 9909166
Title:
              Mapping Perceptual Attributes of Sound to Product Design Choices


This
              Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) project entails study of consumer
              preference for product sound with the goal of establishing a language or
              vocabulary to map consumer preferences for product sound that is appropriate
              for use by product designers to achieve a preferred sound. At present there is
              no structured process available for acoustic engineers to use to relate
              consumer sound preferences to product engineering design goals.  The process
              used in this study for understanding and quantifying product sounds build on
              the methods of listening panels (jury tests) that are in common use in
              psychoacoustics.  As opposed to the content free stimuli (clicks, tones, random
              noise) intended to avoid the complexities of cognitive content in the stimuli,
              this study uses an expert panel to explore a variety of sounds attributes and
              develop descriptors appropriate for establishing a "language of sound"
              appropriate for machine sounds.  The PI then will correlate sound descriptors
              to source attributes and develop physical metrics of stimuli that can provide
              engineers meaningful product design input.  New tools developed from an
              understanding of sound perception attributes as proposed provides the
              foundation for establishing a set of tools that product designers can use to
              achieve preferred product sound attributes. 

