Title       : Investigations on Deterioration in the Historic Huts of the Ross Sea Region of
               Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9909271

Award Number: 9909271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228836             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Blanchette robertb@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The explorers of Antarctica's heroic era erected buildings and brought large
              amounts of supplies to survive the extreme environment during their Antarctic
              exploration. Huts built by Robert F. Scott and Ernest Shackleton during the
              early 1900's were abandoned once the expedition was over, leaving the huts and
              thousands of artifacts behind. The extreme polar environment has protected many
              of the artifacts from rapid decay but over the past  nine decades, serious
              deterioration has become apparent. Results obtained through preliminary studies
              indicate that unique wood destroying fungi are decaying wood in the contact
              with the ground and various molds and cellulose degrading fungi are attacking
              artifacts made of leather, textiles and other organic materials. Exterior woods
              are also being deteriorated by non-biological deterioration processes including
              salt, ultraviolet radiation and wind erosion. Chemical damage within the huts
              and soils contaminated with aromatic hydrocarbons from petroleum products have
              also been found. This project will identify the biological and non-biological
              agents responsible for causing the deterioration, study mechanisms and
              progressive sequence of events taking place during decay processes, test
              methods to be used to control future deterioration, determine the extent of
              environmental pollutants in soils at the historic site, and evaluate chemical
              spills within the huts. The research will provide the scientific data required
              by conservators to help protect these important historic site for future
              generations. It will also add to the knowledge of the biology of Antarctic
              microorganisms, the biodiversity of microbes present in this unusual
              environment, and elucidate unique deterioration processes.
