Title       : Role of Organic Acids in Transport of U(VI) and PB(II) Through Saturated Porous
               Media: Application of Surface Chemical Models to Transport Simulations of
               Bench-Scale Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a9909477

Award Number: 9909477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293777             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Honeyman bhoneyma@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9909477
Honeyman

In most aquatic systems species of dissolved natural
              organic matter (NOM) constitute an important pool of ligands for complexing
              trace metals.  The determination of the effects of NOM on trace metal
              speciation and migration through groundwater systems is critical to the
              development of accurate models for environmental and human health risk
              assessment.

Reactive transport models have generally incorporated isotherms
              (linear or non-linear) or distribution of coefficients (e.g., Kd ) to represent
              metal sorption characteristics.  However, isotherm parameters and Kd values are
              conditional on the chemical composition of the system of interest and, for many
              systems, chemical composition varies in time and space.  As consequence, the
              isotherm or Kd approach will be insensitive to variations in system chemistry,
              including the presence of metal-ion-complexing organic ligands such as
              NOM.

Surface complexation model (SCMs) extend the chemical and mathematical
              formatisms of solution-phase complexation  by considering adsorption in terms
              of chemical reactions between particle surface functional groups and dissolved
              chemical species.  However, in spite of the well-documented importance of NOM
              in metal-ion speciation and transport, the conditional nature of iotherms and
              Kd values, and the success of surface complexation theory as applied to
              evaluation of metal-ion speciation in organic matter-free systems, SCMs have
              not yet been applied to the evaluation of metal-ion transport in systems
              containing NOM.

The experimental tasks in this project will proceed from the
              relatively simple to the more complex.  The initial systems will be composed of
              a sand with low geochemical heterogeneity, U(VI) and citric acid as an NOM
              surrogate.  Increased complexity will be introduced in subsequent tasks with
              Suwannee River Fulvic Acid (nominal MW =800) as the organic ligand and an
              immobile phase of greater geochemical heterogeneity than presented by the
              'model' sand.  Second-tier experiments using a suite of radioactive metal-ions
              (e.g., isotopes of Ni, Zn, Co, Pb)at tracer levels in the presence of fulvic
              acid will provide an extended data base for testing reactive transport
              models.
Reactive  transport modeling will follow the multicomponent simulation
              approach by explicitly considering both solution- and surface-phase processes,
              including surface complexation.  Interfacial molecular hypotheses invoked and
              tested will range from non-electrostatic configurations to distributed charge
              models (e.g., van Riemsdijk and co-workers).  Reaction kinetics will be
              explicitly considered if necessary (e.g., after Szecsody and co-workers).
              
Results of this study will provide a basis for: 1) selecting the appropriate
              level of model complexity necessary to predict metal-ion transport in saturated
              systems under variable system chemical conditions; 2) the incorporation of NOM
              in multicomponent transport models.

