Title       : Collaborative Research: Permian-Triassic Basin History of Southern Victoria Land
               and the Darwin Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9909749

Award Number: 9909749
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Askin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne M. Grunow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9909749
Askin

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a collaborative
              sedimentological, palynological, and paleomagnetic study of Permian and Lower
              Triassic strata in southern Victoria Land (SVL) and the Darwin Mountains (DM),
              Antarctica. Results of the study will help constrain the paleoenvironmental,
              tectonic, biotic, and paleogeographic histories of southern Pangea and provide
              a unique polar view of the world during an icehouse to greenhouse
              transition.

The assembly and drift of Pangea resulted in heightened orogenic
              activity and associated development of numerous depositional basins. One of the
              largest basins was the 10,000+ km long "Gondwanide foredeep" that extended
              across southern South America, South Africa, the Falkland Islands, Antarctica,
              and Australia. Antarctica's centralized location between South Africa and
              Australia, make SVL and DM key areas for testing paleogeographic and
              paleoclimatic models.

Upper Paleozoic and Lower Mesozoic rocks in SVL and DM
              were deposited during Gondwanaland's drift across the south pole. Based on
              present plate reconstructions, SVL and DM were located higher than 75 degrees
              south latitude from 320 to 210 Ma. Despite the putative high latitude position,
              SVL and DM sedimentary successions record a change from Lower Permian glacial
              deposits, to Permian fluvial coal measures, to Lower Triassic non-carbonaceous
              fluvial deposits, and finally to Middle and Upper Triassic fluvial coal
              measures, with well-developed vegetation during much of this time. Present
              climatic simulations suggest seasonal climatic extremes within Pangea's polar
              interior. Discrepancies between the geological evidence and the climate
              simulations need to be resolved, and may be magnified by incomplete
              understanding of the influence of paleotopography, large lakes, and river
              systems at the time of deposition, as well as by incomplete documentation of
              paleoenvironmental conditions. Furthermore, Late Permian and Triassic mean pole
              positions for Gondwanaland are not tightly constrained. Paleomagnetic
              signatures will be recovered from Permian and Triassic petrified wood,
              silicified peat, and coal, which were cemented during early diagenesis
              (preliminary results indicate stable remnant magnetizations). Palynological
              analyses will provide time control for the succession.

Objectives of this
              study include:
1) Determination of a late Paleozoic glacial/deglaciation
              history for SVL and DM as Gondwana drifted over the south pole,
2)
              Documentation of Permian strata as a means to better understand the
              environments of high latitude fluvial coal-bearing deposits,
3) Documentation
              of Triassic lithofacies as a means to better understand high latitude
              conditions during the Early to Middle Triassic "coal gap" interval,
4)
              Providing a well-constrained stratigraphic framework for the Permian to lower
              Triassic succession,
5) Testing the diachronous and inversion tectonic models
              for the Panthalassan Margin of southwestern Pangea, and
6) Constructing better
              paleogeographic models for Gondwana by obtaining new Gondwana reference poles
              for the Permian and Triassic.


