Title       : The DNA Files
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a9909402

Award Number: 9909402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $553000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barinetta Scott bariscot@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SoundVision Productions
	      2991 Shattuck Avenue
	      Berkeley, CA  94705    510/486-1185

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9909402
SCOTT

SoundVision Productions is producing new programs for "The DNA
              Files."  This highly regarded and very successful radio series is designed to
              further public understanding of genetic science as well as the ethical, legal
              and social issues emanating from genetics and biotechnology.  These five, new,
              one-hour programs and feature segments will be on topics that have emerged in
              recent years as significant developments in the realm of genetic research such
              as pollution prevention and reduction and the patenting of gene sequences and
              related genetic information.  Specific topics tentatively planned for the new
              programs include:  "The Ecology of Genetic Engineering," "The Genetics of
              Memory and Aging," "The Genetics of X and the Genetics of WHY," and "Genetic
              Diseases of the Brain."  The programs and features will also introduce those
              products and processes that, while currently viewed as only future fantasies of
              the biotech industry, are likely to become real in one or another within the
              lifetimes of the current generation of public radio listeners.

The major
              outreach component of the project will be via a World Wide Web site.  This is a
              particularly appropriate medium for outreach for this project since demographic
              studies indicate that most members of the public radio audience have computers
              and are able to access the web.  SoundVision will upgrade the present "The DNA
              Files" web site to become a more active and integrated part of the project. 
              Every program will have a dedicated section on the web site that will provide
              expended information and resources beyond those included in the broadcast.  The
              web will provide a forum for public interaction with the issues by engaging the
              scientists, related experts, policy makers and the public.  The project also
              will make cassette tapes and transcripts of the programs available on
              request.

The PI is Bari Scott, who is the Executive Producer for the series;
              Jude Thilman will serve as Project Director.  The programs are hosted by NBC
              Dateline reporter John Hockenberry and distributed by National Public Radio. 
              Project advisors in the field of genetics include Elbert Branscomb, Luca
              Cavalli-Sforza, Troy Duster, Charles Epstein, Ted Friedman, Henry Greely, Leroy
              Hood, Ruth Hubbard, Sheila Jasanoff, Arthur Kaplan, Daniel Kevles, Mary Clair
              King, Phillip Kitcher, Julie Korenberg, Michael Malinowski, Desmond
              Mascarenhas, Pilar Ossario, Gerald Rubin, Lee Silver, and Sylvia Spengler.

