Title       : C-Band Polarimetric Radar Studies During CLEOPATRA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1994   
File        : a9214864

Award Number: 9214864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160190             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. N. Bringi bringi@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The application of advance polarimetric radar techniques to               
              the remote sensing of precipitation is our principal research                  
              focus. A project named CLEOPATRA (Cloud Experiment Oberpfaffenhofen            
              and Transports), to be conducted by DLR and other universities and             
              research organizations in Germany this summer, will make available             
              substantial in situ and other remote sensing radar data which will             
              validate and enhance the microphysical interpretation of the new               
              polarimetric signatures such as propagation differential phase,                
              copolar correlation coefficient and backscatter differential phase             
              that can be measured with the C-Band DLR radar. In addition, the               
              project will have available one FALCON jet operated by DLR, and two            
              vertically pointing Doppler radars which will be important for the             
              studies proposed herein. The FALCON aircraft will have a chaff                 
              release capability for the study of entrainment by tracking chaff              
              using the radar depolarization signature. Coordinated                          
              radar/aircraft datasets in a variety of summer-time convective                 
              precipitation of the newer polarimetric signatures (DP, HV, .) will          
              be studied and compared with aircraft 2D-PMS images and the                    
              vertically pointing Doppler data where applicable. Polarization                
              transformation techniques based on covariance will be                          
              "instantaneous" scattering matrix methods which are already in                 
              progress will be checked by collecting further time series data                
              during CLEOPATRA. We will couple our already developed Mueller                 
              matrix model to the DLR numerical cloud model (MESOSCOP) to study              
              the variation in polarimetric signatures with modelled storm                   
              kinematics and microphysics products.
