Title       : Renovation of the Biology Building Into The Environmental Sciences Research
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  1998   
File        : a9214451

Award Number: 9214451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1365482            (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric A. Mintz emintz@cau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark Atlanta University
	      223 James P. Brawley Dr. S.W.
	      Atlanta, GA  303144358    404/880-8000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9197,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Clark Atlanta University, a historically black institution, is the recipient
              of funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program to aid in the
              renovation of the Biology Building.  Built in 1961, and initially the only
              facility on campus that housed all science classroom and laboratory activities,
              the facility is inadequate to support  modern research and research training. 
              As a commitment to the sciences, the institution has constructed a research
              center for Science and Technology to meet the demand of a rapidly growing
              research and development program and student training activities.  Clark
              Atlanta University will further improve the research infrastructure by
              renovating the Biology Building to accommodate the Environmental Sciences
              Research Laboratory.  Impediments in the building that interfere with
              utilization include: asbestos-containing insulation and floor tiles, poor
              operating condition of the HVAC, electrical, and plumbing systems, lack of ADA
              compliance, and deteriorated laboratory casework and benches.  The renovation
              will correct the building's  deficiencies and restore it to a functional
              facility  for the environmental sciences program.  Environmental research that
              will be conducted in the facility will encompass the use of bioremediation with
              mixed microbial mats; thermodynamic modeling of chemical speciation, chemically
              sensitive ion-selective field effect transistors for in situ detection of toxic
              metals; and enhanced biodegradative remediation of hydrocarbon contaminated
              aquifers.  This modernization project will provide the infrastructure required
              to create new environmental technologies to solve the environmental problems of
              the 21st century.  Not only will the project strengthen the research program,
              but  the new facility will also enhance the mission of Clark Atlanta University
              in its efforts to train competent minority students in science and technology. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
