Title       : Renovation and Modernization of the Wyoming Infrared Observatory Telescopes and
               Support Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9214726

Award Number: 9214726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Woodward   (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter T. Grandy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald W. Canterna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1218      ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES & INSTRM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The astronomical facilities at the University of Wyoming's Infrared            
              Observatory (WIRO) are to be renovated.  Since its construction in             
              the mid- 1970s, no major renovations of the telescope facilities               
              have occurred.  Due partially to equipment failure, and advancing              
              technology, the WIRO telescopes no longer can perform the wide                 
              range of functions that they originally were designed for.                     
                                                                                             
              Support will be used in three critical areas of infrastructure.                
              First, the antiquated, essentially non-functional on-campus                    
              telescope will be replaced with a DFM Engineering 0.6 m telescope.             
              Also, the 2.3 m telescope, the primary research tool of WIRO users             
              will be upgraded.  The current, outmoded telescope multiplexers                
              will be replaced with industry standard, "off-the-shelf" IEEE 488              
              hardware.  A modern pump station with a leak detector assembly for             
              dewar maintenance will be acquired, and the present dome shutter               
              system will be replaced with a modern, aerodynamic shutter design              
              to improve the ability to conduct observation during high wind                 
              conditions.  The third area of emphasis is an upgrade of the                   
              observatory computer facilities.  The current set of PC-ATs will               
              be replaced with a SPARC workstation.  Modernization of each                   
              component is critically necessary for effective, integrated                    
              operation of the WIRO as a viable training and research facility.              
                                                                                             
              Research emphasis for the renovated facility is observational                  
              extragalactic and stellar astronomy, digital image                             
              reconstruction/signal processing of astronomical images, and                   
              instrument development.  These broad fields are areas of shared                
              interest among all the astronomy faculty at WIRO and many of the               
              physicists in the Department of Physics and Astronomy.
