Title       : Geometric Modeling and Artificial Intelligence for Design and Manufacturing
               Automation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1994   
File        : a9214996

Award Number: 9214996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195060             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aristides A. G. Requicha requicha@lipari.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This project is centered on three-dimensional spatial                     
              reasoning and its applications in intelligent engineering systems.             
              Theories and techniques from the fields of geometric modeling and              
              artificial intelligence (AI) are integrated so as to attack                    
              difficult problems that arise in design, manufacturing and other               
              activities in the life cycle of mechanical and electromechanical               
              products.                                                                      
                   The main body of the research is a natural sequel to previous,            
              National Science Foundation supported work on automatic recognition            
              of machinable features, and on accessibility analysis for the                  
              inspection of mechanical parts with Coordinate Measuring Machines              
              (CMMs). USC's feature recognizer will be integrated downstream,                
              with experimental process planners and with commercial NC                      
              (Numerical Control) cutter-path generators for driving machine                 
              tools.  It will also be integrated upstream, with feature-based                
              design systems.  The existing feature finder is very promising                 
              because it can handle complex volumetric interactions between                  
              features, and produces removal volumes that satisfy stringent                  
              conditions for machinability.  It will be redesigned so as to                  
              operate incrementally, thereby providing immediate manufacturing               
              feedback to a designer.  It will also be extended so as to extract             
              the geometric information required by process planners and NC code             
              generators.  Research on inspection planning will seek to produce,             
              fully automatically, complete programs for driving CMMs (and                   
              potentially other equipment such as laser probes), given toleranced            
              solid models of mechanical parts.  Dimensional inspection is                   
              closely related to tolerancing, and will build upon on-going work              
              at USC on the semantics of tolerance specifications.  Issues of                
              measurement interpretation (soft gaging) also will be addressed.
