Title       : Development of 750 MHz Spectroscopy at the National Magnetic Resonance Facility
               at Madison.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1992   
File        : a9214394

Award Number: 9214394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Markley markley@nmrfam.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eddie S. Mooberry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Westler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1108,
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested for 50% funding of a Bruker AMX-750                        
              (17.63 tesla, 750 MHz) NMR spectrometer which will become                      
              part of a $30 million planned expansion of the Biochemistry                    
              Department, University of  Wisconsin-Madison.  One wing of                     
              the planned building expansion is designed to meet current                     
              and future needs of the National Magnetic Resonance Facility                   
              at Madison (NMRFAM).   This wing will  be contiguous with                      
              the current shared instrumentation facility which is used by                   
              researchers in the physical and biological sciences at the                     
              University of Wisconsin-Madison campus and visitors from                       
              other research institutions in the United States and several                   
              foreign countries.  The 750 MHz NMR spectrometer represents                    
              newly emerging technology.  It will incorporate a persistent                   
              17.63 Tesla superconducting solenoid with 5-cm room-                           
              temperature bore of the type developed by Bruker in 1991.                      
              The console and probes associated with this system will be                     
              representative of the state-of-the-art.  The new                               
              construction to house this instrument will be designed to                      
              handle the special siting requirements of  this system.                        
              Research time on the 750 MHz NMR spectrometer will be                          
              allocated on the basis of scientific merit to competing                        
              projects.  The local and national advisory committees to                       
              NMRFAM will oversee its use.  NMRFAM has full-time support                     
              staff (including four facility staff members with Ph.D.                        
              degrees) who will provide: user training; assistance  with                     
              spectral data acquisition,  processing, and analysis;                          
              routine maintenance; and repairs.  NMRFAM also has a proven                    
              track record for making new technology available to its                        
              users, for keeping instrumentation in top operating                            
              condition, for modifying or constructing special circuits                      
              and probes, and for creating  software tools for NMR data                      
              analysis.  The user base for the 750 MHz NMR spectrometer                      
              includes graduate students, postdoctoral research                              
              associates, staff scientists, principal investigators form                     
              40 laboratories in 15 departments on the University of                         
              Wisconsin-Madison Campus.  In addition, the facility is used                   
              by about 35 groups located off campus.  The new building                       
              addition will have space for visiting scientists.  The 750                     
              MHz spectrometer will be devoted to experiments that require                   
              its uniquely-high field strength:  studies of the nuclear                      
              Overhauser effect in larger biomolecules, studies of  the                      
              field dependence of chemical exchange  and relation                            
              phenomena, functional studies of proteins and other                            
              biomolecules that require exceptional resolution and/or                        
              sensitivity.  With the addition of  this spectrometer,                         
              NMRFAM will be in the unique position of offering its user                     
              magnetic field strengths between 9.4 and 17.63 tesla for                       
              studies of field -dependent phenomena.  The staff of NMRFAM                    
              will develop NMR experimental protocols to deal with the                       
              problems and opportunities that this new spectrometer will                     
              offer to research and training in structural and mechanistic                   
              biology.
