Title       : US-Hungary Engineering Research on Processing of Sweet Sorghum for Value Added
               Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1993      
File        : a9214903

Award Number: 9214903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Tengerdy rteng@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Linden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5916,9106,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Hungary research project in                                          
              microbiology is between Drs. Robert P. Tengerdy                                
              and James Linden of Colorado State University                                  
              and Drs. Janos Schmidt of the Pannon                                           
              Agricultural University and Laszlo Nyeste of                                   
              the Technical University of Budapest.  This                                    
              project will combine the complementary                                         
              expertise of Hungarian and American research                                   
              groups in developing a new integrated                                          
              processing of sweet sorghum for value-added                                    
              products such as alcohol, protein, silage, and                                 
              animal feed.  The key to the integrated process                                
              is a biological intervention, enzyme assisted                                  
              ensiling (ENLAC), that improves the storability                                
              of the ensiled crop for year round processing                                  
              and makes possible a higher cell content                                       
              recovery by countercurrent diffusion.  Research                                
              efforts will focus on improving the                                            
              extractability of sugar and protein from ENLAC                                 
              treated sweet sorghum and on separating                                        
              proteins from sugar in the extracted juice.  By                                
              adjusting the engineering parameters of the                                    
              diffusion process, the researchers expect to                                   
              control the ENLAC process for maximum sugar and                                
              soluable protein yields.  Results should                                       
              enhance the value of sweet sorghum as a crop,                                  
              offering a potentially profitable and                                          
              sustainable economic activity to farmers and                                   
              bioindustries in both countries.                                               
                                                                                             
              This project in microbiology fulfills the                                      
              program objective of advancing scientific                                      
              knowledge by enabling leading experts in the                                   
              United States and Eastern Europe to combine                                    
              complementary talents and pool resources in                                    
              areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
