Title       : CISE Educational Infrastructure: Revitalizing the Computer Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1997      
File        : a9214957

Award Number: 9214957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201307             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Gries gries@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine M. Wagner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Van Loan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel P. Huttenlocher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2888,
Abstract    :
                   This award is for the development of four                                 
              freshman/sophomore courses for computer science majors and                     
              non-majors.  The courses will teach multiple programming                       
              paradigms, introduce formal reasoning early in the curriculum,                 
              and exploit computational problems that arise in other                         
              disciplines.  Course material will be made available to other                  
              academic institutions and results of the educational effort                    
              will be presented at professional meetings and conferences.                    
                                                                                             
              Cornell University plans to develop four introductory/                         
              sophomore level courses for computer science majors and non-                   
              majors.  One course, targeted at students with no previous                     
              programming experience, will focus on developing the students'                 
              general problem-solving skills as well as their ability to use                 
              notation and abstract thinking.  The other three courses are                   
              alternative courses for audiences with some background in                      
              computer science.  These courses will provide a formal                         
              introduction to functional programming and formal reasoning,                   
              as well as continued instruction in imperative programming.                    
              Course materials will be disseminated to other academic                        
              institutions and presentations will be made at professional                    
              meetings and conferences.
