Title       : Undulator Beam Line Instrumentation for Real-Time X-ray Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9214220

Award Number: 9214220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy Clarke royc@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Gland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Dierker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This undulator beamline will be developed, instrumentated,                     
              and operated at the Advanced Photon Source (APS) under the                     
              auspices of the Michigan/AT&T Collaborative Access Team                        
              (MATT-CAT).  The APS represents a very significant step                        
              forward for the future of materials research: for the first                    
              time it will be possible to carry out time-resolved studies                    
              of materials under real dynamic conditions.  MATT-CAT is                       
              conceived as a center for real-time x-ray studies which                        
              will operate as a joint university-industry initiative                         
              bringing together faculty and students at the University of                    
              Michigan, and research staff at AT&T Bell Laboratories, to                     
              focus on the kinetic behavior of materials.   MATT-CAT's                       
              goal is to establish a center of excellence devoted to the                     
              structural kinetics of materials which will benefit from                       
              the interaction of physicists, chemists, materials                             
              scientists and engineers.  To accommodate this goal, two                       
              fully instrumented beam lines will be developed, one will                      
              have an undulator source, and the other a bending magnet.                      
              The undulator beam line is designed to achieve high                            
              resolution and will consist of a back-reflection                               
              monochromator, situated in the rear hutch, with the                            
              monochromated beam transported to a forward hutch.   Here,                     
              high-resolution analyzers and fast array detectors                             
              currently under development will be available for time-                        
              resolved scattering studies.  The extremely high                               
              brightness, collimation, and stability of the undulator                        
              beam will be exploited for new kinds of coherent                               
              spectroscopic measurements of non-hydrodynamic modes in                        
              solids and complex fluids.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This beam line will be available to the MATT-CAT members                       
              75-80% of the time, with the remaining time allocated to                       
              general users.  Technical staff will be employed in the                        
              construction of the beam lines, the day-to-day operation                       
              and upkeep of the instruments, and will assist users.
