Title       : Menschutkin Reactions with`alpha-nucleophiles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1994        
File        : a9214994

Award Number: 9214994
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Fountain sc18@truman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Truman State University
	      McClain Hall 203
	      Kirksville, MO  63501    816/785-4000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An investigation of the extent of charge development in the                    
              reactions of substituted N-phenylhydroxylamines with methyl and                
              benzylarenesulfonates will be conducted.  The extent of charge                 
              development in the transition state will be evaluated by                       
              measuring reaction rates as a function of free energy                          
              parameters for both the nucleophile (N-phenylhydroxylamines)                   
              and the substrate (arenesulfonates).  Kinetic isotope effects                  
              will be used to provide details about the extent of bonding in                 
              the transition state.  The degree of charge development in the                 
              transition state derived experimentally will be compared with                  
              results from semi-empirical molecular orbital calculations.                    
              The study will combine electrochemical and spectroscopic                       
              techniques with molecular orbital calculations and kinetic                     
              isotope measurements to determine the role that solvent and                    
              substrate type play in defining the role of N-hydroxyl groups                  
              on nucleophilic substitution reactions of amines.                              
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports an                       
              investigation of nucleophilic reactions between                                
              N-hydroxylamines and arenesulfonates by Professor K. R.                        
              Fountain at Northeast Missouri State University.  The                          
              investigation will focus on the unusual effect that certain                    
              hydroxy groups have on the rate of chemical reactions involving                
              amines.  A particularly important feature of this work will be                 
              an involvement of undergraduate chemistry majors in a research                 
              project combining spectroscopic and electrochemical laboratory                 
              measurements with theoretical calculations on a computer.  By                  
              simulating the reactions on a computer, and comparing the                      
              results with the experimental data, it will be possible to                     
              delineate the degree to which transfer of an electron between                  
              the interacting chemical species accelerates the overall rate                  
              of the nucleophilic reactions being studied.
