Title       : Repair/Renovation of Anderson Biological Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1993      
File        : a9214162

Award Number: 9214162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $908740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen S. Matthews ksm@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Harcombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award will provide funding for the repair                            
              and renovation of the Anderson Biological                                      
              Laboratories at Rice University.  This building,                               
              primarily devoted to research and research training                            
              activities, houses the Department of Ecology and                               
              Evolutionary Biology and a significant portion of                              
              the Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology.                               
              Since its construction in 1956, there has been no                              
              major updating or repair of the HVAC, electrical or                            
              plumbing systems in the facility.  Although                                    
              renovation for individual laboratory spaces for new                            
              faculty has occurred, basic support systems have                               
              not been altered.                                                              
                   The research activities pursued in this                                   
              facility span a broad spectrum of biological                                   
              sciences, from evolutionary biology to molecular                               
              biophysics.  Despite the breadth of scientific                                 
              endeavors, the basic requirements of the research                              
              programs exceed the current limitations of the                                 
              building in terms of temperature and humidity                                  
              control, access to power and hot and cold deionized                            
              water, working hoods and effective cold rooms.                                 
              Renovations will consist of: replacing the HVAC                                
              system with a modern design, insulating exterior                               
              walls to promote effective temperature control, and                            
              upgrading the electrical system.  Plumbing and hood                            
              operation systems will be evaluated and the                                    
              appropriate repairs will be done to ensure proper                              
              and effective long-term operation.  Cold room                                  
              facilities will be renovated to ensure effective                               
              operation and temperature control.  Modernization                              
              of the Anderson Biological Laboratories will                                   
              enhance the research programs, by providing an                                 
              effective physical environment for the pursuit of                              
              important biological questions using modern                                    
              technology and instruments.
