Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Representations of Three-Manifold Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1994  
File        : a9214499

Award Number: 9214499
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Casson casson@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robion C. Kirby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Andrew Casson will continue to study the geometrization                   
              problem for 3-manifolds.  The recent solution of the Seifert Fiber             
              Space Conjecture has reduced this to the case of irreducible 3-                
              manifolds whose fundamental groups contain no free Abelian                     
              subgroups of rank two.  Casson will concentrate on such manifolds              
              which have infinite fundamental group; according to the                        
              "Geometrization Conjecture," these manifolds should all admit                  
              hyperbolic structures.  He will seek simplified proofs of                      
              Thurston's now classical results establishing this conjecture for              
              manifolds with non-trivial boundary, in the hope of developing                 
              methods which apply to the still unsolved case of manifolds without            
              boundary.  Robion Kirby will continue to search for topological                
              interpretations of Witten's 3-manifold invariants for Sl(2,Z), and             
              particularly for the case of finite coverings.                                 
                   It is a surprising fact that although we live in a three                  
              dimensional space, a so-called 3-manifold, and so are blessed with             
              a natural intuition about such geometric objects, in the end this              
              does not carry us as far as we might have expected, for questions              
              which have been settled by algebraic calculations for higher                   
              dimensional manifolds still remain baffling in the 3-dimensional               
              case.  The most famous of these is the celebrated conjecture of                
              Poincare from around the turn of the century concerning 3-                     
              dimensional spheres, where precisely the original 3-dimensional                
              case is the only one still open.  The investigators are pursuing a             
              variety of questions about 3-dimensional manifolds with slightly               
              strange notions of distance on them, so-called hyperbolic metrics,             
              but time and time again these questions have been shown to have                
              clear relevance to the case of manifolds with a more familiar                  
              notion of distance.
