Title       : Model-Predictive Control of a Large-Scale System: A Case Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9214983

Award Number: 9214983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63682              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil L. Ricker ricker@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Many cities in the U.S. are faced with the problem of combined                 
              sewer overflows (CSOs).  Combined sewers carry a mixture of                    
              municipal sewage and storm runoff.  During storm conditions,                   
              the capacity of such sewers (and/or the associated treatment                   
              plants) may be exceeded and the combined sewage must be                        
              released to the environment untreated.  Real-time control of                   
              the combined sewage conveyance system is a potential low cost                  
              solution to the problem.  Regulating gates and pumps can be                    
              manipulated to maximize storage of peak loads within the                       
              system to minimize the CSOs during each storm event.                           
                                                                                             
              The problem described above is the design of a control                         
              algorithm for a large-scale system.  The PI has adapted Model                  
              Predictive Control (MPC) strategies and developed a control                    
              scheme for the Metropolitan West Seattle sewage collection                     
              system.  The project has involved: (1) optimization of the                     
              dynamic response of a plant in which there are many                            
              manipulated variables and many output variables, (2)                           
              forecasting of unmeasured plant disturbances, (3) accounting                   
              for inequality constraints on most output variables, and (4)                   
              incorporating plant dynamics that include integrator states,                   
              nonlinear characteristics, and lags and time delays.                           
                                                                                             
              This research is a one-year case study of the performance of                   
              MPC on the operation of the Seattle metropolitan sewage                        
              system.  The application-specific goal is to minimize                          
              discharge of raw sewage from the network during storm events.                  
              Simulation studies predict that CSOs can be reduced by 28%                     
              under MPC (relative to the existing rule-based computer-                       
              control strategy).  MPC software has already been installed,                   
              and will regulate flowrates at 23 locations in the network on                  
              a 10-minute cycle.  Data will be collected automatically                       
              during each storm event in the 1992-93 rainy season, then                      
              analyzed off-line to: (1) measure the reduction of CSOs, and                   
              (2) diagnose any shortcomings in the MPC strategy using                        
              multivariate statistics.  Data from the use of MPC on this                     
              large-scale problem should encourage application of MPC to                     
              similar problems which exist throughout the chemical industry.                 
              The results will also provide new insights on generic issues                   
              in MPC, including: (1) impact of (and compensation for) model                  
              error, unmeasured disturbances, and sensor/actuator failure,                   
              and (2) formulation of constraints and objective function-ease                 
              with which competing control objectives can be achieved in the                 
              MPC framework.
