Title       : Renovation of Biochemistry Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9214446

Award Number: 9214446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151356             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Hall   (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott M. Lanyon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award will provide funding for the                                   
              renovation of the biochemistry laboratories at the                             
              Field Museum of Natural History.  Established in                               
              1974, the Field Museum's biochemistry laboratories                             
              were the first facilities of its kind to be located                            
              at a major history museum.  The laboratories, a                                
              multi-user core facility, serve primarily as a                                 
              research and training facility for curatorial staff                            
              and graduate students conducting basic research in                             
              molecular systematics.  The original technology                                
              offered by the facility, starch gel protein                                    
              electrophoresis, generated beneficial biochemical                              
              character data for phylogentic analyses of closely                             
              related species and genera and remains as a                                    
              valuable and economical technique for biogeography                             
              research and population level studies.  With the                               
              emergence of polymerase chain reaction and DNA                                 
              sequencing technologies, essential tools for                                   
              systematists, the demand for the use of the                                    
              facilities has increased.                                                      
                   In addition to refurbishing laboratory space,                             
              renovations will include replacing inadequate                                  
              casework, modifying electrical and plumbing                                    
              systems, and installing an effective ventilation                               
              and air conditioning system.  The modernized                                   
              facilities will enable researchers to introduce new                            
              techniques, refine and maintain polymerase chain                               
              reaction and DNA sequencing technologies, and                                  
              provide the capabilities for protein                                           
              electrophoresis.  The research capacity of the                                 
              biochemistry laboratories will increase by                                     
              expanding opportunities for the Field Museum and                               
              Chicago's systematics research communities.
