Title       : Asymptotic Analyses of Flames with Real Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1992      
File        : a9214888

Award Number: 9214888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257806             (Estimated)
Investigator: Forman A. Williams faw@mae.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This program applies asymptotic methods--parameter expansions                  
              for large and small values of parameters appearing in                          
              differential equations--to the analysis of structures of                       
              flames in real combustible mixtures.  Rate parameters for                      
              elementary chemical steps are taken from literature on                         
              chemical-kinetic experiments, and through                                      
              nondimensionalization of the conservation equations,                           
              appropriate large and small parameters are identified.  These                  
              parameters typically involve activation energies, leading to                   
              activation-energy asymptotics, or ratios of reaction rates of                  
              elementary steps, yielding rate-ratio asymptotics.                             
              Identification of limiting values of the parameters simplifies                 
              the conservation equations and allows solutions to be obtained                 
              largely analytically, without resort to numerical integration                  
              of the full set of conservation equations.  The methods                        
              typically lead to formulas for the quantities of interest,                     
              such as burning velocities and extinction strain rates, and                    
              the formulas usually contain parameters determined by                          
              numerical integrations of two-point boundary-value problems                    
              for ordinary differential equations.  Since these equations                    
              are much simpler than the starting equations, full parametric                  
              solutions are obtained, rather than solutions restricted to                    
              specific conditions.                                                           
                                                                                             
              As a consequence, better understanding of flame structure is                   
              developed, the essential aspects of the combustion process are                 
              identified, and non-essential complications that play no                       
              significant role are eliminated.  This type of approach has                    
              been completed in a previous study for the ozone decomposition                 
              flame, for methane flames, and for hydrogen flames, for                        
              example, yielding good four-step and two-step mechanisms for                   
              the last two flames, respectively.  The current program will                   
              address higher hydrocarbon flames, hydrogen flames containing                  
              halogens, flames involving nitrogen chemistry, and methanol                    
              flames, as well as addressing issues of intrinsic stability                    
              and influences of strain on flames.  Special attention will be                 
              paid to the derivation of reduced kinetic schemes of use to                    
              the practicing engineer in combustion design applications.  In                 
              addition, the results will contribute to our general knowledge                 
              of mechanisms of flame propagation, flame structure, and                       
              extinction.
