Title       : Dynamics of Low Frequency Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1994      
File        : a9214840

Award Number: 9214840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $760000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Webster pjw@willywilly.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1324,1577,GLCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The research into the dynamics of large-scale, low frequency              
              phenomena of the coupled ocean-atmosphere system has an emphasis on            
              planetary scale motions with time scales ranging from weeks to                 
              years.  The four main areas of this research are:                              
                                                                                             
              (I)  The annual cycle of the low-latitude coupled ocean-atmosphere             
              system:  Mounting evidence indicates that the annual cycle plays an            
              integral role in the longer period, interannual variability of the             
              coupled ocean-atmosphere system.  The annual cycle itself is a                 
              complicated combination of interactive, large amplitude asymmetric             
              (monsoon) and symmetric (Walker) components.  If these components              
              are out-of-phase, as appears to be the case, then certain types of             
              interaction may be expected.  Therefore, the interactive structure             
              of these components will be investigated with a combination of                 
              diagnostic and modeling techniques.                                            
                                                                                             
              (II)  Equatorial Wave Propagation in Inhomogeneous Flows:  Earlier             
              studies indicate that equatorial transients are significantly                  
              modified by the latitudinal and longitudinal structure of the basic            
              flow.  Both the sign and latitudinal shear of the basic flow tend              
              to determine the degree of equatorial trapping and lateral                     
              extension (emanation) of the transients while the longitudinal                 
              stretching deformation determines the degree to which transient                
              modes are trapped longitudinally.  This research will be expanded              
              from the past studies by explicitly including the strong vertical              
              shear found in the tropical atmosphere.  This research will also               
              take advantage of the more complete ECMWF 31-level global                      
              operational model now available.                                               
                                                                                             
              (III)  Interhemispheric and Extratropical-tropical Interaction:                
              Abundant evidence exists to show  that extratropical modes                     
              influence the tropical regions or even extend to the other                     
              hemisphere through the equatorial westerly duct regions.  Further              
              theoretical studies in this area will use conservative potential               
              vorticity on an isentropic surface (IPV) as a basic tool in an                 
              exhaustive diagnostic investigation of regional equatorial                     
              propagation.  A pilot study appears to identify new phenomena and              
              unexplained processes which may have considerable relevance in                 
              latitudinal interactions.                                                      
                                                                                             
              (IV)  Rapid Development of Ultra-long Equatorial Anomalies:                    
              Tropical Bursts and Surges:  A common view of the tropics is that              
              the large scale fields are weak and slowly varying and that only               
              small scale convective disturbances have rapid development.                    
              However, a contrary view is suggested by new analyses which show               
              that rapid development appears to occur on the largest scales,                 
              thousands of kilometers, especially in the warm pool regions of the            
              tropical Indian and Pacific oceans.  A combined diagnostic and                 
              modeling activity, aimed at understanding these tropical bursts and            
              their role in the coupled ocean-atmosphere interactions, will be               
              undertaken.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Research in each of these four areas will proceed first with                   
              detailed diagnostic studies which will be used to pose hypotheses.             
              Then the hypotheses will be tested by experimentation with a                   
              hierarchy of theoretical numerical models.  This approach has                  
              proven to be very successful in past research.                                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it focuses on understanding the             
              behavior of the coupled ocean-atmosphere system on time scales of              
              weeks to years.  This understanding is key to determining whether              
              the coupled system is predictable on time scales of months to                  
              years, one of the specific scientific goals of the TOGA (Tropical              
              Ocean Global Atmosphere) Program which is aimed at studying the                
              prediction of climate phenomena.
