Title       : Development of the Keck Telescope DEEP Extragalactic Spectrograph
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1993   
File        : a9214621

Award Number: 9214621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. W. Van Citters                       
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1790000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Garth D. Illingworth   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra M. Faber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph S. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CARA
	      65-1120 Mamalahoa Hwy
	      Kamuela, HI  96743    510/987-9020

NSF Program : 1218      ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES & INSTRM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The nature of "dark matter" and the formation and evolution of                 
              galaxies, have emerged as key questions of contemporary cosmology.             
              Redshift surveys of nearby galaxies reveal clouds of galaxies and              
              voids on scales much larger than previously suspected, but cannot              
              by themselves address how such structure arose.  It has gradually              
              become clear that galaxies have indeed evolved measurably within               
              the last 3-7 billion years, but by how much and by what mechanisms             
              is not known.  Overlying all these concerns is uncertainty about               
              the amount and nature of dark matter and how it impacts the                    
              development of galaxies and the growth of large-scale structure.               
                                                                                             
              Substantial gains have been made, but progress is discouragingly               
              slow owing to the enormous observational difficulties attendant in             
              studying the faintest galaxies. The advent of a new class of large             
              ground-based telescopes - of which Keck is the first - will                    
              increase progress dramatically, and time is now ripe for a major               
              new assault on these puzzles.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The main need is first to clarify how much and what kind of                    
              evolution has occurred in galaxies over the last half of the                   
              lifetime of the Universe.  The DEEP program (Deep Extragalactic                
              Evolutionary Probe) will tackle these problems.  Through DEEP, an              
              understanding is sought of how their distribution in space has                 
              evolved over the last several billion years.  The answers will                 
              certainly constrain the nature of the dark matter and, may allow               
              us even to address the ultimate goal - the geometry of space                   
              itself.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The heart of DEEP is a redshift survey of ~15,000 galaxies.  A                 
              novel aspect of DEEP is the measurement of internal motions in                 
              galaxies, since these provide estimates of their mass.  Evolution              
              is thus revealed by comparing the properties of distant galaxies               
              with their nearby, similar-mass counterparts.  Very large samples              
              are required to study separately the evolution among the known wide            
              variety of galaxies.  Clustering and the geometry of space are also            
              problems that require large samples to be studied for confidence               
              in the results.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The overriding problem for such a program is the great amount of               
              telescope time required to obtain high-quality spectra for                     
              exquisitely faint, distant galaxies.  Heroic efforts with current              
              spectrographs on 3-4 m class telescopes have resulted in just a few            
              dozen redshifts at the very faint 24 magnitude limit of DEEP.  The             
              Keck Telescope with its first-generation spectrograph LRIS (Low                
              Resolution Imaging Spectrograph) will be able to obtain such                   
              redshifts substantially faster - it may be practical to acquire                
              some 600-700 galaxies per year with a large investment of time -               
               but even so, 20-25 years would be required to obtain a sample of              
              15,000 galaxies.  This is not practical.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              A new spectrograph for the Keck Telescope will provide dramatic                
              gains in speed - 5 times over LRIS and 80 times or more over any               
              current system.                                                                
                                                                                             
              This spectrograph, the Multi-Barrel Survey Spectrograph (MBSS),                
              utilizes a state-of-the-art wide-field camera that has already been            
              incorporated into LRIS.  Using a novel feature of the LRIS optics -            
               an off-axis slit and matching collimator - the LRIS optical system            
              will be replicated four times in a compact design with high                    
              efficiency to create an instrument ideally suited to the study of              
              faint galaxies.  The same spectrograph will also service a wide                
              variety of the faintest survey programs besides DEEP.                          
                                                                                             
              The issues that DEEP addresses - galaxies, large-scale structure,              
              dark matter, and the evolution of the universe - are ones that                 
              strongly stimulate the public imagination.  Since DEEP is being                
              carried out in partnership with the Berkeley Center for Particle               
              Astrophysics, the project is ideally placed to utilize its                     
              educational programs to reach out to a wide audience.
