Title       : CISE Educational Infrastructure: MULTI: Multimedia User- interface Laboratory
               for Teaching and Instructional MaterialDevelopment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1994     
File        : a9214942

Award Number: 9214942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 15,  1992  
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arie E. Kaufman ari@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip M. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Brennan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prateek Mishra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerhard Schloss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2888,9145,
Abstract    :
                   This award is for the development of an interdisciplinary                 
              undergraduate curriculum in multimedia, user interfaces, and                   
              computer-human interaction.  Six new undergraduate courses                     
              will be developed covering user interface development, human                   
              information processing, computer graphics, computer-supported                  
              cooperative work, scientific visualization and human factors                   
              in Interface design.  This curriculum development is a                         
              collaborative effort between the Department of Computer                        
              Science and the Department of Psychology.  An R&D laboratory                   
              will be established to develop software and course materials                   
              needed to support the new curriculum.  Each course development                 
              will include a CD-ROM with a printed monograph.  All                           
              educational materials will be made available to other academic                 
              institutions and results of the project will be presented at                   
              professional workshops and conferences.                                        
                                                                                             
              SUNY, Stonybrook proposes to develop an interdisciplinary                      
              undergraduate curriculum in multimedia, user interfaces, and                   
              computer-human interaction.  This will be a collaborative                      
              effort between the Department of Computer Science and the                      
              Department of Psychology.  Course materials, software, a set                   
              of monographs and CD-ROM's , which will be produced as part of                 
              the project, will be widely disseminated in the academic                       
              community.  The results of the curriculum and materials                        
              development will be disseminated through publications, and                     
              presentations at professional meetings.
