Title       : Flax Pond Laboratory: Enhancement of Seawater System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  1996    
File        : a9214534

Award Number: 9214534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Kirk Cochran kcochran@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W M. Wise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This proposal seeks support for the                                       
              enhancement of research and research training                                  
              facilities at the Flax Pond Marine Laboratory (FPL)                            
              of the University of Stony Brook (USB), including                              
              substantial improvements to the seawater                                       
              supply/distribution system. Specific improvements                              
              include:  replacement of intake lines/pumps;                                   
              enhancement of incoming seawater                                               
              treatment/filtering capabilities; improvement in                               
              ability to control temperature of seawater; and                                
              rehab of wetlabs to improve drainage of seawater                               
              system and floor drain system.  In addition, these                             
              funds will enable development of an area of the Lab                            
              for microalgal culture to support the maintenance                              
              requirements of experimental cultures of finish and                            
              shellfish and for use in research ont he feeding,                              
              dietary and nutritional physiology of these                                    
              organisms.                                                                     
                   Research at FPL has emphasized the biology of                             
              coastal marine organisms, particularly shellfish                               
              and finish.  Predominant have been studies of the                              
              physiological ecology and aquaculture of benthic                               
              macrofauna, particularly commercially exploited                                
              bivalve molluscs, and examinations of the                                      
              interactions between reproductive, behavioral, and                             
              physiological biology int eh evolution of fishes.                              
              Additional research has dealt with the                                         
              ecology/physiology of macroalgae, the chemical                                 
              behavior of stabilized combustion wastes in the                                
              marine environment, the extent and rate of                                     
              degradation of biodegradable plastics int eh marine                            
              environment, and the effect of chlorinated                                     
              hydrocarbon pollutants on marine phytoplankton                                 
              communities.  These will remain important in                                   
              research/research training conducted at FPL.  The                              
              proposed will benefit such studies and will also                               
              make the facility more attractive to workers in                                
              other fields, such as biogeochemists at USB's                                  
              Marine Sciences Research Center (MSRC).
