Title       : Renovation of Chemical Engineering Research Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9214180

Award Number: 9214180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1315081            (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Russel wbrussel@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Golden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9214180  Russel       The Chemical Engineering department at  Princeton
              University, noted for it's top rated  research, remains as one of the leaders
              in the  filed.  In order to maintain this status, it is  imperative that
              Princeton's chemical engineering  research facilities be modernized.  This ARI
              award  provides funds to renovate and modernize the  chemical engineering
              research facilities located in  the A-wing of the Engineering Quadrangle and
              the G-  wing of the Energy Research Laboratory.  Present  conditions within the
              laboratories are ill-suited  for modern computational and experimental
              research.   Renovations to these facilities will improve  services to insure
              proper electrical supply,  chilled and deionized water, high pressure 
              nitrogen, compressed air and ventilation.  With the  refurbishment of obsolete
              research laboratories,  efforts in the fields or ceramic processing,  complex
              fluids catalysis and surface science,  nonlinear dynamics, and polymer science
              and  materials will significantly expand the  Department;s influence in the
              field.       Renovated facilities will sustain the momentum   acquired by the
              Chemical Engineering department  over the past decade through major senior 
              appointments and the development and promotion of  outstanding junior faculty. 
              The department's  influence on the profession through its leadership  in the
              field, collaborations with industrial  laboratories, and producing studnets who
              continue  to pursue advance degrees will strengthen with  modern facilities. 
              ***
