Title       : Geographic and Bionomic Variability of Cowpea Weevil Callosobruchus maculatus
               (U.S.-Nigeria Cooperative Research)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9214051

Award Number: 9214051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frances Li                              
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19950              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Mitchell Masters w-m-masters@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rodger Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The bruchid beetle, Callosobruchus maculatus,                                  
              is an important pest of cowpeas in both field                                  
              and storage situations.  The species is                                        
              extraordinarily variable in nearly every aspect                                
              of its behavior and life history.  In this                                     
              collaborative research project, entomologists                                  
              in the U.S. and  Nigeria will characterize                                     
              genetic variation in life history features                                     
              among Nigerian samples of this beetle.  The aim                                
              is to apply a measurement protocol developed by                                
              the U.S. researcher, Dr. Rodger Mitchell, of                                   
              the Ohio State University, to African                                          
              populations with which the Nigerian researcher,                                
              Dr. T. I. Ofuya, of the Federal University of                                  
              Technology, in Akure, is familiar.  The joint                                  
              research will address such basic questions                                     
              about the life history strategies of                                           
              feral populations of this species as:  Are the                                 
              populations similar over broad areas or do                                     
              local adaptations evolve as easily as the                                      
              traits change in laboratory experiments?   This                                
              first full scale description of the feral                                      
              biotypes of the species will provide                                           
              information on the capacity of local                                           
              populations to evolve new traits and adapt to                                  
              new hosts.  That information will be useful in                                 
              identifying the way resistant varieties affect                                 
              the life table of the beetle and in considering                                
              the rationality of biological controls.                                        
                                                                                             
              This research promises important contributions                                 
              to the basic ecological science community in                                   
              identifying patterns of variability and                                        
              improving understanding of the basic                                           
              information needed to consider how bionomic                                    
              variability evolved.  The combination of                                       
              scientific interest and potential application                                  
              to an important concern of developing                                          
              countries, satisfies the criteria of mutual                                    
              benefit in research partnership, and                                           
              enhancement of science and engineering                                         
              infrastructure of the Science in Developing                                    
              Countries program.
