Title       : Replacement of Multidisciplinary Science and Engineering Laboratories with a
               Center for Interdisciplinary Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1994  
File        : a9214172

Award Number: 9214172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sekazi K. Mtingwa   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold L. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0602000   Facilities - Replacement                
              13        Physics                                 
              18        Materials NEC                           
              50        Engineering                             
              79        Psychology Sciences NEC                 
Program Ref : 9146,9155,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Mtingwa    North Carolina A&T State University has a long and distinguished 
              record in graduating talented minority students in science and  engineering,
              both at the baccalaureate and masters levels.  In  its quest to achieve
              academic excellence in science and  engineering, the institution recently
              established a doctoral  program in the fields of electrical and mechanical
              engineering.  This program will significantly enhance the university's progress
               in its relation to scientific research excellence and the  productivity of
              scholars trained in science and engineering.  To  help support the doctoral
              programs and expand its research  programs, the university will create the
              Interdisciplinary  Research Center (IRC),  a single facility that will allow
              for the  merger of several multidisciplinary laboratories in six major  thrust
              areas: Materials, Manufacturing, Systems Engineering,  Computing Systems,
              Agriculture Sciences and Social Sciences.  The  Center will support
              interdisciplinary research activities by  faculty and students from the Schools
              of Engineering and  Technology and the College of Arts and Science.    This
              award will provide funding for the renovation of research  and research
              training space for the IRC.  Space will be  reconfigured to house well-defined
              interdisciplinary research  that is currently ongoing in cramped conditions. 
              Supporting  utilities will be routed vertically through common chases and 
              distributed horizontally to the various laboratories, and new  fixed equipment
              will be installed.  The improved facility will  expand the capabilities of
              researchers and students engaged in  research activities, stimulating
              technological innovations and  training in nationally strategic academic
              disciplines for the  21st century.  Since North Carolina A&T State University
              is an  Historically Black College and University, the renovated facility  will
              have a substantial impact on increasing the number of  underrepresented
              minorities and women entering the pipeline  leading to advanced  degrees in
              engineering and science.
