Title       : Solid Phase Membrane Mimetics (II)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9214794

Award Number: 9214794
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Pidgeon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig B. Marcus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Immobilized Artificial Membranes (IAMs) are solid silica                       
              particles, containing, on their surfaces, phospholipids                        
              covelantly attached  to the silica surface by linkage  to the                  
              end of  one of the  fatty acid chains of the phospolipid. Thus                 
              the polar headgroups of the phospholipids protrude away from                   
              the silica surface. These surfaces are prepared with                           
              attachement densities of the order of phospholipid monolayer                   
              densities. Therefore the silica surfaces resemble one-half of                  
              the  lipid bilayer of a biomembrane, and they are intended to                  
              mimic the lipid environment of biomembranes. In particular,                    
              these surfaces can be used for the chromatographic separation                  
              and purification of membrane bound proteins: Membrane proteins                 
              embedded in endogeneous cell membranes exhibit multiple types                  
              of binding to membrane lipids. The working principle behind                    
              using IAM  surfaces in the chromatographic separation of                       
              membrane proteins is that if these  proteins, extracted and in                 
              a mobile carrier phase, are passed over IAMs tailored to                       
              resemble the lipid microenvironment of the biomembranes from                   
              which they came,  the IAM surface, taking advantage of the                     
              multiple binding sites, ought to be able to selectively bind                   
              the protein.  Previous research by the PI on IAMs was                          
              supported by a prior NSF grant (CTS8408450). This research                     
              began by examining a prototype IAM surface containing                          
              diacylphosphatidylcholine  (PC) molecules covelantly linked to                 
              silica propylamine.  Early research indicated that these                       
              prototypes leaked lipids, and the PI solved this problem by                    
              using ether linked single chained lipids, and end caping, with                 
              alkyl anhydrides, unreacted propylamine groups.  After the                     
              leakage problem was solved, the PI used ether-linked, capped                   
              PC- IAMs to chromatographically separate and purify small                      
              molecules such as deoxynucleotides, amphetamines and fatty                     
              acids, and large molecules such as several species of                          
              cytochrome P450.    The proposed research focuses on  varying                  
              the surface binding characteristics by preparing IAMs with PC                  
              and a secondary phospholipid.. The secondary phospholipids are                 
              phosphatidylethanolamine,  phosphatidylglycerol, phosphatidyic                 
              acid and phosphatidylserine.  After preparing these different                  
              IAMs,  the affinity of the mixed phospholipid surfaces to two                  
              model proteins, cytochromes P450 and phospholipase A2 (PLA2)                   
              will be studied in an effort to elucidate the binding                          
              mechanisms of the proteins to the surfaces. These proteins                     
              have been selected because their structure has been well                       
              studied. The research will also invesitigate an affinity                       
              removal  procedure for extracting the bound proteins from the                  
              surface. In this procedure, the single chained lipids are                      
              dissolved in an aqueous carrier phase at concentrations high                   
              enough to form micelles. These micelles can act as reservoirs                  
              of  lipid; as the carrier phase passes over the IAM surface,                   
              lipid molecules can force desorption by intercalating                          
              themselves into the lipid layer, and then displacing  and                      
              ultimately solubilizing the protein molecule.  In addition,                    
              31P-NMR will be used to evaluate the rotational properties of                  
              the immobilized lipid headgroups, both in the presence and                     
              absence of bound protein.
