Title       : U.S.-Indonesia Cooperative Research on Computer-Aided Designof VLSI Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1993      
File        : a9214646

Award Number: 9214646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25212              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. L. Liu liucl@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5927,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr.                                     
              C. L. Liu, Department of Computer Science,                                     
              University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,                                    
              to pursue with Dr. Bobby Nazief, Department                                    
              of Computer Science, University of                                             
              Indonesia, for a period of 24 months, a                                        
              program of research in the area of computer                                    
              aided design of very large scale integrated                                    
              (VLSI) circuits.  In the area of physical                                      
              design, the collaborators will perform                                         
              research on place and route problems that                                      
              arise from the introduction of new                                             
              technology, for example, field programmable                                    
              gate arrays, multi-chip modules, and                                           
              quickly customized logic.  They also will                                      
              collaborate in studying a transformational                                     
              approach to the data flow graph synthesis                                      
              in the area of high level synthesis of VLSI                                    
              circuits.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The research problem is of great importance                                    
              in computer science and has the potential                                      
              for impacting favorably on the                                                 
              semiconductor industry in the United States                                    
              and in the developing semiconductor                                            
              industry in Indonesia.  This research could                                    
              assist in solving some of today's design                                       
              problems and produce new design tools for                                      
              the future.  Dr. Liu is a senior researcher                                    
              who has an excellent international                                             
              reputation.  Dr. Nazief is a young                                             
              researcher at the newly-established Inter-                                     
              University Center for Computer Science,                                        
              University of Indonesia.  This project is                                      
              relevant to the objectives of the Science                                      
              in Developing Countries Program which seeks                                    
              to increase the level of cooperation                                           
              between U.S. scientists and engineers and                                      
              their counterparts in developing countries                                     
              through the exchange of scientific                                             
              information, ideas, skills, and techniques                                     
              and through collaboration on problems of                                       
              mutual benefit.  This project adds an                                          
              international cooperative dimension to the                                     
              PI's research under NSF Grant No. MIP-
