Title       : Midgap States in Tantalum Triselenide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1993     
File        : a9214491

Award Number: 9214491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18265              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Brill jwbrill@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 5939,9161,9251,
Abstract    :
              The presence of soliton states with energies below the single                  
              particle gap in charge-density-wave (CDW) conductors is of great               
              theoretical importance, but as yet, they have not been measured                
              directly.  Such states should have fractional charge, and are                  
              expected to exist at equilibrium in commensurate or nearly                     
              commensurate systems.  They are also implicated in the conversion              
              between CDW and normal (band) carriers at electrical contacts.  Two            
              experiments are proposed to optically observe such states in TaS3.             
              They combine the expertise of investigators from the Institute of              
              Radio Engineering and Electronics, Russian Academy of Sciences and             
              the University of Kentucky; the experiments will be undertaken at              
              the University of Kentucky.  Bolometric specta will be taken as a              
              function of uniaxial strain to look for changes in the equilibrium             
              density and energies of solitons.  Transmission spectra near                   
              electrical contacts will be taken as functions of CDW current.                 
              %%%                                                                            
              Experimental and theoretical research on charge-density-wave (CDW)             
              conductors such as tantalum trisulfide (TaS3) continues to be of               
              current interest.  Like superconductors, these materials exhibit               
              collective electron transport; i.e. the current is carried by                  
              coherent motion of all the electrons.  Unlike superconductors,                 
              however, this motion is strongly affected by impurities and other              
              crystalline defects, leading to a number of unique and surprising              
              properties.  Defects in the CDW itself, (called "solitons") have               
              energies less than the CDW energy gap.  Such defects are necessary             
              to convert "normal" electrons into CDW electrons at electrical                 
              contacts; furthermore, fractional electric charge (i.e. less than              
              the charge of a single electron) is localized at each soliton.                 
              However, such defect states have never been directly observed.                 
              This proposal describes two experiments, to be carried out at the              
              University of Kentucky.  The work is a collaboration between the               
              host institution and the Institute of Radio Engineering and                    
              Electronics (Moscow), to look for "midgap" soliton states in TaS3              
              using infrared spectroscopy.  In the first experiment, changes in              
              the spectra caused by straining the sample, which changes the                  
              defect concentration, will be sought.  In the second experiment,               
              changes in spectra near electrical contacts as functions of current            
              will be explored.
