Title       : Renovation of Environmental Engineering and Science Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9214706

Award Number: 9214706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter F. Matystik wfm@mancol.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Mahony  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Mahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Manhattan College
	      Manhattan College Parkway
	      Bronx, NY  104632216    212/920-0100

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project involves the renovation and                                  
              modernization of the interdisciplinary                                         
              environmental engineering and science laboratory                               
              at Manhattan College.  The successful completion                               
              of this project  will result in a comprehensive                                
              and unified environmental laboratory complex.                                  
              Individual research and research training areas                                
              will include: unit operations/advanced water and                               
              water waste treatment; instructional/research                                  
              training; aquatic and sediment chemistry research;                             
              microbiology; instrumentation; toxicology;                                     
              radiological microcomputer; storage; equipment                                 
              calibration/repair; glassware storage/washing.                                 
                   Some of the research to be supported by the                               
              renovated facility includes: risk assessment                                   
              research - in a modern dedicated toxicology lab                                
              overseen by a new faculty member; the continuation                             
              and expansion of breakthrough research to                                      
              determine toxic effects based upon acid volatile                               
              sulfide contents of sediments - in a dedicated                                 
              acquatic and sediment chemistry lab; investigation                             
              of new techniques for advanced treatment of water                              
              and wastes such as biological fluidized beds and                               
              odor control - in a renovated unit operations lab;                             
              and enhancement of research characterizing risk to                             
              the ecosystem and human health of genetically                                  
              engineered microorganisms - in a dedicated                                     
              microbiology lab.  Additionally, hundreds of                                   
              thousands of dollars of research instrumentation                               
              acquired under various sponsored projects will be                              
              housed in a climate controlled instrumentation                                 
              lab.
