Title       : Renovation of Doherty Hall for Materials Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9214183

Award Number: 9214183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abraham Clearfield clearfield@mail.chem.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wiley P. Kirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Letton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald G. Naugle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raghvendra K. Pandey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Main Campus
	      
	      College Station, TX  77843    409/845-3211

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award is the first step in assisting                                 
              Texas A&M University (TAMU) with the establishment                             
              of a Materials Science department.  Funds have been                            
              requested to renovate Doherty Hall, into a                                     
              Materials Research Facility for the TAMU Materials                             
              Science and Engineering Program which will be                                  
              devoted to research and graduate instruction.                                  
              Currently, the materials program is centered around                            
              ongoing interdisciplinary research involving seven                             
              departments and six divisions in which there is no                             
              laboratory space on TAMU's campus designed                                     
              specifically for collaborative projects.                                       
                   Renovations to Doherty Hall will provide                                  
              centralized facilities which will include four                                 
              materials characterization laboratories, a Physical                            
              Electron Microscopy Center, a Surface Science                                  
              facility, a X-ray diffraction laboratory and an                                
              Analytical Characterization laboratory.  The                                   
              renovated facility will provide space for new                                  
              instrumentation in each of the laboratories and                                
              will house the components of the Polymers Program                              
              for Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Mechanical                             
              Engineering, and components from the Advanced                                  
              Electronics Program, including crystal growth, ion                             
              implantation and electron beam lithography.  This                              
              facility will provide state-of-the-art materials                               
              research laboratories, encouraging                                             
              interdisciplinary interactions between scientists                              
              and engineers and provide new research                                         
              opportunities for students.
