Title       : Dissertation Research: The Ethnoarchaeology of Amazonia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1992    
File        : a9214806

Award Number: 9214806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11467              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Heckenberger  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. James Richardson, Mr. Michael                       
              Heckenberger will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He               
              will conduct approximately 18 months of fieldwork in the Upper                 
              Xingu region of the Brazilian Amazon. This region has been                     
              relatively little affected by European contact and Mr Heckenberger             
              will study the settlement pattern, past and present of Kuikuru                 
              Amerindians. In the first stage of this project he will examine                
              present practices of land use. He will analyze how villages are                
              spatially organized and relate this pattern to social organization.            
              He will then focus on individual family groups and where specific              
              activities are conducted. In the second phase of the research he               
              will use this knowledge to trace Kuikuru change over time. He will             
              locate and map historic villages to compare past and present                   
              settlement patterns. Finally he will conduct archaeological                    
              excavations at prehistoric sites to examine a more distant past.               
                                                                                             
              For many years anthropologists have studied tribal peoples of the              
              Amazon region in an attempt to understand how groups at a                      
              relatively simple level of technology and social organization adapt            
              to tropical environments. The problem these reseachers face however            
              is that even seemingly "untouched" groups have been indirectly                 
              exposed to Western contact for over one hundred years. Therefore it            
              is difficult to tell the extent to which observed patterns                     
              developed truly independently of outside contact. Mr.                          
              Heckenberger's research will help to answer this question.                     
                                                                                             
              This work is important for several reasons. It will increase our               
              understanding of culture contact and change. It will also assist in            
              the training of a promising young scientist.
