Title       : Renovation of Multidisciplinary Science Facility Research Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1992 
File        : a9214290

Award Number: 9214290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315380             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Preston Reeves   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul O. Scheie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Jonas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Wasmund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William G. Squires  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Lutheran College
	      1000 W Court Street
	      Seguin, TX  781555978    512/379-4161

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Texas Lutheran College requests funds to                                  
              renovate the faculty/undergraduate research spaces                             
              of the multidisciplinary Moody Science Hall.                                   
              Renovations will include a total of 23 spaces and                              
              the renovation of a number of small and several                                
              larger faculty/undergraduate research/research                                 
              training laboratories.  These spaces will be                                   
              equipped fully with new or renovated systems for                               
              water, gas, distilled water, steam, plumbing and                               
              HVAC.  The roof will be repaired, hoods will be                                
              renovated, and the humidity controlled.                                        
                   Research/research training currently conducted                            
              in the facility includes: exploration of Titanium                              
              (II) complexes; study of the reaction products of                              
              alkali metals with substituted pyridines;                                      
              facilitated chemical reactions using phase transfer                            
              catalysis and ultrasound; gravitational physiology                             
              and the control of circulation; and the study of                               
              myocardial cell ultrastructure.                                                
                   The renovation will more than double the                                  
              number of students participating in research.  The                             
              college will be able to move toward projects in                                
              independent scientific inquiry for all science                                 
              majors and increase the current total of                                       
              undergraduate research/research training stations                              
              to 34.  Research will be more fully integrated into                            
              the curriculum, and new pursuits in research will                              
              be made possible.  Future ability to attract and                               
              retain both gifted students and accomplished                                   
              faculty will be greatly affected by research                                   
              facilities which are complete and functional.
