Title       : CISE Educational Infrastructure: TeleMentoring: A Novel Approach to Teaching
               Undergraduate Computer Scientists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9214924

Award Number: 9214924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harry G. Hedges                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $438578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan M. Smith jms@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Insup Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ira Winston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Farber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan B. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2888,
Abstract    :
                   This award is for the acquisition of teleconferencing and                 
              multimedia technology, and for curriculum changes to expand a                  
              curriculum in Telecommunications.  The University of                           
              Pennsylvania will use a new instructional delivery system, the                 
              "video wall", to develop "Telementoring" as a long distance                    
              learning technique.  The video wall is already being used in                   
              research projects by members of the AURORA Gigabit Testbed                     
              which is being supported by both NSF, DARPA and a consortium                   
              of industrial research partners.  Educational materials                        
              developed will be made available to other academic                             
              institutions through Internet, and results of the educational                  
              experiments will be disseminated through publications and                      
              presentations at educational and professional                                  
              meetings.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The University of Pennsylvania plans to use a state of the art                 
              instructional delivery system, the "video wall", to provide                    
              multimedia and teleconferencing support for undergraduate                      
              courses in telecommunications.  The video wall is an                           
              experimental video conferencing terminal with two large screen                 
              projection televisions mounted side-by-side creating the                       
              illusion of one large screen.  Two cameras, co-located with                    
              the screens, are arranged to produce a single blended life-                    
              size image which is combined with high-quality directional                     
              sound.  The results of the curriculum and materials                            
              development will be disseminated through Internet, and                         
              publications and presentations at educational and professional                 
              meetings.//
