Title       : Kinetic Effects in Radical, Diradical, Carbanion, Carbene, and Pericyclic
               Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1995       
File        : a9214805

Award Number: 9214805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326350             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Dolbier WRD@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The effect of fluorine substitution on radical, diradical,                     
              carbanion, carbene, and pericyclic reactions will be conducted.                
              By strategic placement of fluorine on a substrate, the kinetic,                
              stereochemical, and regiochemical effects will be evaluated.                   
              Processes to be investigated include Cope rearrangements,                      
              electrocyclic reactions, cyclopropane and vinylcyclopropane                    
              rearrangements, and methylcyclopropane and methylcyclobutane                   
              rearrangements. A highlight of the investigation will be the                   
              use of intramolecular cyclization reactions to examine steric,                 
              polar, and stereoelectronic reactivity effects of fluorine                     
              substituents on reactions of radicals, carbanions, carbenes,                   
              and 1,3-dipoles.                                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              studies of Professor W. R. Dolbier at the University of Florida                
              on fluorocarbon chemistry. The incorporation of fluorine into a                
              variety of substances can enhance their utility and provide                    
              materials with superior properties for use in a variety of                     
              different applications ranging from chemically resistant fibers                
              to polymers which resist penetration of water in high humidity                 
              environments. In order to maximize the impact of fluorine on                   
              the substrate to which it is attached, it is necessary to fully                
              understand the effect that fluorine has on chemical reactions                  
              under a variety of different conditions. The studies of                        
              Professor Dolbier will provide invaluable information which                    
              will help accelerate the development of fluorine based                         
              materials and insure that full advantage is taken of the unique                
              properties of fluorocarbons.
