Title       : U.S.-Czechoslovakia Research on Information Theory and Mathematical Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9214474

Award Number: 9214474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11977              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew L. Rukhin rukhin@math.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5930,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Czechoslovakia research project between Dr. Andrew                   
              Rukhin of the University of Maryland, Baltimore County and Dr.                 
              Igor Wajda of the Institute of Information Theory & Automation,                
              Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, will focus on two problems                   
              relative to information theory and statistical decision theory: (1)            
              Change-point estimation problem; and (2) Adaptive classification               
              problems for stochastic process.  The first problem deals with the             
              classical estimation problem of change-point between two different             
              distributions.  A notion of asymptotic efficiency is introduced                
              despite there being no consistent estimator of the change-point.               
              The researchers will investigate the new optimality measure and                
              study the existence of adaptive estimators which are fully                     
              asymptotic efficient, when a nuisance parameter is present.  A                 
              version of this problem for stochastic processes in which consistent           
              estimators exist will also be addressed.  In the second problem,               
              Drs. Rukhin and Wajda will classify a realization of a stochastic              
              process into a family of given distributions (time can be discrete or          
              continuous).  They have to derive a new inequality for the error               
              probability of any classification rule.  This inequality leads to a            
              notion of asymptotic optimality more general than the classical one.           
              They will obtain conditions for the existence of adaptive                      
              classification procedures.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This project in statistics and probability fulfills the program                
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading                
              experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine                     
              complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual             
              interest and competence.
