Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic Topology of Algebraic Varieties and Conformal
               Field Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9214772

Award Number: 9214772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander A. Beilinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9214772  Beilinson       This project deals with two subjects.  The first one is
              the  theory of mixed motives.  This, yet conjectural, theory is aimed  to
              unfold the hidden topological pattern of arithmetic geometry.   It helps to
              explain various phenomena in K-theory and the theory  of algebraic cycles and
              to provide information about the values  of the special functions of arithmetic
              origin.  Several results  in that direction have already been obtained, e.g.,
              in a joint  paper with P. Deligne, a proof of part of D. Zagier's conjecture 
              on the values of the polylogarithm function.  At the moment, the  problem of
              the actual construction of the category of mixed  motives (at least modulo
              Grothendieck's Standard Conjectures)  seems to be quite tractable.  The second
              subject of the project  is the study of the geometry of conformal field theory.
               This  theory has been developing rapidly during the last decade.  The 
              investigator's first modest aim was to write down (jointly with  B. Feigin and
              B. Mazur) an account of an algebro-geometric  setting.  The next thing to
              pursue (work in progress with V.  Drinfeld and V. Ginzburg) is a theory, as
              foreseen by Drinfeld,  relating the representations of Kac-Moody algebras at
              the  critical level with the geometric version of Langlands'  correspondence. 
              The ultimate aim of the project is to tie  together the two subjects above,
              which remains a tantalizing  hope.       The two subjects of this project,
              conformal field theory and  the theory of motives, have somewhat different
              origins.   Conformal field theory came first to physics approximately ten 
              years ago.  It was observed there that often objects at the  critical
              temperature (the melting ice cube in your glass)  suddenly acquire infinitely
              greater inner symmetry than before;  this symmetry governs the intricate
              pattern that singles out the  object.  The mathematical structures that
              described this soon  became - after the string theory upheaval - the most
              popular  structures of theoretical physics, a dev elopment that also helped  to
              connect previously unrelated but intensively studied  mathematical areas such
              as representation theory of  infinite-dimensional groups, geometry of moduli
              spaces, and the  Langlands' program.  The first part of this project dwells
              here.   The theory of motives, discovered by Grothendieck in the  mid-60's,
              has, in a sense, a similar flavor.  It starts with an  old insight that number
              theory suggests that one consider the  whole numbers as if they were functions
              on a certain complicated  space.  This space, with its inner symmetries,
              replaces the  ordinary geometric notion of a point; morally, the ordinary 
              geometry acquires an extra arithmetic dimension.  The theory of  motives
              studies such a geometry.  As an application, it may  provide a range of yet
              unpredictable results about the values of  the classical arithmetic functions. 
              ***
