Title       : Workshop: The Roles of Mathematics and Computation in Systems and Integrative
               Biology, USU Campus, Logan, Utah, Spring 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0321567

Award Number: 0321567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eugene N. Bruce                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34060              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Powell powell@math.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Roles of Mathematics and Computation in Systems and Integrative
              Biology

At both the large (population, community, ecosystem) and small
              scales (chemical and chromosomal) quantitative techniques are widely
              acknowledged to be useful in answering biological questions. Arguably, these
              efforts have produced interesting mathematics, statistics, and quantitative
              advances.  However, at scales larger than DNA but smaller than populations, the
              biological and mathematical communities have failed to take full advantage of
              one another.  In systems or integrative biology this failure is particularly
              telling.  Systems biology is primarily concerned with how biological components
              interact to produce adaptive behavior at a larger scale of integration. We
              interpret systems biology broadly to encompass areas such as intracellular
              genetic and protein network dynamics during development, integration of tissue
              responses to create dynamic homeostasis at the organism level, the emergence of
              higher cognitive function from neural networks, as well as the organization of
              social systems by the movement and interaction of individual organisms.  Such
              questions can clearly benefit from advances in mathematical, statistical,
              computational, and engineering analysis.  There are several reasons for
              enhancing the mathematical and computational components of systems biology.  As
              a positive benefit, since there have been many   scientific payoffs in
              genomics, bioinformatics and environmental biology, which have largely embraced
              quantitative methodology, it seems natural to investigate what similar
              opportunities exist in systems biology and what key issues need to be addressed
              to achieve these opportunities.  A second reason is that the increased
              successful emphasis on mathematical and computational approaches in competing
              disciplines such as medicine, genomics, and proteomics, will reduce funding
              opportunities for systems biology if it does not also embrace these analytical
              methods.  An opportunity for deeper understanding of integrated living systems
              may be lost if we fail to exploit advances in the mathematical and
              computational sciences.  We propose to organize a small workshop to help chart
              how mathematical, statistical and computational methods are most likely to be
              useful in integrative or systems biology, what stumbling blocks exist, and how
              to motivate increased utilization of quantitative methods and participation of
              mathematical and computational specialists in biology at these neglected
              scales.  Through directed discussion among a group of leading researchers and
              educators, the workshop will i) identify the most effective ways that
              quantitative analysis can fundamentally enhance research and education in
              Integrative Biology, ii) identify immediate and long-term educational needs
              [requirements] for developing those multidisciplinary skills   that will
              facilitate the future use of quantitative approaches in Integrative Biology,
              and iii) outline goals and strategies to support increased use of quantitative
              methods in systems biology at these neglected scales.

What is the
              intellectual merit of the proposed activity?  The workshop is organized to
              address pressing questions on the multidisciplinary use of quantitative
              methodologies in systems-level biology:  how may such approaches most
              fruitfully be used, are all the keystone pieces in place for their use, and
              what technologies and training must be developed to fully utilize these
              technologies?  By examining these questions and proposing answers it is hoped
              that the workshop will facilitate a whole new vein of scientific
              breakthroughs.

What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity? 
              Systems biology, by its nature, is integrative and serves to increase
              understanding of relationships among smaller-scale systems.  Particularly when
              enhanced with models, such understandings tend to systematize knowledge,
              therefore aiding with general instruction and education.  More specifically,
              one of the objectives of the workshop is to discuss what training is necessary
              to facilitate advancing the role of mathematics and computation in integrative
              biology.  This is likely to involve educational issues at all levels in all
              fields involved:  biology, math, statistics, computer science, and
              engineering.


