Title       : SGER: Investigation of Auxetic Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0321492

Award Number: 0321492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80922              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison B. Flatau aflatau@umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9102,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI: Alison Flatau
Institution: University of Maryland
Title: Investigation of
              auxetic metals

Abstract:
This SGER research project entails an
              investigation of metals that exhibit auxetic or negative Poisson's ratio
              behavior and a feasibility study into engineering applications that use this
              effect.  An auxetic material is one that increases in its lateral dimension in
              response to stretching or tensile loading.  This novel and counterintuitive
              behavior has been used to advantage in a variety of composite structural
              systems, cellular foams, and polymers.  However, metals that exhibit auxetic
              properties are rare and require careful orientation of a structural member
              relative to the molecular crystal lattice orientation for observation of this
              effect.  This research effort will include analysis and measurement of
              mechanical properties such as elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio in single
              crystal and textured polycrystal metals, with a particular focus iron-aluminum
              alloys (Alfenol) and on a relatively new material, the iron-gallium alloy known
              as Galfenol.  Preliminary predictions of Poisson's ratio's for Alfenol and
              Galfenol in a [110] orientation indicate respectively that values of as low as
              -0.44 and -0.75 can be realized.  The study will investigate these materials
              and develop finite element models for use in identifying compositions of
              auxetic metals with properties best suited for the design and development of
              fasteners that function because of friction induced under tensile loading due
              to transverse expansion resulting from the auxetic nature of the material. 
              
The proposed research offers the potential for a broad commercial impact if
              successful, as the fastener application suggested offers an affordable
              alternative to nut-and-bolt methods for joining structural members.  If
              effective as a single component fastener, there should be many uses in which
              two-component nut-and-bolt connectors might be replaced, especially in space
              applications and in microsystem applications, where there are inherent
              difficulties in manipulation of the nut to secure a bolt.  Additionally, the
              principal investigator has a strong track record for engaging underrepresented
              undergraduate students in laboratory research experiences both during the
              academic year and summers, and will offer research opportunities for both women
              and minorities students throughout the course of this project.   



