Title       : Bacterial Glycogen Biosynthesis: Regulation and Biological Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0321974

Award Number: 0321974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39163              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony Romeo romeo@microbio.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9726197  Romeo, T.  The transition from exponential growth into stationary phase
              by bacteria elicits extensive changes in biochemical and physiological
              properties. This enhances resistance to a variety of stresses and promotes
              survival in the environment. In order to understand the physiology of the
              stationary phase, the factors which regulate these adaptations must be
              identified and studied. Prior funding of this project (MCB 9218796) resulted in
              the discovery and substantial elucidation of a mechanistically unique global
              regulatory system, Csr (carbon storage regulator). Csr controls glycogen
              synthesis and other stationary phase processes, several carbon metabolism
              pathways, surface properties and virulence factors of certain plant pathogens.
              Csr consists of two unconventional regulatory components: CsrA, a small
              RNA-binding protein that binds to specific mRNA transcripts and facilitates
              their decay, and CsrB, a -350 nucleotide structural RNA that binds to 18 CsrA
              subunits and antagonizes CsrA activity. CsrB is one of a small but growing
              number of trans-acting regulatory RNAs in bacteria, and its ability to
              sequester an mRNA decay factor is a novel biological function for RNA.
              Objectives of the current project are to i) Define the Csr modulon and control
              mechanisms. The effects of csrA on a variety of metabolic and physiological
              processes will be examined using enzyme assays, reporter gene constructs, and
              other approaches. The regulatory circuitry and mechanisms by which CsrA
              mediates global control will be investigated using genetic and in vivo
              transcription analyses. To determine whether CsrA acts as a global mRNA decay
              factor via specific mRNA-binding, an approach combining PCR, in vitro
              transcription and RNA mobility shift will be developed. ii) Identify genes
              encoding additional Csr components and determine their functions. Novel csr
              genes will be identified by transposon mutagenesis and will be cloned and
              functionally characterized via the approaches which were used to elucidate the
              biol ogical function of bacterial glycogen. Previous studies indicate that
              glycogen does not promote viability during long-term nutrient deprivation.
              Instead, it facilitates the acquisition of certain stress resistance properties
              in the stationary phase. Studies to rigorously determine the function of
              bacterial glycogen will be completed.  The central role of Csr in controlling
              bacterial metabolism, physiology and virulence, and its value as a novel
              paradigm of genetic regulation present a compelling case for continued
              investigation of this regulatory system. This project will advance fundamental
              knowledge of the systems which have evolved for the intricate control of
              bacterial metabolism and physiology, and for modulating messenger RNA decay,
              the most recalcitrant of the principle gene regulatory processes. It will also
              generate information and genetic tools for directing endogenous carbon flux
              during fermentation / biotechnology applications.
