Title       : Workshop on Collaborative Research through an Integrated Tsunami Scenario
               Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0321889

Award Number: 0321889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry H. Yeh harry@engr.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This action is to support a series of three workshops to initiate, develop,
              coordinate, and sustain the community effort for scenario simulations for
              tsunami hazard mitigation.  The simulations involve many elements, including
              tsunami generation, hydrodynamics, warning transmission, evacuation, human
              behavior, and social and environmental impacts.  The goal of the scenario
              simulation exercise is to give researchers in all aspects of tsunami science
              and hazards planning an experience similar to that obtained in a real field
              investigation.  In running the simulations and evaluating the results, critical
              problems will be identified for improvement in each specialized area.  The
              simulation exercise will provide a valuable common background from which to
              forge and maintain coherence in the broadly distributed multi-disciplinary
              tsunami community.

The idea of tsunami scenario simulations was discussed by
              the tsunami community at an NSF workshop held in 2002 in Seattle.  The
              participants strongly recommended that an integrated tsunami scenario
              simulation be developed.  The aim of these three workshops is to implement this
              recommendation through a broadly distributed multi-disciplinary multi-community
              effort.

Three workshops are planned, one each year for the next three years.
               The first workshop will be designed to initiate the simulation effort, the
              second workshop will act as a catalyst to expand those activities, and the
              third will focus on the applications and the use of the developed system.  The
              first workshop is planned for June 2003 at Oregon State University.  A working
              group will be formed to organize and coordinate these workshops.  Because of
              the multi-disciplinary multi-community nature of the scenario simulations, the
              working group will consist of experts from a wide variety of disciplines. 
              Prior to each workshop, the working group will act as a steering committee. 
              After each workshop, the working group will analyze the workshop outcomes and
              issue a workshop report for further discussion with the community.  Such post-
              workshop discussions will take place on the Internet utilizing a web-based
              discussion tool.  The working group will also proactively seek participants in
              the simulation exercise from broader research communities, which will be kept
              informed via a public-access web page, and on which the workshop results will
              be posted.

The three workshops will provide a coherent integrated community
              collaborative arena through a common task of tsunami scenario simulations, and
              will induce synergistic advancement in a wide variety of the simulation models.
               The ultimate goal of these workshops is to achieve a widely accessible
              platform for simulation of virtual tsunamis through a community effort.  When
              fully implemented, the tsunami scenario simulations will be useful for hazards
              planning in coastal communities, and for the coordination and development of
              scientific research.  In addition, the integrated, highly visual character of
              the simulations will be of great value for K-12 education on tsunami hazards,
              and for general public education in this area.
