Title       : A Data-Oriented, Active Learning, Post-Calculus Introduction to Statistical
               Concepts, Methods and Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0321973

Award Number: 0321973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 10,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan J. Rossman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing curricular materials for a two-course sequence that
              introduces students at the post-calculus level to statistical concepts,
              methods, and theory. These courses are providing a more balanced introduction
              to the discipline of statistics than the standard sequence in probability and
              mathematical statistics. The materials incorporate features of successful
              statistics education projects, including development of students' conceptual
              understandings, student explorations through hands-on activities, analysis of
              genuine data, and integration of computer tools both to enhance students'
              learning and to analyze data efficiently.

The student audience targeted by
              this project is particularly important because it has been overlooked by
              previous curricular reform projects focused on the introductory course for
              students with majors outside of mathematics. The proposed two-course sequence
              introduces mathematics and science majors to content and pedagogy, which
              prepare them well for careers in statistics or teaching. Because large numbers
              of mathematics majors become teachers at the secondary school level, these
              students must learn fundamental principles of data analysis to be able to teach
              according to NCTM standards.  This course is particularly appropriate as it
              teaches students in a discovery-oriented manner in which they should
              teach.

In addition to developing, testing and revising these materials, the
              project includes a significant program of dissemination and evaluation. The
              primary outcomes are two fully self-contained textbook/ workbooks, which
              integrate investigative activities with more traditional exposition. Other
              expected outcomes include a suite of Java applets designed to aid students'
              conceptual visualization and extensive support materials such as instructor's
              guides and sample examinations. A final anticipated outcome is a week-long
              faculty development workshop.
