Title       : Manufacturing Learning Center of Los Angeles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9421667

Award Number: 9421667
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: J R. Williams   (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              0317000   Urban Technology                        
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9421667  Williams    ABSTRACT    The California State University Long Beach
              Foundation, the Southern California Coalition for Education in Manufacturing
              Engineering Economic Development Corporation of Los Angeles (L.A.), Workforce
              L.A., Rebuild L.A., the L.A. Unified School District and the L.A. Community
              College District are jointly sponsoring the development of a public-private
              manufacturing-focused educational complex and industrial park to be located in
              a manufacturing intensive area in Los Angeles.  This complex, the Manufacturing
              Learning Center, will provide state-of-the-art manufacturing facilities and
              educational programs to prepare young people for the highly skilled
              manufacturing jobs of the future.  Using a model proven effective in Detroit
              and adapted to Los Angeles, the project establish an organization with
              substantial business and community involvement to develop and manage the
              Center.    The mission of the Manufacturing Learning Center is to promote
              personal dignity and advanced engineering education, community harmony and
              economic development through the preparation of inner city youths for world
              class manufacturing leadership.  The Manufacturing Learning Center (MLC) will
              have five principal components, key features to integrate these components, and
              opportunities to contribute significantly to the Southern California economy by
              focusing on the telecommunications and transportation industries.    The
              Manufacturing Learning Center (MLC) consists of five principal components:   
              1. The Center for Advanced Technologies:  The center will be a highly advanced,
              flexible manufacturing production facility in which manufacturing technical
              training and engineering education will be provided for inner city young people
              leaving high school as well as dislocated manufacturing employees needing
              retraining or upskilling.    2. The Manufacturing Career Academy:  In
              collaboration with the L.A. Community College District and private industry,
              the L.A. Unified School District (LAUSD) will develo p for 500-700 students a
              grades 10-13 "middle college" or academy for manufacturing careers.  Students
              will gain academic and manufacturing skills through the integration of work and
              learning in actual and simulated production environments.  The last year (grade
              13) of the Academy will be called the Manufacturing Technicians Institute and
              will receive post secondary accreditation toward the Associate of Arts degree
              and the Bachelor's degree in engineering.  The Career Academy will be
              constructed with $15 million in State funding on land donated by the State.  To
              be eligible for this funding LAUSD must secure matching funds from a private
              developer or lead tenant for the industrial park portion of the project
              described below.    3. Industrial Park:  Approximately 10 of the 20 MLC acres
              will support private industrial development.  The property will be made
              available on a lease basis to private industry for the development of
              manufacturing facilities.  Lease revenues will be utilized by the Career
              Academy to help sustain the educational program.    4. FAST TRACK Program: 
              Modeled after the Focus:  HOPE FAST TRACK program, this intensive, eight week
              program upgrades the basic skills, computer skills, work habits, leadership and
              team skills of inner city high school graduates.  Through a curriculum with an
              underlying theme of manufacturing engineering entrepreneurship, the academy
              prepares participants for (1) entry into the off-campus, manufacturing
              technician program of the MLC, (2) entry into traditional (on-campus) college
              programs, or (3) immediate job placement.    5. Manufacturing Teacher Training
              Institute:  The institute provides training to instructional staff of the
              Manufacturing Career Academy (high school, community college, and
              industry-based teachers) and the Center for Advanced Technologies on how to
              teach to manufacturing skill standards in real and simulated production
              environments.  The training is conducted by outstanding manufacturing engineers
              and educators.  ***
