Title       : Graduate Research Ethics Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1998   
File        : a9421897

Award Number: 9421897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171261             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Schrag BSCHRAG@INDIANA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah G. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Pritchard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Aarne Vesilind  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen M. T. Muskavitch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1092,9123,9179,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Association for Practical and Professional Ethics, in collaboration with the
              Poynter Center for the Study of Ethics and American Institutions, and
              Association members who are leading scholars and educators in the ethics of
              scientific research, will provide instruction in ethical issues in scientific
              research for a selected group of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in
              engineering and the natural and physical sciences.  The objective is to equip
              these researchers with skill in ethical thinking, understanding of the
              historical context of scientific misconduct and awareness of the
              multidisciplinary nature of major issues in scientific research.  An intensive
              four day workshop will provide 15 participants  in each of three years with
              tools for self-directed development in these areas and a network of support.  
              The workshop will introduce participants to ethical theory and reasoning in the
              context of discussions on topics such as data sharing and ownership;
              responsible conduct of research; conflicts of interest; professional relations
              with colleagues; ethical issues in computing; protection of human subjects;
              variations in standards of conduct; responsibilities of engineers and
              scientists to the larger society. The aim is to enable them to provide
              leadership in ethical issues in the scientific community and enhanced ethics
              education for their own future students.   Participants will be nominated by
              science and engineering faculty at research universities and through
              solicitations to a wide variety of professional associations, and selected for
              their promise as leaders and mentors.   In advance of the workshop, they will
              begin to read historical cases and introductory material, to inform themselves
              of standards of conduct in their own fields,  and to develop a case study for
              distribution and comment.  During the workshop, participants will discuss
              presentations and case studies,  continue to work on their own cases and those
              contributed by others, and review and evaluate standards of conduct.  Case
              studies prepared in the workshop will be made available to faculty nationwide
              for use in their own courses, and participants will be expected to share their
              work at their home institutions.  They will join a network of concerned
              scientists and engineers from the Big Ten and other universities and receive a
              complementary three year membership in the Association which will enable them
              to maintain the contacts needed to continue to work in the field.  Project
              staff and an outside evaluator will assess the project.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
