Title       : Characterization of Nascent Chain Binding Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1997     
File        : a9421946

Award Number: 9421946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Welch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              6*D6      @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     6*D6   
              6*D6                                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                  Oh     +'  0               
                                     $       H       l                                       
                     D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       marcia
              steinberg                    marcia steinberg            @      (?6            
                           @         e =       e                                             
                                               "       "   "       "       "       "       " 
                   L       L       L       L       L       d       n       L           C   x 
                   |       |       |       |       |       |       |                         
                       #   ?       e               V   T       4                           " 
                   |                 |       |                       |       |              
              |       "       "       |                       x       |       |       |      
              |       "       |       "       |                               6       >      
              "       "       "       "       |               |   4   |                      
                                                                                    9421946
              Welch Relatively little is known regarding the local environment of a
              polypeptide during the course of its synthesis in the cell. Whether the
              maturing polypeptide begins to adopt its final folded conformation either
              during (co translationally) or after (post translationally) completion of its
              synthesis has been debated, but not entirely resolved. In addition, whether
              folding of the nascent polypeptide occurs independently, or whether other
              components assist in the folding process is unknown. These sorts of questions
              are being revisited owing to the identification of a class of proteins,
              referred to as molecular chaperones, which appear to participate in various
              aspects of protein maturation. While not conveying any  specific information
              for the folding process, molecular chaperones appear to participate in protein
              maturation by minimizing the possibility of protein aggregation, a serious and
              potential problem in the cell where the overall concentration of proteinacious
              material is high. The P.I. suggests that during the course of protein synthesis
              the maturing polypeptide becomes engaged with one or more cytosolic components 
              referred to collectively as the nascent chain binding complex (NCBC). Once
              synthesis of a suitable number of amino acids has been completed to provide for
              the folding information of a "protein domain", folding of the nascent
              polypeptide would commence, concomitant with NCBC release.  The P.I. has
              already identified one component, the 70 kDa heat shock protein (hsp 70) as
              being part of the NCBC, but has evidence that other proteins also interact with
              nascent polypeptides. A variety of different approaches will be used to purify
              and characterize NCBC components. In addition the possibility that other
              molecular chaperones (to which the P.I. has suitable antibodies) are present
              within the NCBC will be addressed. Once a consensus of NCBC components has been
              arrived at, antibodies to novel NCBC components will be raised and used to
              facilitate their purification. In addition antibodies to NCBC components, as
              well as the purified NCBC proteins themselves, will be used in
              depletion/reconstitution experiments in rabbit reticulocyte Iysates to
              ascertain the effects on protein maturation. It is anticipated that these
              studies will lead to a more thorough understanding of the different components
              involved in interacting with and facilitating the maturation of most, if not
              all, newly synthesized proteins. %%% Recent insights have led to entirely new
              concepts regarding how proteins are synthesized and acquire their properly
              folded and biologically active conformation. Classical experiments performed in
              the 1950's and 60's led to the proposal that protein folding was a spontaneous
              process, dictated on ly by the linear sequence of amino acids present within
              the polypeptide chain, and not requiring the help of any accessory components.
              Work from many laboratories now have identified a class of protein machinery,
              referred to as molecular chaperones, which appear to play an intimate role in
              helping other proteins inside the cell adopt their properly folded
              conformation. In studies described herein, the P.I.  will continue to identify
              and characterize relevant components, including members of the chaperone
              family, which interact with and facilitate protein folding. Finally, using
              antibodies prepared against the nascent chain binding proteins the P.I. will
              effectively remove such components from the rabbit reticulocyte and determine
              the consequences of such removal on the maturation of particular proteins. Such
              work, in sum, will provide us with a better picture of how proteins inside the
              cell acquire their final properly folded conformation. ***                     
                              ;                                                              
                                                    @                                        
                                                                                             
                                            ....()()))()()                                   
                                                    ;                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   S u m m a r y I n f o r m
              a t i o n                           (
