Title       : The Role of Phytochrome Genes in Photoperiodic Ecotypes of Black Cottonwood
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1998  
File        : a9421420

Award Number: 9421420
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn R. Furnier   (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn T. Howe  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gary M. Gardner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wesley P. Hackett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    94221420  Howe  Daylength, or photoperiod, is one of the most important 
              environmental cues controlling the onset of dormancy in  perennial plants. 
              Short days induce growth-cessation, the  initiation of cold-acclimation, and
              the formation of a  terminal bud.  By responding to daylength, the initiation
              of  dormancy can be closely synchronized with the end of the  growing season
              and plants can begin acclimating prior to the  onset of low temperatures in the
              fall.  Because the length  of the growing season varies latitudinally,
              photoperiodic  ecotypes have evolved in species with large latitudinal 
              distributions.  In the northern hemisphere, for example,  trees from nothrern
              locations respond to longer photoperiods  and initiate dormancy earlier in the
              season than do southern  genotypes.  Differences in response occur even when
              the  ecotypes are grown in common-garden tests under the same  photoperiodic
              regime, demonstrating that photoperiodism is  under strong genetic control. 
              The long-term goals of this  project are to determine the genetic basis of
              photoperiodic  ecotypes in perennial plants and to characterize the early 
              events in short-day induced bud set, using black cottonwood  as a model
              species.    This research will integrate information on photoperiodism  at the
              populational, whole-plant , and molecular genetic  levels in order to
              understand the evolutionary processes  leading to ecotypic variation in plants.
               Because both the  timing of bud set and plant architecture are important 
              determinants of plant productivity, this research has  important implications
              for plant breeding.  This research  will also add to our understanding of the
              ecological role of  phytochrome in plants.
