Title       : Odor Transduction in an Olfactory Epithelial Slice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9421190

Award Number: 9421190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Avijit Chaudhuri                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent E. Dionne vdionne@hoh.mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               Olfactory transduction is the physiological process of  smell in which receptor
              cells transform their reception of  an odorant into a nerve signal to send to
              the brain.  The  mechanisms involve modulation of ion-selective components of 
              the membrane conductance in the olfactory receptor cell, to  trigger excitation
              of a nerve impulse from the cell.  Membrane properties often are studied in
              cells that have  been dissociated and isolated in a dish, where they are 
              easily accessible for physiological recording with micro-  electrodes.  This
              project uses a novel "slice" preparation  of sensory epithelium, so that
              micro-electrode studies will  allow characterization of the membrane properties
              of  olfactory cells in a more normal environment, and  determination of how the
              membrane conductances are modulated  by odors.  This preparation offers unique
              opportunities to  study spatial interactions within the sensory epithelium, 
              and the role of non-neuronal neighboring cells in modulating  the neural
              response.  Using patch-clamping techniques of  electrophysiology, the
              chemosensory properties of two  distinct morphological forms of olfactory cells
              are  compared, along with the physiological properties of three  classes of
              non-neuronal cell types in the epithelium.  Results will have an impact on our
              understanding of how  peripheral chemosensory function depends on the
              integrated  activity within the receptor organ, as well as the  properties of
              individual receptor cells.  These results will  be important to sensory
              neuroscience in general, in  analyzing the capabilities for detecting,
              discriminating and  encoding by a network system of neurons in a sheet of 
              epithelium.
