Title       : Conference: The Cytoskeleton and Cell Function Meeting at Cold Spring Harbor,
               New York, April 26-30, 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1995     
File        : a9421544

Award Number: 9421544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Helfman   (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9421544  Helfman    The meeting is scheduled to be held at Cold Spring Harbor,
              April 26-30,  1995 and is expected to attract about 300 scientist working on
              various  aspects of the cytoskeleton. This meeting will focus on the regulation
               and function of the cytoskeleton in various biological processes  including
              actin filament assembly and dynamics, motile systems,  microtubule assembly and
              dynamics, cell division and nuclear structure,  intermediate filaments,
              molecular motors and intracellular trafficking,  membrane-cytoskeleton
              interactions, and the cytoskeleton in development  and differentiation. 
              Various systems will be represented including  yeast, Chlamydomonas,
              Dictyostelium, Drosophila, and vertebrates.  The  fundamental importance of the
              cytoskeleton in cellular functions renders  the subject of interest to
              investigators from a wide number of  disciplines including cell biologist,
              biochemists, molecular biologist,  geneticist, and developmental biologists.  
              The cytoskeleton crosses the  boundaries of cell biology, molecular biology,
              developmental biology,  eenetics and biochemistry; it is very important to
              bring people working  in diverse areas together in one location where they can
              discuss ideas  and develop communication.  In consequence of this diverse
              background  and emphasis, the meeting will encompass sessions which are focused
               primarily by biological function.  Every attempt will be made to present  as
              many of the experimental approaches being used to study the role of  the
              cytoskeleton in cellular functions using biochemical, structural 
              (crystallography, NMR), molecular, immunological, and genetic  techniques.  %%%
               This is a meeting which will focus on the regulation and function of the 
              cytoskeleton in various biological processes including actin filament  assembly
              and dynamics, motile systems, microtubule assembly and  dynamics, cell division
              and nuclear structure, intermediate filaments,  molecular motors and
              intracellular trafficking, membrane-cytoskeleton  interaction , and the
              cytoskeleton in development and differentiation.  It is scheduled to be held at
              Cold Spring Harbor, April 26th-30th, 1995  and is expected to attract about 300
              scientists from a wide range of  specialties including cell biology,
              biochemistry, molecular biology,  genetics, ald developmental biology.  In such
              a crossdiscipline topic,  it is very important to bring people with these
              diverse backgrounds  together so that they can discuss ideas and develop
              communication.  In  consequence of this diverse background and emphasis, the
              meeting will  encompass sessions which are focused primarily by biological
              function.  The meeting is intended for students and postdoctoral fellows as
              well as  established investigators. Funding is only requested for student and 
              post-doc travel. All applicants will be expected to submit an abstract  of
              which approximately 60-70 will be selected  for a 10-20 minute  platform
              presentation along with 16 invited speakers. It is intended  that all other
              attendees will have the opportunity to present posters.  Abstracts will be
              collated into a booklet available to all participants,  but proceedings will
              not be published.  ***
