Title       : Proposal for support of Nuclear Physics Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1997    
File        : a9421500

Award Number: 9421500
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1203218            (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Cline Cline@nsrl.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ching-Yen Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chang-Hong Yu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank L. H. Wolfs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9421500  Cline       Research will be carried out in nuclear structure and 
              reactions using low energy heavy ions, and in relativistic heavy  ion physics
              exploring quark-gluon degrees of freedom.  The low  energy experiments will
              focus on studies of rotational and  vibrational collective excitations,
              properties of deformed and  superdeformed nuclei, and the role and nature of
              the pairing  interaction which controls the behavior of systems at high 
              angular momentum.  Use will be made of the new high-multiplicity  gamma ray
              detector, Gammasphere, for some of the measurements.  Other experiments will
              continue the search for anomalous decay  lines in the spectra of electrons and
              positrons emitted during  low energy collisions of the heaviest nuclei (uranium
              plus  uranium), which would be a signature for physics beyond  conventional and
              currently understood nuclear and  electrodynamical processes.   In addition, a
              new program of  detector development will be started aimed at exploring the 
              production of a quark-gluon plasma in relativistic heavy ion  collisions at the
              RHIC accelerator.  This and related experiments  will test our understanding of
              the conditions under which  confined quarks are liberated and how these quarks
              and gluons  interact to form hadrons.  All these activities are of high, 
              current scientific interest within the nuclear physics community.  Development
              and construction of state-of-the-art detectors  is  integral to this activity. 
              Education of graduate students and  postdocs is  a strong component of this
              grant to the University  of Rochester Nuclear Physics Group.  ***
