Title       : Electronic Structure of Hydrodesulfurization Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1997    
File        : a9421784

Award Number: 9421784
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne Harris sharris@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9197,EGCH,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic  Chemistry Program
              supports research by Dr. Suzanne Harris of the  Chemistry Department,
              University of Wyoming, on  hydrodesulfurization (HDS) catalysts.  Approximate
              electronic  structure calculations (Fenske-Hall) will be used to examine both 
              solid state and molecular systems related to HDS.  Thiophenic  binding sites on
              the surfaces of active HDS catalysts, such as  ruthenium, rhodium and promoted
              molybdenum sulfides, will be  compared to those in model thiophenic molecules. 
              Calculations  will be carried out on both adsoption of thiophene at selected 
              surface sites on these sulfides, and on related groups of  complexes
              incorporating thiophenes, benzothiophenes, and  dibenzothiophenes.  These
              calculations will make it possible to  evaluate how the nature of the
              transition metal center, its  coordination geometry, the other ligands bound to
              the metal, and  the nature of the thiophenic ligand itself affect the binding
              and  activation of thiophenic molecules at one or more metal centers.      
              This is the first theoretical attempt to relate heterogeneous 
              hydrodesulfurization (HDS) reactions to the homogeneous chemistry  of metal
              thiophene complexes.  HDS is used in the petroleum  refining industry to remove
              sulfur from thiophenic molecules in  heavy crude oils and coal-derived liquids.
               At high temperature  and hydrogen pressure, the petroleum is passed over a
              metal  sulfide, and the thiophene is removed.  The behavior of molecules  of
              metal thiophenes has been used to help understand the behavior  of the real
              catalyst system, but the details of the mechanism  remain unknown.  In this
              study, the electronic structure of metal  thiophene molecules will be compared
              to that of the surface of  the metal sulfide catalysts in order to better
              understand the  absorption and reactions of thiophenes in HDS catalysis.
