Title       : Androgen-Dependent Plasticity of Motoneurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9421695

Award Number: 9421695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184878             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Collins william.collins@stonybrook.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9421695  William F. Collins      The ability of the central nervous system
              cells to reconfigure  their structure and contacts as result of environmental
              or chemical  queues is paramount to learning, memory, behavior and brain 
              function, in general.  Reconstruction occurring in the central  nervous system
              is defined as plasticity.  Moreover, the impact of  gonadal hormones, such as
              androgens, on brain structure and  function is only beginning to become
              evident.  However, other  studies suggest that these powerful hormones are
              essential for the  normal function of neurons and their loss results in atrophy
              and  cell loss.  Dr. Collins will use a well-characterized motoneuron  model
              system to explore the anatomical and electrophysiological  consequences of
              gonadal androgen deficiency on central nervous  system motoneurons.  
              Initially, Dr. Collins will assess the  electrophysiological properties of
              motoneurons and their anatomical  structure before and after androgen
              withdrawal, in some cases up to  6 months after the last exposure to androgens.
               Specifically,  androgen dependence among dendrites will be examined.  Finally,
              Dr.  Collins will examine the efficacy of synaptic inputs to the  identified
              motoneurons by electrically driving presynaptic cells  and assess their
              post-synaptic influence in the presence or absence  of androgens.  These
              studies will reveal novel mechanisms of  steroid hormone action on brain
              motoneurons and begin to elucidate  mechanisms of androgen-dependent neuron
              plasticity.  While little  is understood about the role of neural plasticity in
              brain  function, gonadal steroid hormones are effective in their ability  to
              reorganize the critical brain centers that may be essential for  such critical
              tasks as learning and memory in man and all species  alike.
