Title       : Optimal Design Processor for Structural Systems, Indo-US Cooperative Research,
               Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1995     
File        : a9421299

Award Number: 9421299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16129              (Estimated)
Investigator: C S. Krishnamoorthy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst Tech Madras
	      
	      Madras, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1041,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9421299  Krishnamoorthy    Description:  This project supports a  cooperative
              research project by Dr. David  Goldberg, Professor of Engineering at the 
              University of Illinois and Dr. C.S.  Krishnamoorthy, Professor of Civil
              Engineering  at the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT),  Madras, India.  The
              project aims to merge US  research results in genetic algorithms (GAs)-  search
              procedures based on the mechanics of  natural selection and natural genetics-
              and  Indian research on structural optimization and  the application of
              knowledge-based systems,  thereby producing a set of computer tools that  can
              substantially improve the breadth and  efficacy of structural design in both 
              countries.  The computer work is viewed as the  development of a prototype GA
              shell tailored to  structural optimization.  When possible, public  domain
              codes such as Genesis and Splicer will  be used to save effort.    Scope:  This
              research project is suitable for  the objectives of the Division of
              International  Programs in linking US and foreign scientists  with
              complementary talents and experiences.   The US scientist has experience and
              research  results in the area of GA that can benefit from  the extension of the
              methodologies to practical  settings in the field of structures.  The  Indian
              scientist at the IIT has experience in  knowledge-based design of structures. 
              This can  benefit from applying the current GA theory and  techniques.  ***
