Title       : A Dynamic Atlas of the Cercal Sensory System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1996     
File        : a9421185

Award Number: 9421185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229111             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwen A. Jacobs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,9198,9215,BIOT,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  Many sensory systems have some kind of representation in the brain that
              seems to form a kind of spatial map.  One well-studied case of this is a map of
              directional responses from the tiny wind-sensitive hairs on organs called cerci
              at the back end of a cricket, which has been used as a relatively simple model
              system.  The nerve fibers carrying information from these cerci come in to a
              central cluster called a ganglion that is part of the animal's central nervous
              system.  Crickets, like many other invertebrates, often have single nerve cells
              that are characteristically identifiable from animal to animal, so it is
              possible to construct an atlas of such identifiable neurons, and relate their
              activity to the behavior of the animal, such as turning toward or away from a
              stimulus.  This project builds on an existing large database of identified
              neurons in this system, to add dynamic properties about their physiological
              responses to the known spatial properties of their connectivity from the cercal
              inputs, and their outputs to other parts of the ganglion and the brain.  Data
              on response properties including threshold sensitivity, frequency tuning, phase
              response, and rates of adaptation are incorporated and used to derive a set of
              mathematical functions.  These functions, representing the response dynamics of
              the cells in the system, are projected on to the three-dimensional matrix of
              the spatial map.  Advanced computational visualization algorithms will be
              implemented to represent the spatial patterns of activity within the map.  The
              impact of this work will be not only on mechanosensory integration, but on
              general issues of information processing in nervous systems, combining the
              constraints of anatomical structure and the insights about computational
              algorithms used in neural maps, which allow the organism to respond with
              appropriate spatial behavior to environmental signals.
