Title       : Studies in the Phonological Structure of Bantu languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9421362

Award Number: 9421362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Odden odden@ling.osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9421362         The Bantu languages of Africa have played a major role in the 
              development of current phonological theory. One reason for the  continued
              importance of the phonology of Bantu languages is that de-  spite a basic
              similarity between the languages, the abstract building  blocks of grammars are
              arranged differently in each language, so that  every language poses new
              empirical puzzles. Bantu languages are  particularly rich in the area of
              prosodic phenomena tones, vowel  length and syllabification and often have
              highly developed systems of  prosodic rules that apply at the sentence level.
              While quality  descriptions of the phonology of perhaps a dozen Bantu languages
              are  available, there are around 400 Bantu languages spoken in Africa, so  one
              can accurately say that the surface has only been scratched in  studying the
              phonology of Bantu languages.       The goal of this three-year project is to
              provide a more solid  empirical foundation for the study of the grammatical
              structure of  Bantu languages, focusing on problems in the phonology of certain
               languages spoken in Southern Kenya, Northern Tanzania and Southern  Uganda.
              Four languages are targeted for extensive investigation in  this project,
              specifically Kikerewe, Runyankore, Bukusu and Kikamba.  None of these languages
              has received adequate attention in terms of  their phonological systems,
              especially in terms of tone and syllable  structure.        Working with native
              speakers of these languages, the research  team will elicit lexical items and
              grammatical paradigms, including  inflectional paradigms and phrasal
              constructions, to determine the  range of phonological alternations attested in
              these languages.  Simultaneously these data will be analyzed; hypotheses will
              be formed  regarding the principles which explain the distribution of the 
              available data. By collecting and analyzing the data simultaneously,  errors
              and omissions in the data will be detected quickly and  hypotheses can be
              tested against a wider range of const ructions. The  data and analyses
              generated by this project will then be disseminated  as a special issue of the
              Ohio State University Working Papers in  Linguistics, and through journal
              articles and monograph-length  publications.
