Title       : Studies of Optical Spectral Holeburning using Raman Coherent Population Trapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1998       
File        : a9421304

Award Number: 9421304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217655             (Estimated)
Investigator: Myung K. Kim myungkim@chuma.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9421304  Kim  In this proposal, optical spectral holeburning is considered with
              Raman  coherent population trapping in a folded three level lambda system. This
              is  a novel technique which allows storage (and retrieval) of optical data with
               potentially significant advantages over conventional schemes. Each data  pulse
              is composed of the two optical frequencies corresponding to the two  legs of
              the lambda transition. The information about the pulse amplitudes  and
              separations are encoded in the spin-rather than optical-coherence. This 
              coherence is created by a two-photon process, so that its amplitude is 
              proportional to the product of the amplitudes of electric fields (i.e., 
              geometric mean intensity) of the two frequencies, and oscillates in phase  with
              the beat frequency. Thus, both amplitude and phase sensitive optical  data,
              encoded in the geometric mean intensity and the phase of the beat  frequency,
              respectively, can be stored.    This scheme of data storage and retrieval may
              have significant advantages  over existing techniques. For example, the write
              window is determined by  two time scales: the homogeneous decay time of the
              spin coherence, and the  two-photon correlation time. This relaxes two
              constraints of optical data  storage. First, only the ground-state coherences,
              and not the optical  coherences, have to be long lived. Noting that spin
              coherences with  lifetimes up to approx.1 second are known to exist in certain
              solids at  room temperature, this technique opens up the possibility of finding
              high  density optical data storage materials above liquid nitrogen temperature.
               Second, the laser frequency does not have to be highly stabilized, since  the
              two photon correlation time can be made independent of single frequency 
              linewidth if one laser frequency is generated from the other via  acousto-optic
              modulation, for example. Finally, this system may be used to  enhance the
              storage density since, in addition to the spin coherence, the  Raman excitation
              can create optical coherence.  Therefore, optical data can  be stored in holes
              burnt in a two-dimensional frequency space, leading to a  five-dimensional data
              storage. In the time domain picture, such a combined  scheme corresponds to
              extension of the write window, enabling the memory  capacity (at a single
              position) to exceed the current fundamental limit  imposed by the ratio of the
              optical inhomogeneous to homogeneous  linewidths.    The basic physics of
              optical spectral holeburning using Raman coherent  population trapping will be
              studied to determine suitability for potential  applications to optical data
              storage and image processing. This will be  accomplished by performing
              experimental and theoretical studies of spectral  holeburning in rare-earth
              doped crystals. Specific experiments include  basic characterization of Raman
              population trapping in a doped crystal,  storage and retrieval of optical data
              with Raman-excited spin echoes in  solids using modestly stabilized lasers, and
              basic demonstration of  enhanced storage density via spectral hole burning in a
              two dimensional  frequency space. Theoretical calculations will include more
              than two  ground-states in order to more closely match the characteristics of
              the  actual systems. Finally, projections will be made, based on the 
              experimental and theoretical results, as to the feasibility of practical 
              optical memories with Raman population trapping.  ***
