Title       : Light Induced Processes in the Condensed Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9421043

Award Number: 9421043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin M. Hochstrasser hochstra@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9421043  Hochstrasser    This research is focused on two main areas arising from
               recent technological advances in optical and infrared  femtosecond pulse
              generation and near-field microscopy.  Linear and nonlinear infrared properties
              of materials in the  teraherz and the vibrational fundamental region are now 
              accessible with time resolution in the 40-160 fs regime.  These methods will be
              used to determine directly the nuclear  responses, over a wide frequency range,
              to charge  reorganization in conjugated polymers, charge transfer  complexes
              and their crystals. Impulsive excitations of the  nuclear motions leads to
              wavepackets whose motion in time  can be used to characterize the potential
              surfaces involved.  The vibrational energy dynamics also will be studied 
              directly. A complete study of the higher exciton states of  materials with
              confined excitations on linear chains of  polysilanes will be conducted to
              understand the excited  states of such chains in which the electron and hole
              are  more separated. The second area of the proposed research is  concerned
              with the dynamics and electronic properties of  organic nanoscale systems using
              near-field methods. The  materials to be characterized include: self assembled 
              monolayers of proteins (on semiconductors) that can undergo  energy and
              electron transfer with single protein spatial  resolution; polysilane films and
              stretched films in which  linear chain excitations can be separately examined; 
              aggregates of cyanine dyes having coherence lengths larger  than the tip size
              of the near-field microscope; and organic  nanoparticles that can be separately
              examined and their  confinement properties characterized.  %%%  The proposed
              research is in two main areas arising from our  recent technological advances
              in optical and infrared  femtosecond pulse generation and near-field
              microscopy. The  first involves characterization of the femtosecond 
              vibrational and electronic responses of materials in the  infrared region of
              the spectrum from close to zero  frequency  to 8000 cm-1. The second is the
              determination of optical  properties of nanoscopic and low dimensional organic,
              bio  and polymeric materials by means of the newly developed near-  field
              picosecond time resolved microscopy. This work is  important because: 1)
              infrared properties of materials,  particularly organic and biomaterial are not
              widely explored  yet, and 2) it allows examining nanoenvironment in materials 
              on the scale of single, isolated molecule.
