Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Robert Spencer Jennings, Tracy M. Sonneborn, and
               the Career of American Protozoan Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1995  
File        : a9421803

Award Number: 9421803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4990               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick B. Churchill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The founders of the American protozoan genetics program, Herbert Spencer
              Jennings and Tracy M. Sonneborn, were highly respected leaders in the
              twentieth-century biological community. The research program  they created and
              their primary research organism, Paramecium aurelia, however, have not impacted
              significantly the corpus of this century's genetic thought. The goal of  Ms.
              Judith Schloegel's dissertation which is being written under the direction of
              Professor Churchill is to illuminate the circumstances underlying this
              paradoxical disparity between the success of these researchers and their
              experimental program.    This research serves as the basis for a triple
              biography of Jennings, Sonneborn, and the unicellular organism, the Paramecium.
              Examination of the staunchly anti-reductionist mode of experimental inquiry of 
              Jennings and Sonneborn, and the social and political commitments which they
              embraced, will illuminate the career of Paramecium in genetic research. It will
              also enable comparison of the protozoan research program with other relevant
              organismic programs. Extensive archival research will elucidate the important
              role of numerous relationships, between student and teacher, between competing
              research programs, and between researcher and genetic organism, for the mode of
              experimental inquiry practiced, and the type of knowledge produced by an
              organism. Discerning these relationships will contribute to a richer
              understanding of the development of genetic knowledge in twentieth-century
              America.
