Title       : Electrosensory Processing in Laminated Midbrain Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9421039

Award Number: 9421039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Avijit Chaudhuri                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294573             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Rose gary.rose@m.cc.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9421039  Rose  Sensory processing involves integration of timing from multiple 
              inputs converging on single cells, and production of precisely  timed outputs. 
              The structure of single neurons and the biophysical  properties of the cell
              membrane are fundamental features underlying  temporal mechanisms in neural
              circuits in the brain.  A valuable  system where these properties can be
              studied easily is in weakly  electric fish.  These small fish have an electric
              organ that they  discharge to produce an electric field around the animal; they
               detect tiny electrical signals with sensitive electroreceptors all  over the
              body, and use this electrosense to detect objects in the  environment.  The
              electric organ can produce very precisely timed  repetitive discharges.  Within
              the midbrain is a remarkable  laminated structure called the torus
              semicircularis.  This  important center analyzes the spatial and temporal
              patterns of  electrosensory stimuli, and is involved in the behavioral response
               of the animal to targets in the environment.  This project exploits  this
              unique system using sophisticated novel biophysical and  behavioral approaches
              to understand mechanisms of temporal  selectivity, the role of cellular
              morphology and laminated  assemblages in temporal filtering, the ways in which
              the same  central circuits contribute to different behavior in different 
              species, and how anticipatory behavior to repetitive stimuli can be  learned. 
              Results from this study will have an impact beyond simply  the interest in
              electrosense.  The temporal processing studies are  important for sensory and
              computational neuroscience, the  comparative discrimination studies for
              understanding the evolution  of neural circuits, the behavioral studies for
              understanding  sensorimotor control mechanisms, and the anticipatory behavior 
              study for understanding learning.
