Title       : Management of Technological Innovation: Assessing Life-Cycle Environmental
               Impact of Discrete Part Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1997     
File        : a9421257

Award Number: 9421257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Ravi Kumar rkumar@sba.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Nadler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Panos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph S. Devinny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522400   Information Systems                     
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 9148,9197,ENVI,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # 9421257  University of Southern California    This research proposes
              to develop a comprehensive methodology for capturing the life-cycle impacts of
              environmental unfriendliness in discrete part manufacturing.  The output of 
              this research is a means by which businesses can obtain the environmental
              status of their operations.  Status may be defined by the collective life-cycle
              impact (measured appropriately)  of the products/process under the manager's
              authority.  For example, environmental life-cycle impact status of a particular
              products line produced by current physical process could be visualized as a
              vector of measurable attributes, categorized under the taxonomy of human
              impact, ecological impact, and socio-economic impact, that are aggregated at
              the business unit level.  The life-cycle impact include impacts caused by
              purchasing/selling processes (including
              parts/materials/supplies/services/finished goods),
              receiving/storing/maintaining processes (including parts/materials/ supplies/
              equipment/ finished goods) production process (including assembly and
              packaging), transportation process (including purchased
              items/work-in-process/finished goods/equipment/waste), disposal process
              (including parts/materials,supplies/service/finished goods/equipment/ waste). 
              Also considered, will be the effects of product use, recycling/ reuse/
              remanufacturing environmental impacts.    The methodology developed will be
              transformed into a computer-based tool that managers will be able use to
              determine trade-off and manage technological innovations to improve
              environmental friendliness of their products and process.    This research will
              be conducted with the help of TRW and Motorola, who will contribute detailed
              operations-related information on products as well as help in the development/
              implementation of measures, methodology and tools in a corporate setting.  The
              tools developed  will be  used  to assess the environmental implications of
              three products, two at TRW and one at Motorola.  The produ cts at TRW include
              Airbag System and Diagnostic Module unit used in automotive airbags, currently
              in production and the Remote Convenience System which will be in the production
              in 1996.  The product at Motorola is the pager.
