Title       : Management of Technological Innovation: Research, Development and Industrial
               Testing of a Systainability Impact Assessment System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1997  
File        : a9421398

Award Number: 9421398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas N. Gladwin tgladwin@stern.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon A. Levin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suresh B. Kotha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Ehrenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522400   Information Systems                     
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 9148,9197,ENVI,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # 9421398  New York University    This project proposes a program of
              transdisciplinary collaboration and synthesis.  Engineers, ecologist, and
              organizational scientists at NYU, MIT and Princeton and corporate managers at
              AT&T. Bristol-Myers Squibb, Digital Equipment Corporation, and Phillips
              Electronics, will research, develop and field test a Sustainablity Impact
              Assessment System (SIAS).    This system will help industrial users to
              comprehensively identify, project measure, evaluate and communicate the effects
              o proposed or ongoing industrial actions on environmental and socio-economic
              systems, using absolute standards of sustainablity rather than relative
              measures of environmental "friendliness" or "consciousness."  It should be
              applicable to all phases of technology management, including the evaluation,
              forecasting, planning, and transfer of technology.  It should also help to
              inculcate in corporate managers a new set of societally desirable values
              regarding the appropriate role of technology in a sustainable world.    The
              project will consist of three phases.  During the conceptual development phase,
              the project team will develop core sustainablity standards, review the
              state-of-the-art in assessment methodologies, survey industrial firms on their
              assessment usage, and develop a SIAS prototype.  Then during the systems
              construction phase the project team will convene a sustainablity assessment
              conference, develop detailed sustainablity metrics and scales, prepare a
              methodology manual, and hopefully an experimental software package.  Finally,
              during the field testing and deployment phase, the project team will implement
              and test the system in various industrial organization, documents and analyze
              the results, and refine and publish them.
