Title       : Laboratory Studies of the Evolution of Precipitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1999   
File        : a9421735

Award Number: 9421735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1995  
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry T. Ochs h-ochs@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth V. Beard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ochs/Abstract           Laboratory studies are being conducted on collisions
              between  cloud-size and precipitation-size drops in free fall to obtain the 
              collection efficiences critical to the formation and evolution of 
              precipitation in warm-base clouds.  Unique laboratory equipment are  being
              employed for generating drops at terminal velocity and  studying subsequent
              collisions.  The research is focused on two  problems:  obtaining critical
              collision efficiencies needed to  calculate the rates for 1) autoconversion and
              2) self collection,  processes that control the initiation of rain and spread
              of the  raindrop distribution.  For the autoconversion problem, an  experiment
              is being used to measure the collection efficiency for  cloud-size drops of
              minimal charge for comparison with previous  laboratory data at moderate charge
              and with theoretical collision  efficiencies for uncharged spheres.  The
              influence of turbulence on  the collision efficiency is also being studied. 
              For the self-  collection problem, several experiments are being employed to 
              measure the collection efficiency for small precipitation-size  drops as a
              function of temperature and ppessure.  Other experiments  are focused on
              extending the physical scaling parameter to predict  collection efficiencies
              for a wide range of drop sizes.  Numerical  cloud models employed to evaluate
              the influence of the laboratory  results on the formation and evolution of
              precipitation.
