Title       : Perceptual Representations in Conceptual Tasks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1996  
File        : a9421326

Award Number: 9421326
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence W. Barsalou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of the proposed work is to determine whether perceptual representations
              enter significantly into conceptual processing.  Subjects will perform
              conceptual tasks that have traditionally been explained with propositional,
              non-perceptual theories of knowledge, e.g., feature listing (what features are
              typically true of a chair) and property verification (e.g., does a chair have a
              seat).  Of interest will be whether subjects use perceptual representations in
              these tasks, even though the task contexts do not require or demand that they
              do.  The use of perceptual representations will be detected in two ways: 
              instructional equivalence and perceptual work.  Instructional equivalence
              occurs when subjects who receive no imagery instructions (`neutral subjects`)
              perform similarly to subjects explicitly asked to use imagery (`imagery
              subjects`).  Perceptual work occurs when performance of both neutral and
              imagery subjects is affected by perceptual variables.  Initial experiments on
              feature listing and property verification provide strong evidence for both
              instructional equivalence and perceptual work, indicating that neutral subjects
              use perceptual representations.  Further studies will replicate and extend
              these findings.  For feature listing, various experiments examine the roles of
              perceptual representations in conceptual combination, event concepts, abstract
              concepts, gesture, and production modes.  For property verification, various
              experiments use distractor relatedness, preparation time, part expectancy, and
              perspective to examine the role of perceptual representations.  In an
              additional project on modality-specific interference, several experiments test
              the prediction that perceptual representations of conceptual knowledge should
              produce specific patterns of attentional interference.  Should these projects
              provide evidence that perceptual representations play central roles in
              conceptual processing, theories of cognition and intelligence would require
              significant reformulation.  Most existing theories assume that intelligent
              behavior reflects the processing of an abstract, amodal, and arbitrary language
              of thought, much like the symbolic computer languages used widely in electronic
              computation.  According to existing theories, perceptual experience is
              transduced into a set of conceptual symbols that bear no perceptual resemblance
              to their referential origins.  An alternative, and much less explored view, is
              that conceptual symbols are fragments of perceptual states, extracted directly
              from these states via selective attention.  The resulting conceptual
              representations are not static holistic 'pictures in the head,' but instead are
              systems of perceptual symbols that combine productively to produce infinite
              conceptual structures.  Additionally, these perceptual symbols are analytic,
              schematic, multimodal, and dynamic, offering a rich expressive system for
              representing a wide variety of concepts, not just those for concrete objects. 
              Intuitively, such perceptual symbol systems resemble modern multimedia
              computing much more than traditional non-analogue computing. Evidence
              continuing to indicate the presence of a perceptual symbolic system in humans,
              has strong implications for understanding and applying intelligence as well as
              theories of the brain's operation and visions of artificial intelligence. 
              Rather than viewing intelligence as the manipulation of arbitrary amodal
              symbols, it would come to be viewed as arising from a productive system of
              perceptual symbols.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
