Title       : Gonadal Hormone Effect on Neural Organization in vitro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1997  
File        : a9421431

Award Number: 9421431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249194             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Lustig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      62 S. Dunlap
	      Memphis, TN  38163    901/448-5541

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number: 94-21431  Principal Investigator:  Lustig, Robert H.      The
              brain consists of billions of neurons which must interconnect  to form specific
              cell groups and fiber tracts.  The gonadal  hormones, estrogen and androgens,
              have profound effects on specific  cell groups in the brain.  It is believed
              that the gonadal steroid  environment during brain development dictates the
              organization of  the brain and results in sex differences in brain
              organization.   Participating in these sex differences may be the influence of
              the  androgens and estrogens on the development of neural contacts  through the
              nerve cell axons and dendrites.  However, studies of  these connections in the
              intact developing brain are difficult at  best.  Therefore, Dr. Lustig has
              elegantly proposed to address the  question of gonadal steroid modulation of
              axon and dendrite  development using in vitro cell lines endogenously
              expressing  receptors for the steroid hormones, or genetically altered to 
              express androgen or estrogen receptors.  The proposed studies will  investigate
              the effects of androgens and estrogens on axon  outgrowth and arborization, on
              dendritic spine and gap junction  formation in vitro, and assess the molecular
              events involved in  cellular morphology and connectivity.  These studies will
              provide  new information on the manner by which estrogen and androgen elicit 
              the cell biological events necessary for appropriate interneuronal 
              connectivity during development.  Such studies may serve as a basis  for
              beginning to define the etiology and ontogeny of brain sexual  dimorphisms, and
              the role of sex hormones in the development of  cognition and behavior.
