Title       : Transfer of the LACM-AHF Polychaete Collection to the Natural History Museum of
               Los Angeles County
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1997       
File        : a9421004

Award Number: 9421004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248918             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk Fitzhugh fitzhugh@bcff.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L A Cty Museum Nat Hist F
	      900 Exposition Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900074057    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9421004  Fitzhugh   The Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History (LACM)
              maintains one of the foremost polychaete annelid collections in the world.  The
              collection is the largest of its kind the western United States and second
              largest in the country, with the most diverse representation of eastern Pacific
              polychaete taxa in the world, and is well known for its cosmopolitan coverage. 
              Research based on the collection extends back to the last century and
              collection use has clearly continued to increase through time.  Donated to the
              LACM in 1988 from the University of Southern California's (USC) Allan Hancock
              Foundation (AHF), the collection still resides in the AHF.  Subsequent to this
              acquisition, however, the LACM hired a collection manager and curator
              specifically for this collection.  Unfortunately, the collection has been
              subjected to extremely cramped conditions, severely limiting adequate curation.
               Two very significant events have occurred during the past two years in that
              the LACM completed construction of polycaeete research and collection
              facilities, and an NSF-funded compactor system has been installed in the latter
              area.  The current proposal requests funds for two years to (1) employ a
              curatiorial assistant and temporary personnel to help move the collection from
              the AHF to the LACM, as well as participate in the desperately needed upgrading
              of the collection, (2) purchase such moving supplies as cardboard boxes,
              bubblewrap, and packing tape, (3) purchase jars and closures, shell vials,
              carboys, alcohol, label paper, and magnetic labels to effect collection
              upgrades directly related to specimen care, (4) complete this upgrade program
              with the purchase of several types of shelf padding to protect against specimen
              loss as a result of breakage of glass containers, and (5) purchase a microscope
              slide cabinet and two platform ladders of use in the collection room.  The
              continued utilization and growth of this collection is completely dependent
              upon its timely transfer to the LACM and  the immediate replacement and/or
              upgraded of curatorial supplies.
