Title       : Lexical Development in Human Infants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9421064

Award Number: 9421064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Aslin aslin@cvs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              921064                                          The purpose of this research is
              to reveal the  lexical-recognition competencies of normal human infants during 
              the second six months of postnatal development. The focus of the  research is
              on the perceptual and memory abilities required for  the segmentation and
              extraction of words (or wordlength units)  from fluent maternal speech prior to
              the onset-age of vocal  production. A new familiarization-preference (F-Pref)
              technique  has been developed to assess infants' sensitivities to words.  This
              technique involves a brief familiarization period (30-45  seconds) during which
              infants are presented with target words (or  non-words) embedded in sentences
              and subsequently tested for  recognition of those words in isolation compared
              to non-familiar  words. Postfamiliarization recognition is revealed by longer 
              listening times to familiar over non-familiar words. This  technique will be
              used to explore further the conditions under  which 7 to 8 month old infants
              are able to extract words from  fluent speech when the surrounding acoustic,
              phonetic, and  language-specific contexts are varied, when speaking rate is 
              altered, and when the frequency of pauses is manipulated during  the
              familiarization period. In addition to these primary  questions, we will also
              attempt to extend the F-Pref technique to  infants in the first six months of
              postnatal development (using  simplified procedures), and to older infants in
              an attempt to  reveal the emergence of semantic priming in infancy. Because the
               segmentation, extraction, and memory for words embedded in fluent  speech is a
              necessary precursor to the formation of a lexicon,  these experiments should
              reveal a fundamental capacity of infants  in the early stage of language
              acquisition when comprehension is  thought to be superior to production.
