Title       : Morphological Signal Processing: Slope Transforms, Max-Min Dynamics, and
               Differential Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9421677

Award Number: 9421677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228886             (Estimated)
Investigator: Petros Maragos stacy@eedsp.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Morphological systems are a broad class of nonlinear systems that  can provide
              rigorous and efficient solutions to many applications  of image and signal
              processing that can benefit from and most often  require the use of nonlinear
              analysis. Examples include multiscale  filtering, feature extraction, image
              segmentation, and other  geometry-based problems in computer vision. This
              research is  investigating a range of theoretical and applied problems 
              including: (1) the modeling of multiscale processing in image  analysis, image
              distance transforms, and signal envelope detection  using morphological
              systems; (2) the development of analytic tools  for these nonlinear systems
              both in the time/space domain and in a  new transform domain - the slope
              domain; and, (3) the exploration  of exciting connections of the above to
              physics. The unifying theme  is a collection of max-min differential/difference
              equations  modeling the scale or time/space dynamics of morphological systems, 
              and some novel nonlinear signal transforms, called slope  transforms.   
              Several nonlinear PDEs that model the evolution of multiscale  morphological
              filters are being studied. These PDEs are related to  the well-known eikonal
              equation of optics. Solutions based on  max-min difference equations that can
              compute distance transforms  are being examined. The analysis of the multiscale
              nonlinear PDEs  and the solution of the eikonal equation through max-min
              equations  constitutes a new area in nonlinear image analysis that we call 
              differential morphology; many applications are envisioned.   Specific research
              problems include the development of fast discrete  slope transforms; the study
              of recursive morphological systems  resulting from discretizing the nonlinear
              differential equations;  the design of discrete slope-selective filters for
              signal envelope  detection and image distance transforms; the design of analog
              slope  filters for D/A conversion; multiscale image analysis using 
              morphological PDEs; and image segmentation and gr idless image  halftoning by
              solving the eikonal PDE using morphological systems.
