Title       : Social Origins of Personal Memory Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9421511

Award Number: 9421511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122823             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine Nelson knelson@casbs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Graduate School
	      365 Fifth Avenue
	      New York, NY  100164309    212/790-4395

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is little systematic information available regarding the relation of young
              children's facility with language and their ability to organize and remember
              events that they personally experience.  Previous research has indicated that
              children learn from parents how to talk about remembered events, and that the
              more `story-like` such talk is, the better remembered events are.  This project
              uses an entertaining game with preschool children to determine how language
              used to talk about the event before, during, or after the experience affects
              the child's memory for the experience, both in its general organization and
              specific aspects, such as the particular objects and actions that were
              involved.    The studies will address general theoretical issues of memory
              processing and specific issues of the development of memory in early childhood,
              the beginnings of autobiographical memory (or a self-history), and the role
              language plays in reinstating memory for an event.  In one set of studies,
              preschool children (3-5 years) are engaged in an interesting episode of a
              treasure hunt game.  Different groups of these children have either a verbal or
              nonverbal reinstatement session two weeks later, and memory for the original
              event is tested for all groups, including controls who had no reinstatement
              session, in a recall session 8 weeks later. Other studies will use a similar
              paradigm to test effects of narratives during the episode (present talk) and
              narratives prior to the episode (future talk).  These studies are designed to
              determine the relation between children's language competence, particularly
              their competence in extended discourse and narrative production, to the
              organization of and their memory for personally experienced events.  The
              outcome of this investigation will have important implications for such issues
              as the dependability of children's memory, for educational programs, and for
              resolving basic questions in memory development such as the beginnings of
              autobiographical memory and self history.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
