Title       : A Method for Rapid Determination of Monomer Sequences in Linear Polymeric
               Molecules such as Nucleic Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1994  
File        : a9421831

Award Number: 9421831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary Cecchini                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Branton dbranton@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9421831  Branton  We propose a new method for rapidly sequencing polymers such
              as DNA  or RNA.  The method involves measurements of ionic current  modulation
              as the nucleotides of a linear nucleic acid molecule  pass through a channel in
              an artificial membrane.  Our immediate  goal is to prove that we can draw
              single stranded DNA or RNA  through a continuously open channel in a lipid
              bilayer and to  demonstrate that, during polymer passage through the channel,
              ionic  currents are reduced in a manner that reflects the properties of  the
              polymer (length, nucleotide composition, etc.).  Our long term  goals are to
              demonstrate the feasibility of using a patch-clamp-  like approach for direct
              electro-sensing of monomer sequences in a  linear polymer of DNA; and develop
              this as a routine procedure for  sequencing.  Because the approach proposed
              eliminates several of  the currently required preparatory chemical steps in DNA
              sequencing  and because it depends on inherently rapid, molecular events, 
              successful sequencing with this method will be an extraordinarily  important
              advance that should reduce the time and cost of nucleic  acid sequencing by
              several orders of magnitude.  %%%  A new method for the rapid sequencing of
              nucleic acid polymers  like DNA and RNA will be developed.  The method to be
              used involves  measurements of changes in ionic currents as the individual 
              building blocks of a nucleic acid pass through a channel in an  artificial
              lipid membrane.  The immediate goal of this research  project is to show that
              single stranded DNA or RNA can be drawn  through a continuously  open channel
              in the membrane (lipid  bilayer) and to demonstrate that during passage of the
              polymer  changes in ionic currents are reduced in a manner that reflects the 
              properties of the nucleic acid (i.e., length, composition of the  individual
              nucleotides which make up the nucleic acid).  The long  term goals are to
              demonstrate the feasibility of using this patch-  clamp-like approach for
              direct electro-sensing of ind ividual  nucleotides (the building blocks of
              nucleic acids) in the linear  sequence of DNA; and to develop this as a routine
              procedure for DNA  sequencing.  Because the proposed approach eliminates
              several of  the currently required preparatory chemical steps in DNA sequencing
               and because it depends on inherently rapid molecular events,  successful
              sequencing with this method will be an important advance  that should reduce
              the time and cost of nucleic acid sequencing by  several orders of magnitude.
