Title       : Synthesis and Reactivity of Metallaradicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1997   
File        : a9421802

Award Number: 9421802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus H. Theopold theopold@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9421802  Theopold  University of Delaware  Dr. Klaus H. Theopold, Chemistry
              Department, University of Delaware, is supported by the Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division to
              study the reaction chemistry of paramagnetic organometallic compounds. The
              project concentrates on chromium and is directed, in part, toward understanding
              and developing Cr based catalysts. A series of Cr(III) alkyls, higher oxidation
              state oxochromium alkyls, and chromium alkylidenes in which the Cr oxidation
              state is greater than (III) will be prepared. The goals of this phase of the
              investigation will be to obtain cationic, catalytically active species, ones
              which indicate the existence of agostic ligand-chromium interactions, and
              species which will serve as oxidants in organic reactions. In order to explore
              the interactions between paramagnetic Cr ions, a series of chromium-hydride
              clusters which may behave as molecular magnets will be sought. Uniting the
              oxo-complex and cluster themes, a series of complexes with an oxo-cubane or
              related core will be prepared. These will model several important commercial
              olefin polymerization catalysts.    Electrons behave like little magnets. In
              many metal compounds there are an even numbers of electrons which align so that
              the magnetism of one is canceled by another. However, there are a few compounds
              which have an odd number of electrons and, consequently, these compounds behave
              as small magnets. In addition, an odd number of electrons often leads to
              increased chemical reactivity. The object of this project is to prepare a
              number of different types of these  "paramagnetic" complexes. These species
              will then be evaluated as new reagents, as catalysts for important industrial
              processes, and as magnetic materials.
