Title       : Evaluation of Binding Interactions of Ions Generated by Electrospray Ionization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1997   
File        : a9421447

Award Number: 9421447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer S. Brodbelt jbrodbelt@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project is in the area of analytical and surface chemistry  and in the
              subfield of mass spectrometry.  During the tenure of  this three-year
              continuing grant, Professor Brodbelt and her  students at the University of
              Texas at Austin will carry out a  systematic comparative examination of ion
              complexes formed by  collisionally induced dissociation (CID) and cationization
              by  chemical ionization (CI) with their analogues formed directly by 
              electrospray ionization (ESI).  These studies are designed to  identify the
              chemical processes that impact ion formation and to  provide insights into the
              molecular interactions that give rise  to the significant differences in ion
              fragmentation patterns  observed between ESI and softer ionization processes
              such as CID  and CI.  Additionally, the relative cation-substrate binding 
              strengths will be correlated with substrate structural  characteristics,
              including the presence of specific functional  groups and steric features.  In
              addition to providing new  fundamental insights into ion formation processes,
              this research  is expected to lead to improvements in the analytical utility of
               ESI-based mass spectrometry.    Electrospray ionization is the most rapidly
              growing ionization  technique in analytical mass spectrometry.  It is a robust 
              ionization technique and the requisite equipment is simple and  relatively
              inexpensive.  However, ion fragmentation patterns  obtained with ESI, a "harsh"
              ionization method, differ  significantly from those observed with "softer"
              ionization  methods such as CID and CI.  This research is aimed at 
              understanding the chemical processes attendant to the ion  formation event and
              thereby extend the scope and sensitivity of  ESI-based mass spectrometry as an
              analytical tool.
