Title       : MRPG: Racial Identity: Issues of Saliency, Self-Esteem and Academic Performance
               in African American College Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9421433

Award Number: 9421433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Sellers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9421433  Several hypotheses regarding the psychosocial consequences of racial
              identity are derived from a multi-dimensional model of racial identity.  The
              proposed research focuses on generating stimulus materials and pilot data that
              will permit the PI to test these hypotheses in two studies to be proposed in a
              subsequent grant application.   The goal of the first pilot project is to
              refine stimulus materials (video-tapes of violent behavior and group
              composition) and dependent measures of racial and gender identity salience for
              use in a future study of contextual influences on racial and gender salience. 
              A sample of African American female college students will watch a video-tape of
              either a black male (race salient), white female (gender salient), or white
              male (neutral) being beaten by a white male and complete the dependent measures
              of racial and gender identity salience.  Feedback from the subjects will be
              used to assess the effectiveness of the stimuli in making race or gender
              salient as well as to standardize the level of violence experienced.  Also,
              estimates of reliability and inter-measure consistency will be produced.  In a
              second pilot project, survey instruments designed to measure racial identity,
              self-esteem, and educational efficacy will be given to approximately 450
              African American college students from two universities.  The reliability and
              underlying structure of the measures will be assessed using exploratory and
              confirmatory factor analytic techniques. These measures will be used in two
              future studies investigating  (1) the relationship between racial identity and
              self-esteem and (2 ) role of racial identity in academic beliefs and
              performance of African American college students.     This research consists of
              two pilot studies which are designed to improve the methodology of two future
              studies which will investigate the racial identity of African American college
              students.   This research is important in it's potential for developing a
              sophisticated, multi-dimensional mod el of racial identity which will
              contribute to our understanding of:  a) the situational factors that make
              racial identity salient; b) the relationship between racial regard and
              self-esteem; and c) associations between racial identity and academic
              performance.
