Title       : American Life: Biologists and the Shaping of a Nation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1995     
File        : a9421880

Award Number: 9421880
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Pauly   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A.   PROJECT SUMMARY    American Life: Biologists and the Shaping of a Nation   
              Professor Pauly is  examining the interrelations between the history of
              American biology and the biohistory of North American with the aim of
              clarifying the degree to which the goals of American biologists have been
              linked to national goals.   Professor Pauly  hopes to delineate the biotic
              foundations of the development of the life sciences in the U.S. to uncover how
              biologists' activities affected the continent's organisms (plant, animal, and
              human), and to show  how these interactions influenced biologists' identities,
              work experiences, and social relations.   The project  will explicate how
              biology and biologists were pivotal in interpreting and advancing what was
              singular about America.    More specifically, Professor Pauly argues that the
              enduring aim of American biologists was to coadapt diverse populations within a
              unique and seemingly malleable geographic setting.   He describes three
              movements:  1)  A small group of scientists built a bureaucratized network that
              would, in conjunction with the federal government, identify and manage the
              plant, animal, and human populations of much of North America.  2)  Then,
              laboratory biologists turned to new subjects of inquiry that seemed
              intellectually deeper and personally more fulfilling; this academic work soon
              led to significant reflections regarding the links between the organization of
              nature and the organization of democracy.  3)  And finally, biologists sought
              new paths through which they could effectively influence American populations. 
              They found different challenges in agriculture, medicine, eugenics, and
              education.    Professor Pauly's research  highlights the variety of ways in
              which biology was a contested and unclear science.  Its definition and
              boundaries were contested.  Biologists seemingly conflated thinking about their
              objects of study and themselves.  The involvement of biologists with such
              contentious ideas and practices as evolution, sex, and viv isection led to
              difficult relations with members of the public.  The relations between
              universal knowledge claims and national facts and interests were obscure. 
              Professor Pauly argues that these difficulties were not liabilities; rather
              they formed crucial resources for scientific and political creativity.
