Title       : Theory of Electrons in Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1996  
File        : a9421966

Award Number: 9421966
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lu J. Sham lsham@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9421966  Sham  This project is a theoretical study of the time evolution of  the
              nonlinear optical processes in solid state systems.  The  theory requires
              taking into account simultaneously the  interaction of electrons with intense
              electromagnetic  fields, the interaction among the electrons, and the 
              interaction of the electron with its host environment.  Special attention is
              paid to the interplay between the  polarization of light and the spin dynamics
              of the  electrons.  The following systems will be studied:  III-V  nonmagnetic
              semiconductor heterostructures (promising  systems for optoelectronic devices),
              II-VI magnetic  semiconductor heterostructures (important for visible  optical
              and magneto-optical devices), and light element  compounds (exhibit properties
              of strongly correlated  electrons).  The approach adopted is field theoretic,
              with a  diagrammatic representation.  The results are expected to be  a unified
              explanation for a wide range of observed nonlinear  optical phenomena in each
              class of these solid state  systems, predictions of new behavior, and a deeper 
              understanding of strong electron correlation through optical  processes which
              can test electron theories.  %%%   This work involves modeling the interaction
              of light with  several solid systems, including layered (composite) 
              semiconducting systems and light element compounds.  This  interaction provides
              a means of measuring the electronic  properties in these systems and forms a
              basis for making  ultrafast optical devices.  The light interacts with  the 
              electronic properties in certain classes to be studied and  with magnetic
              properties in others.  The results are  expected to be a unified explanation
              for a wide range of  observed nonlinear optical phenomena in three classes of 
              solid state systems, predictions of new behavior, and a  deeper understanding
              of the electron-electron interactions,  which are a key to the theory behind
              many materials.  ***
