Title       : Analyses of the La Chimba Faunas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9421751

Award Number: 9421751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40058              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Stahl PSTAHL@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Athens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Stahl    With National Science Foundation support Dr Peter Stahl will  analyze a
              large collection of archaeological fauna from the site  of La Chimba which is
              located in the Pichincha Province of  Ecuador. The site, which was excavated in
              the 1970s and 1980s is  important because its stratified deposits are extremely
              rich in  well preserved faunal remains as well as other materials such as 
              ceramics and stone tools. Based on radiocarbon dates, it spans an  almost 1,000
              year interval and includes the period when domestic  animals first appeared in
              the region. Dr. Stahl will conduct an  extensive faunal analysis and focus on
              both the guinea pig and  the camelids (which include a number of species). He
              will  categorize all identifiable pieces by species, body part and  cultural
              treatment. We will also xray a number of specimens to  determine bone density
              which determines the probability that a  type of bone will be preserved. On
              this basis he hopes to gain  insight into the introduction of these important
              domesticates  into their northerly end of their prehistoric range and to 
              determine the effect they had on local economy and other aspects  of culture.  
               The South American Andean region saw the rise of one of the great  prehistoric
              civilizations of the world. Anthropologists wish to  understand the processes
              which underlay the rise of civilization  and, because of the wealth of
              archaeological information  available, have focussed on this region. They know
              that the  domestication of plants and animals is an important factor in  this
              process. It is unlikely that either camelids or guinea pig  were domesticated
              this far North but were rather they were  probably introduced in already
              domesticated form. Through his  study of the La Chimba faunal remains Dr. Stahl
              will be able to  assess in a direct manner the social effect of these 
              introductions.    This research is important for several reasons. It will
              provide  data of interest to many archaeologists and will also increase  our
              understanding of ho w complex societies develop. Finally the  density
              measurements will be widely used by faunal analysts in a  number of contexts.
