Title       : Effect of Sodium Pump Isoforms on Cardiac Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  1996   
File        : a9421171

Award Number: 9421171
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raphael Zahler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9421171  Zahler    The sodium pump (Na,K-ATPase) is a protein located in the
              membrane of cells that helps to control the size (volume) of the cells, and
              their salt and water content.  In addition, the ability of nerve and heart
              cells to generate the electrical energy necessary for muscular contraction
              depends on this enzyme.  The sodium pump is especially important in the heart,
              where its activities are crucial for regulating the strength of contraction. 
              The sodium pump is also the target of action of digitalis, a commonly used
              cardiac medication.  Because of the pivotal role of this enzyme system, many
              scientists have studied its function.  New techniques, however, have revealed
              that the sodium pump is much more complex than was believed a few years ago. 
              These techniques have been used to show that there are at least three different
              forms of the sodium pump, produced at different times in different parts of the
              heart.  It has been shown that the cardiac conduction system, which controls
              the rhythm of the heartbeat, concentrates a particular type of sodium pump. 
              Also, the number of these pumps appear to vary during pathologic changes such
              as cardiac enlargement (seen in hypertension) or heart failure.  The pumps and
              their response to stress are important because they help regulate the strength
              of cardiac contraction, and transmission of electrical signals within the
              heart.  This project will analyze the roles of the different forms of the
              sodium pump by using genetic engineering to create mice that have an abnormal
              distribution of pump types in their hearts, and evaluating the effect of these
              changes on the sodium pumping characteristics of cells from these hearts. 
              Different types of cultured human cells will also be genetically engineered in
              a similar manner.  Not only does the heart produce several different forms of
              the sodium pump, but the pump types found in hearts from newborn animals are
              different from the types of pumps in hearts from older animals.  The second
              goal of the project is  to better understand the genetic mechanism that
              controls the switching of pump types in the heart.  This work may lead to a
              better understanding of the effects and toxicity of digitalis-like drugs on the
              heart.  ***
