Title       : NSF/ONR: Advanced Processing, Characterization and Properties of Epitaxial
               Multilayer Superconductor Heterostructures and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1997       
File        : a9421718

Award Number: 9421718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagdish Narayan j_narayan@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jagannadham Kasichainula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1055,9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9421718  Narayan       Understanding of the structure and properties of
              interfaces between high-temperature superconductors, metals and dielectrics
              holds key to the properties of thin film epitaxial structures.  The structure
              and chemical composition of interfaces determines the nature of epitaxial
              growth and defects in thin films which directly affect transport properties and
              device characteristics. The objective of this proposal is:  In-situ processing
              of multilayer heterostructures needed for advanced superconductor devices.  The
              primary focus will be on yittria, barium oxide, and copper oxide
              superconducting materials systems.   Thin film multilayer heterostructures will
              be processed by pulsed laser deposition using a multitarget holder where up to
              five different films can be grown in a single chamber.  By replacing one of the
              targets with a laser mirror it is possible to channel the laser energy on the
              substrate and achieve in-situ atomic level cleaning.  Modeling of stresses and
              strains will be carried out to understand the nature of epitaxial growth and
              defect content in thin films.  These results will be correlated with atomic
              structure and chemical composition of interfaces and nature of defects in thin
              films.  Epitaxial quality and defect content of thin films will be optimized to
              achieve highest theoretical superconducting temperature Tc (about 94 Kelvin)
              and critical current density (Jc greater than 5.0 million amps. per square cm
              at 77 Kelvin) for high performance devices.  The optimized thin films will be
              used to fabricate a few high-performance bolometers (high responsivity or high
              speed).       Superconducting materials offer an attractive energy conserving
              way of transmitting electricity with very low losses.  However, in order to
              capitalize on this superconducting property, the material has to be super
              cooled.  Further, for practical applications these superconductors have to be
              built into devices.  In order to maximize the application, one needs to operate
              these devices with m inimum degree of cooling.  By understanding the process of
              multilayer superconducting devices, it is anticipated that a broader
              application of this technology may become possible into new electronic devices.
               ***
