Title       : Dissertation Research: The Assessment of Female Condition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9422906

Award Number: 9422906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5190               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Wrangham wrangham@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Pagel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                A new hypothesis has been proposed for the function of conspicuous sexual
              traits in female primates.  The conventional view has been that certain female
              traits that occur in sexual contexts, such as sexual skin swellings, are
              designed to attract the attention of or incite competition between males in
              multi-male species.   However, this view does not explain why females in these
              species would need to advertise their reproductive state so conspicuously or
              why conspicuous traits would incite more competition among males than would
              otherwise occur.  In contrast, Pagel argues that conspicuous sexual  males
              because they advertise the female's quality or condition.  The signals evolve
              in response to male mate choice and competition among females to attract males
              (the mirror image of what has been normally accepted).  While the female
              competition hypothesis is the most developed hypothesis to date for the
              function of conspicuous sexual advertisement in female primates, no tests have
              been made of its predictions.  This dissertation project will examine variation
              in female sexual traits and their influence on female attractiveness to males
              in wild olive baboons at Gombe national Park in Tanzania.  No study to date has
              been designed to test the hypothesis that male sexual interest is influenced by
              variation in any of these female traits in the wild, although it has been
              apparent that males mate selectively.  This study will make a substantial first
              step towards understanding the evolutionary and social significance of female
              sexual signals and sexual attractiveness, a topic clearly of vital importance
              for understanding human evolution.  It will also result in the training of
              young experts in the area of social behavior.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
