Title       : The Role of Housing Foreclosure on Urban Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1997       
File        : a9422580

Award Number: 9422580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94282              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mickey Lauria   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/286-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422580  LAURIA     Individual home ownership has generally been held as a
              positive goal for society and the macroeconomy, as evidenced by the range of
              public policies encouraging home ownership in the US.  Home ownership is not
              only an additive process, as some households lose possession of their homes. 
              The most dramatic end to home ownership is the foreclosure of property. 
              Current academic and policy discussions of residential foreclosure have the
              unfortunate context of under-conceptualization of the issue and a lack of
              empirical information about the correlates of foreclosure.  We have little
              theoretical or empirical knowledge concerning the effect of housing foreclosure
              on home ownership rates, neighborhood conditions and stability, and the spatial
              structure of the city.     The proposed research uses a range of available
              theoretical and empirical background to develop a set of hypotheses about:  the
              economic and neighborhood (social and institutional) determinants of
              foreclosure rates;  the institutional and economic determinants of the
              socio-economic results of homeowner foreclosure;  and the effects of
              foreclosure on the physical form of the city (distribution of households by
              age, size, and income;  residential versus non-residential land uses).  The
              empirical study will be conducted on foreclosure activity and aftermath in New
              Orleans during and since the late 1980s.  Data on foreclosures will come from
              court records.  Data on socio-economic characteristics of foreclosees and
              purchasers will be collected via household survey.  Data on neighborhood
              characteristics will come from the US Census.     The ultimate purpose of the
              research is to enable municipal governments to predict the effects of changed
              rates of foreclosure (depending in part on the macroeconomic and institutional
              reasons for changes in those rates), and to enable governments at all levels to
              reduce the rates and the negative effects of homeowner foreclosure.
