Title       : Collaborative Research on Measurement with Theory: A Bayesian Approach to
               Dynamic Macroedconomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9422873

Award Number: 9422873
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238748             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Whiteman whiteman@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beth F. Ingram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9422873  Charles Whiteman and Beth Ingram    In conducting empirical
              research, guidance from theory is extremely valuable.  Yet in macroeconomics,
              as theoretical models have become increasingly complex and stylized, such
              guidance has become difficult to incorporate in a formal statistical sense. 
              This project develops and then implements a coherent statistical framework for
              combining theoretical and empirical information.  The framework is Bayesian and
              enables the formal yet probabilistic incorporation of theoretical restrictions
              (e.g., cross-equation restrictions) in working with reduced-form models.  A
              distinctive feature of the approach proposed here is that theoretical models
              are viewed as sources of prior information which can then be formally combined
              with data information via Bayes' Rule.  This is particularly useful in working
              with reduced-form models such as vector autoregressions (VARs), where
              researchers frequently have strong views about the parameterization of the
              theoretical model but only weak views about the parameterization of the VAR. 
              The new framework also enables economists to incorporate prior information
              about parameters values in the estimation of structural models.  This stands in
              marked contrast with the current practice of incorporating such information
              only informally and implicitly.  The result of this practice is inference
              without a firm statistical basis.    The methodology is then used in a variety
              of empirical projects: an analysis of the source of shocks which have driven
              the U.S. post-war business cycle; an analysis of competing sources of economic
              growth; construction and estimation of a fully specified nominal business cycle
              model (which includes monetary and fiscal policy variables) for the purpose of
              conducting policy analysis; an analysis of the empirical viability of simple
              heterogeneous agent models with incomplete markets; and an analysis of the
              usefulness of theoretical asset pricing models in the modeling of financial
              time series.
