Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Parallel Programming on Clusters of
               Multiprocessor Workstations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1995     
File        : a9422071

Award Number: 9422071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tse-yun Feng                            
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59352              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Crowl crowl@cs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vikram A. Saletore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9422071  Crowl     This award is to purchase ATM networked multiprocessor
              workstation equipment which will be dedicated to support research in computer
              and information science and engineering.  The equipment will be used for
              several research projects, including in particular: the abstraction techniques
              for parallel programming; the task-parallel programming environment; and the
              data-parallel programming environment.     In the first project, the proposed
              equipment will enable the researchers to design, implement and evaluate
              abstractions that can simultaneously exploit fast shared-memory communication
              and tolerate slow message-based communication.  Furthermore, the proposed
              equipment will also enable researchers to do controlled experiments to
              determine application tolerance to communication latencies.     In the second
              project, the proposed equipment will enable researchers to investigate and
              develop a parallel programming environment for shared-memory multiprocessors
              clustered over a high speed ATM network.  They will also develop schemes for
              partitioning and mapping of tasks and data for scheduling as well as load
              balancing.  In addition, they will also be able to study the performance of
              scientific application programs.     In the third project, the researchers will
              be able to synthesize a new C* compiler that generates code for a high-speed
              network of multiprocessor workstations.  They will evaluate language extensions
              and, in particular, will incorporate explicit data decomposition directives,
              more general control flow , and parallel I/O into the language.
