Title       : Models of Socio-Economic Change: Social Learning and Social Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9422942

Award Number: 9422942
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245037             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abhijit V. Banerjee banerjee@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1041,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9422942  Abhijit Banerjee    During the last fifty years, there have been
              many empirical studies about the specific process by which ideas, innovations,
              fads or new behaviors spread through a society.  By contrast, the theoretical
              literature on social diffusion is much smaller and more recent and follows two
              approaches: the IO approach that emphasizes network externalities, and the
              approach that emphasizes social learning: that is, the phenomenon of economic
              agents learning from each other's actions.  The research to date has shown that
              change can be both inefficient and abrupt and that the outcome can be dependent
              on the choices made by a small number of poorly informed early decision-makers.
               The latter property is sometimes called "herding" behavior.  This has made
              social learning models very attractive for explaining the volatility of
              collective behavior.  Given this interest, it is important to understand the
              underpinnings of the herding results.  The current research does this by
              examining a model of social learning which is a natural alternative to the herd
              behavior model.  The key assumption dropped in the new research is that
              everyone knows all the choices made in the past.  If, instead, every agent gets
              to sample only a small number of previous decisions, then cascading to an
              inefficient outcome may no longer occur.  The research goes on to examine the
              effect of forgetting and reporting and perception biases on the social
              diffusion process.  This helps to get a clearer idea of the environments in
              which herding occurs and those in which it does not.    The second project 
              looks at the relationship between a traditional rural sector and an industrial
              urban sector.  The previous literature assumed that the rural peasants were not
              economically rational and that urban wages were not flexible downward.  Because
              of this, the literature fell into disrepute.  The purpose of the research here
              is to revive the distinction between urban and rural sectors without assuming
              irrationality of persi stent disequilibrium.  This is accomplished by finding a
              compensating differential that accounts for the difference in wages in the two
              sectors: that differential is a lower cost of borrowing in the rural sector due
              to better monitoring.  The model is capable of answering many questions about
              the pattern or income distribution and the evolution of the rural-urban wage
              differential.
