Title       : Information Integration for Simulation-Based Design and Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9422722

Award Number: 9422722
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $706770             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyung K. Choi kkchoi@ccad.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Haug  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9139,9148,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9422722 Choi  This award is made in support of the NSF initiative
              ENG-CISE-IITA94,  National Challenges.  It  is a joint initiative between the
              Engineering Directorate and the Computer Information and Engineering
              Directorate.  This is a joint award to the University of Iowa (ECS-9422722) and
              Rensselear Polytechnic Institute (ECS-9422713) in the National Challenge area
              of Advanced Manufacturing Technology.  It provides funding for an investigation
              into the requirements placed on product models of assemblies to support
              simulation based concurrent design of mechanical systems. It provides funding
              for an investigation into methods for coordinating design changes that result
              from simulations over a network, and funding for evaluating the ability of the
              product models of the ISO STEP standard (Standard for the Exchange of Product
              model data)  to support simulation-based concurrent design tools and a
              networked integration infrastructure.  An integrated simulation-based
              concurrent engineering environment will be constructed that will permit all
              members of a product development team to simulate the performance and
              effectiveness of product and process designs at a level of fidelity comparable
              to that which can be achieved using physical prototypes.  The simulation-based
              design environment produced will support the development of large scale
              mechanical system applications, particularly tracked and wheeled vehicle
              systems. The technology produced will reduce the time and cost of testing and
              introduce high quality products into the market in a shorter time than that
              required by conventional development methods.  Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
              will be responsible for creating the product models, exchange of product models
              between engineering systems using STEP , and development of tools to support
              work flow control and engineering change processing.  The University of Iowa
              will verify these product models by integrating their CAD and design simulation
              tools with the product databases, performing simulations  from multiple design
              perspectives, generating engineering design changes, and working with
              Rensselaer to develop tool to support work flow and engineering change
              processing.  Caterpillar Inc. of Peoris, and PDES, Inc., a joint
              industry/government consortium including Boeing, Ford, General Electric,
              General Motors, Hughes, IBM, and Lockheed will be involved with the review of
              the progress.
