Title       : U.S.-German Cooperative Research on the Applications of Organolanthanides in
               Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1999      
File        : a9422011

Award Number: 9422011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Molander gary.molander@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 5936,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9422011  Molander  This award supports the establishment of a collaboration
              between Professor Gary Molander of the University of Colorado, Boulder, and
              Professor Herbert Schumann of the Institute for Inorganic and Analytical
              Chemistry at the Technical University of Berlin.  These investigators will join
              their diverse expertise in organic and inorganic chemistry in a joint effort
              focused on the design and synthesis of organolanthanides and certain other
              organometallic compounds, and the exploration of their use as catalysts in
              selective organic synthesis.  The team led by Professor Schumann is one of the
              strongest in the world in the synthesis and structural determination of
              organolanthanides.  It will play the lead role in designing new organometallic
              complexes for study in the catalytic reactions and it will provide experimental
              procedures to prepare the catalysts. It also provides important skills in the
              handling of air-sensitive materials.  The research group headed by Dr. Molander
              brings expertise in synthetic organic chemistry.  The U.S. group will provide
              the insights into important organic reactions which might benefit from the
              organometallic compounds produced by the German group, in effect, providing
              specifications for the catalysts to be explored. They will synthesize the
              organic substrates needed for the catalytic reactions of interest and carry out
              the organic reactions and study them in detail.  Reciprocal visits of
              postdoctoral fellows and advanced graduate students for several months per
              year, funded by NSF and its German counterpart, the DFG, will enable the two
              groups to share and transfer their expertise in various aspects of
              organometallic chemistry.    Because of their unusual properties,
              organolanthanides offer interesting possibilities as promoters and catalysts
              for organic reactions.  Until now, there has been very little systematic work
              by synthetic chemists to study applications if the whole range of
              organolanthanides in organic synthesis.  Now that inorganic chemists su ch as
              Dr. Schumann have succeeded in producing a range of lanthanide catalysts, it
              becomes possible for an expert in organic synthesis such as Dr. Molander to
              suggest characteristics for new "designer" catalysts that will greatly improve
              specific synthetic processes.  Thus this collaboration will provide an outlet
              for the chemistry developed in the inorganic laboratory, with the promise of
              practical uses for the many organometallic complexes designed and synthesized
              there.  ***
