Title       : New Intercalation Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9422667

Award Number: 9422667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311672             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Stanley Whittingham STANWHIT@BINGHAMTON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9422667  Whittingham    Previous research by this investigator has established
              that  new oxide intercalation hosts can be readily synthesized  using
              hydrothermal techniques, and that changing the acidity  or the cations present
              in the reaction medium dramatically  determines the crystalline structure
              formed. By appropriate  choice of reaction medium it is proposed to form new 
              structures containing large tunnels or channels, similar to  those found in
              aluminosilicate zeolites, that will offer  unique properties for the materials
              chemistry. The  feasibility of this approach has been demonstrated for 
              tungsten and molybdenum oxides. Major emphasis in this  project will be placed
              on vanadium and manganese oxides, and  on a new titanium phosphate.  Because
              enhanced diffusion in  such materials are expected, the diffusion/ionic
              mobility  will be determined. The host materials also will be  characterized
              for their ability to be intercalated by a  variety of guest ions and molecules,
              and their chemical and  physical properties will be determined using x-ray, 
              electrochemical, and electrical measurements and the  standard analytical
              techniques.  %%%  Zeolitic microporous materials have frameworks containing 
              mostly the redox inactive elements aluminum and silicon.  From a chemical point
              of view it would be highly desirable  to have a framework containing, or built
              from, redox active  species such as transition metals. In addition, for many 
              electrochemical applications it would be preferable to work  with oxides rather
              than sulfides because of their greater  ease of handling, lower cost and for
              energy storage their  greater electrochemical potential. The goal of this
              project  is to synthesize transition metal oxide materials with open 
              structures, that might have some of the properties and  applications of the
              aluminosilicate zeolitic materials, have  novel applications and be potentially
              electrochemically  active.
