Title       : Financial Conditions and the Cyclical Behavior of Business Firms: An Empirical
               Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9422761

Award Number: 9422761
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Gertler mark.gertler@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1041,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422761    A longstanding issue in business cycle analysis is understanding  how
              small shocks may produce large fluctuations in output.   Recent theoretical
              research has shown how financial propagation  mechanisms could amplify swings
              in spending and production caused  by technology shocks or shifts in monetary. 
              The theory begins  with the idea, that for a significant class of borrowers 
              (households, small and medium sized firms, etc.), information and  enforcement
              problems may drive the cost of uncollateralized funds  above the price of
              internal funds.  Under these circumstances,  borrowers' available supplies of
              collateral (broadly defined) and  internal funds influence the terms of credit
              they face.  In this  way, borrowers' financial positions ultimately influence
              their  spending and production decisions.  The theory predicts that 
              differences in cyclical behavior should emerge across classes of  borrowers,
              depending on their respective access to credit,  everything else equal.  Credit
              market frictions are also more  likely to impinge on behavior around
              recessionary periods, when  borrowers have relatively weak balance sheets.  To
              identify  financial propagation effects, therefore, it is important to look  at
              data across different phases of the business cycle, as well as  across
              different classes of borrowers.  This project will  empirically assess
              financial propagation mechanisms using a newly  available Census Bureau panel
              data for firms that contain both a  rich cross-sectional dimension and a long
              time series dimension  at the business cycle frequency to empirically assess
              financial  propagation mechanisms.  Unlike previously used firm level data 
              sets, this data covers non-publicly as well as publicly traded  firms for both
              manufacturing and other sectors, and has a long  time series available at the
              quarterly frequency.      More specifically, this project contributes to our
              understanding  of financial propagation mechanisms in four ways:  The first is
              a  comprehensive descriptive ana lysis of the data for the  manufacturing
              sector.  The second involves structural estimation  of inventory and investment
              demand equations to identify the  influence of liquidity constraints in this
              sector.  The third  links the firm level data to Census Bureau plant level data
              to  study the effects of financial factors on labor demand in  manufacturing. 
              The final project extends these efforts to the  retail and wholesale trade
              sectors.
