Title       : Modeling Nature: The Scientific Data Revolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1995     
File        : a9422233

Award Number: 9422233
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Suppe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Technological developments enable science to gather or produce massively complex
              data sets which cannot be analyzed or understood via traditional methods. 
              Instead, computer-intensive modeling techniques are used to gain control of the
              data by producing models of data.  Data are reduced, refined, and manipulated
              by further modeling.  The end-products of scientific observation and experiment
              increasingly are in the form of models not theories.  Models are essential to
              experimental design, underlying the design and control of detectors and
              experimental conditions.  Models developed in one area are used as probes to
              investigate other phenomena.  simulation models provide an alternative source
              of experimental data.      Philosophy of science has paid relatively little
              attention to such a contemporary modeling practices.  Dr. Suppe's first
              objective in this research is to provide a detailed understanding of
              contemporary scientific modeling practices.  Second, he is exploring the
              implications of contemporary modeling practices for understanding scientific
              knowledge.  Third he is providing a formal structural analysis of scientific
              modeling in terms of mapping and embedding relations between set-theoretic
              structures, extend that analysis to a general analysis that encompasses
              scientific models, scientific theories, and metamathematical models, and detail
              relations between scientific models and theories.  Fourth, he is going to 
              provide the field of Science and Technology Studies with suitable descriptions
              and illustrations of contemporary modeling techniques--which scientists
              typically do not publish.
