Title       : TQO TRANSFORMATION TO QUALITY ORGANIZATIONS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1996  
File        : a9422368

Award Number: 9422368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan R. Sanderson                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Beyerlein beyerlei@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann T. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mitty C. Plummer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan T. Beyerlein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen M. Swigger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on obtaining a deeper understanding of the role of
              teams and team leadership in the improvement of quality within organizations. 
              The objectives of the research are to provide a systematic description of team
              leadership and its role in team development and effectiveness, and to develop
              an interdisciplinary methodology that will assist in transformations to quality
              organizations.  The research design involves the disciplines of anthropology,
              computer education and cognitive systems,computer science, engineering
              technology, management, and psychology.  The interdisciplinary research group
              willinvestigate teams and team leadership at several organizational levels
              (i.e., the organization as a whole,the team itself, and the individual within
              the team), and will examine factors that influence teams, including the culture
              of the organization and the belief and behavior patterns that relate to this
              culture.  The outcomes of the research are expected to include an
              interdisciplinary model of team leadership, knowledge about team formation and
              maturation processes, knowledge about technical professional work processes,
              tools to assist in transformations to quality organizations, and a basis for
              identifying and educating team leaders.  Companies participating in this study
              include IBM, Texas Instruments, TUElectric, and the Defense Logistics Agency.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
