Title       : Hurricane Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1997   
File        : a9422525

Award Number: 9422525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne H. Schubert waynes@hadley.atmos.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Dr. Schubert will pursue four areas of inquiry regarding  tropical
              cyclones.  First, many aspects of hurricane dynamics are  poorly understood,
              including spiral bands, polygonal eyewalls, and  the oscillatory or looping
              paths hurricanes take.  An attempt will  be made to develop a unified dynamical
              understanding of these  phenomena using simple theoretical models and numerical
              simulation.   A second intriguing problem involves the phenomenon of twin 
              tropical cyclones.  These paired storms occur exclusively in the  west Pacific
              and Indian Oceans and play a role in the dynamics of  El Nino.   These systems
              will be investigated in a series of  modeling studies.  Another interesting
              phenomenon which has been  observed primarily from satellite observations is
              the development  of undulations in the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)
              cloud  patterns and the subsequent formation of one or more tropical  cyclones,
              depending on the degree of curvature.  Dr. Schubert will  study the cyclone
              formation processes within the ITCZ in a series  of modeling studies.  In all
              of the modeling studies, he intends to  investigate the role of moist physics. 
              Finally, the recent  development by the principal investigator of a new
              coordinate  system based on vorticity for use in models opens the possibility 
              of formulating a three dimensional nonlinear balanced theory for  vortices. 
              Dr. Schubert will also pursue this possibility.  All  four topics represent
              important research problems that are critical  to improving understanding of
              the formation and behavior of  tropical cyclones.  ***
