Title       : Managerial Innovations in Retailing and Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1996        
File        : a9422818

Award Number: 9422818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180217             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ram C. Rao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1041,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                   This project develops a theoretical framework for  understanding the scope
              of innovations in retailing with  particular attention to competition and the
              incentives to  innovate and explore new service-oriented business  practices. 
              The research includes empirical analysis that  emphasizes competition between
              established retailers and the  new retail outlets such as warehouse stores. 
              The research  comprises both theoretical and empirical analysis of  competitive
              strategies.  The theory relies on a game  theoretic formulation, with
              endogenous consumer decisions  predicated on information provided by firms. 
              Where  information is lacking, consumers have expectations that are  fulfilled
              in equilibrium, i.e., are rational.  The model  also permits forward buying by
              consumers.  The empirical  work consists of studying both firms' strategies and
               consumer behavior.  The firms' strategies include their  positioning, pricing,
              product assortment, service level and  advertising.  Consumer behavior is with
              respect to their  shopping behavior:  choice of store, choice of product, and 
              inventorying.  Thus, the empirical analysis is tied to the  theoretical work. 
              The data will also match stores and  consumers within the same geographic
              market.    The research should prove useful to both researchers and  managers. 
              Researches should find the game theoretic  foundation for the analysis of
              retailing useful to build on  as they tackle other aspects of retailing, and
              multi-product  firms in general.  The empirical analysis will provide  insights
              into how retail innovations affect entrenched  firms. Such insights are
              critical to understanding market  transitions, managerial effectiveness, and
              productivity.  Managers should find the results useful in formulating their 
              strategies, and obtaining insights which will prove useful  as they enter new
              markets, for example, internationally.
