Title       : Core Support for the International Human Dimensions of Global Environmental
               Change Programme (HDP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9422176

Award Number: 9422176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Wiegandt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grad Inst of Int Studies
	      
	      Geneva, SZ  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              82        Economics                               
              85        Political Sciences                      
              86        Sociology                               
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9422176  WIEGANDT       The complex, wide-ranging nature of global change
              research  requires international collaboration among scientists from many 
              different disciplines.  To facilitate this collaboration, three  major
              international programs have been established.  Two of  these, the International
              Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and  the World Climate Research Programme
              (WCRP), have been in  existence for some time.  A third program, the Human
              Dimensions  of Global Environmental Change Programme (HDP) was established in 
              1990 under the sponsorship of the International Social Science  Council (ISSC).
               This award will use funds gathered from agencies  participating in the
              Subcommittee for Global Change Research of  the U.S. Committee on Environment
              and Natural Resources  (CENR/SGCR) to facilitate development of a more detailed
              science  plan for the HDP through the conduct of meetings of the HDP  Steering
              Committee and working groups that are developing focused  research programs. 
              Most funds will go to pay participant support  costs for meetings of the HDP
              Steering Committee and for meetings  of working groups planning new core
              research projects.  Topics  for which core research projects are being planned
              include the  production and consumption of energy, environmental security and 
              sustainable development, perception and assessment of global  environmental
              change, and industrial growth.  One working group  also is engaged in planning
              for a global omnibus environmental  survey.  In addition to travel
              reimbursement, some funds will be  used for communication and staffing needed
              for successful  operation of these groups.  Scientific and technical reports of
               the work of these groups will be prepared and distributed.  Funds  for this
              award have been provided by the National Aeronautics and  Space Administration
              as part of its contribution to distributed-  cost activities of the U.S. Global
              Change Research Program.       The outcomes of these planning activities will
              be core  international, coll aborate research projects that will provide  input
              into the analysis, modeling, and interpretation of global  change.  HDP core
              research projects also should assist policy  makers in the U.S. and other
              nations in exploring options for  adapting to and mitigating global change.
