Title       : Formaldehyde Chemical Actinometer for the Troposphere: Measurements of
               Photolysis Rate Coefficient, H2 and H02 Branching Ratios, and Comparison with
               other Ultraviolet Ligh
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1996      
File        : a9422307

Award Number: 9422307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian G. Heikes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1309,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422307   Heikes     The photolysis of formaldehyde is an important intermediate
              step in the atmospheric oxidation of hydrocarbons and leads to the direct
              formation of carbon monoxide, hydrogen, and perhydroxyl radicals. The later two
              are produced through two different photolysis channels. The perhydroxyl channel
              is significant to the net photochemical production of odd-hydrogen, ozone,
              hydrogen peroxide, and organic hydroperoxides. Uncertainties in the photolysis
              rate and in the branching between the two channels lead directly to
              uncertainties in the oxidizing power of the atmosphere. These rates are
              currently estimated using modeled actinic fluxes of light, laboratory derived
              formaldehyde absorption cross sections, and laboratory derived quantum yields.
              Atmospheric gases, aerosols, and clouds confound the actinic flux calculation.
              This together with measurement uncertainties in the laboratory data may lead to
              significant errors in the photolysis rates and radical production rates from
              the photolysis of formaldehyde.   In this project, a chemical actinometer will
              be constructed to measure directly the photolysis rate of formaldehyde and the
              product distribution. Ambient formaldehyde concentrations will also be
              measured. These measurements will be used in conjunction with theoretical
              models to test our understanding of formaldehyde photolysis and evaluate its
              strength as a perhydroxyl radical source. Measured photolysis rates and
              branching ratios will be correlated with narrow-band and broad-band  UV
              irradiance measurements. Correlations identified will permit the use of more
              simple irradiance measurements to estimate formaldehyde photolysis properties.
