Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of Water Markets in Helping California
               Meet Its Future Water Needs: A Comparative Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1995   
File        : a9422483

Award Number: 9422483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1690               (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Holdren   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,9179,9189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422483  Holdren  This research examines California's new water transfer
              institutions using the tools of Transfer Cost Economics (TCE).  To cope with
              impending water shortages, California has adopted numerous legal reforms aimed
              at creating a Water Market:  an institutional mechanism to facilitate the
              transfer of water rights from agricultural to urban and environmental uses.  In
              spite of continuing reforms, few long-range inter-regional water transfers have
              occurred.  These few actual transactions will be the focus of examination:  the
              parties, their interests, conflicts, and resolutions during negotiation and
              execution of transfer agreements, and the changing institutional milieu. 
              Practical results will include what urban water districts and environmental
              interests can reasonably expect from the best feasible water market program. 
              Theoretical results will include a discussion of TCE as an alternative or
              complementary paradigm for understanding the relationship between resource
              scarcity and market mechanisms.  This proposal seeks funding for four trips to
              agricultural and urban water districts which have successfully transferred
              water.  Critical details of transactions are found in actual participants files
              and recollections.  Onsite interviews will provide the evidence with which to
              test the predictions of TCE related to water markets.  %%%  The historic
              approach to meeting new water demand in arid California has been a technical
              one:  federal, state, and local agencies augmented natural river flows by
              building dams, reservoirs, aqueducts, and groundwater wells.  For a host of
              economic, environmental, technical, and political reasons, additional surface
              water development is not expected to provide significant new resources for
              future needs.  Market-based reforms which promote efficient use of existing
              resources have been offered as a primary alternative to new construction in
              meeting the projected additional demand for water that will be faced by 2020. 
              Scholars, interest groups, policy make rs, and politicians have hailed water
              markets as a significant and positive future force in California water
              allocation decisions.  But in spite of this fanfare, only three or four
              longterm, interegional water transfers have been concluded in California.  Thus
              there appears to be a discontinuity between expectation/perceived performance
              and actual performance.  Failure of the water markets strategy will have
              serious consequences for future water supply strategies.  This research
              addresses the reasons for this discontinuity and the utility of water markets
              through an examination of the California water market agreements.  It uses the
              insights of Transaction Cost Economics analyze the water markets strategy.  ***
