Title       : Gas-Particle Transport Limitations in Atmospheric Aerosols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9422993

Award Number: 9422993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murray V. Johnston mvj@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony S. Wexler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ATM-9422993  Johnston     In this project, two areas that are relevant to
              gas-particle transport in tropospheric air pollution will be investigated. The
              first hypothesis is that surface coatings of organic compounds limit
              condensation and evaporation of particles.  In particular, respiratory and
              atmospheric neutralization of sulfuric acid particles by ammonia may be
              inhibited by surface coatings of atmospheric organic matter.  To test this
              hypothesis, sulfuric acid particles containing surface active organics will be
              exposed to ammonia vapor.  The accommodation coefficient of ammonia onto
              sulfuric acid will be determined as a function of the composition and thickness
              of the organic coating.   The second hypothesis is that particle morphology,
              namely formation of solid phases as an aqueous particle dries, may inhibit
              evaporation or condensation of volatile components.  In particular, ammonium
              nitrate/ammonium sulfate particles relevant to polluted urban environments will
              be studied.  If an ammonium sulfate surface coating forms upon drying, then
              evaporation of ammonium nitrate will be inhibited.  To test this hypothesis,
              aqueous particles containing ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulfate will be
              dried and the morphology of the dry particles will be characterized.  The
              evaporation rates of particles generated and characterized in this manner will
              be measured.   Most of this research will be performed with rapid-single
              particle mass spectrometry (RSMS), a new method for on-line chemical analysis
              of single aerosol particles that was developed with previous NSF funding.  The
              sample particles are detected by light scattering from a continuous laser beam
              and then ablated by a pulsed excimer beam.  Ions produced by laser
              desorption/ionization are detected by time-of-flight mass spectrometry and the
              chemical composition of the particles is inferred by the distribution of ions
              o`served.
