Title       : Modeling the Long-Period Basin Response in San Fernando and Los Angeles Regions
               During the 1994 Northridge Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9422238

Award Number: 9422238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39935              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Graves   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WCC
	      203 N. Golden Circle Drive
	      Santa Ana, CA  927054010    /   -

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1041,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9422238  Graves  Objective  The  objective of the proposed work is to understand
              and quantify  the  effects  that  the San Fernando and Los Angeles  sedimentary
               basins  had on the long-period (1-10 sec) ground motion  response  during   
              the    Northridge   earthquake,   and   to    formulate  recommendations for
              the inclusion of basin effects investigations  in future seismic hazard
              analyses.    Significance  The  Northridge earthquake and its aftershocks have
              produced  the  most comprehensive set of strong motion data ever recorded for 
              a  single earthquake sequence. These data allow for a wide range  of  research 
              involving  the  analysis  and  modeling  of  earthquake  source, path and site
              effects within the Los Angeles region.  One  important  area of concern is to
              understand the effect  that  the  deep  sedimentary basins which underlie the
              San Fernando and  Los  Angeles  regions  had  on  the  amplification  and 
              focusing   of  long-period  (1-10  sec) seismic energy during  this 
              earthquake.  Previous work has shown that wave propagation effects related  to 
              the geologic structure of the Los Angeles and San Fernando basins  have  a 
              significant  impact  on  the  observed  ground  motions,  particularly  for
              periods longer than about 1 sec.  and  in  many  cases, these basin-induced
              effects dominate the ground motions in  the  period  range  1-10  sec. During
              the Northridge  earthquake,  localized  areas of intense ground shaking and
              associated  damage  were   observed   that  cannot  be  explained   by  
              conventional  attenuation   relations  (e.g.,  Santa   Monica,   I-10   freeway
               collapse).  It  is  important to understand the  cause  of  these  phenomena
              and address their implications for engineering  design,  particularly for large
              structures (e.g., tall buildings,  freeway  bridges,  base-isolated
              structures), which are most sensitive  to  long-period energy.    Method and
              Anticipated Results  This   investigation  involves  the  analysis  of  ground 
              motion  recordings  of  the  Northridge earthquake and its aftershocks  in 
              order to systematically map out the observed basin effects within  the  San
              Fernando and Los Angeles regions. A key element of  this  analysis  is  the 
              numerical modeling of these data  using  a  3D  elastic   finite-difference 
              technique.   The   finite-difference  approach   is   attractive  because  it 
              allows  flexibility   in  incorporating strongly heterogeneous velocity models,
              as well  as  using a finite, variable-slip source model.                       
                          The goal of this project is to: (1) produce long-period (1-10  sec)
              time histories calculated on a fine spatial mesh throughout  the San Fernando
              and Los Angeles regions; (2) display the results  in map format, which will
              illustrate the spatial distribution of  generated ground motions (e.g., wave
              field timeslices,  distribution of peak velocity and duration of shaking) and
              the  correlation of these motions with the subsurface geology; and (3)  compare
              these results with those obtained using existing  empirical attenuation
              relations, as well as the results  calculated for 1D velocity models, in order
              to quantify the  effects of the basin response for use in future seismic hazard
               analyses.  ***
