Title       : Application of High Performance Computational Methods to Micromechanical
               Characteristics of Composite Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1999   
File        : a9422707

Award Number: 9422707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1250000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Rodin gjr@ticam.utexas.eduu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Browne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Tinsley Oden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. van de Geijn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0108000   Software Development                    
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Rodin 9422707  Design of composite materials to have desired properties is a
              task of great engineering significance.  Presently this is usually accomplished
              through trial and error laboratory synthesis and ad hoc analysis with the
              result that non-optimal design is commonplace.  The dramatic increase in
              computational power available for mathematical modeling and simulation raises
              the possibility that computationally-based design can play a significant  and
              complementary role to laboratory development of compmsite materials, as has
              been the case in other engineering design problems.  The computational problem
              is to determine the overall properties ( not necessarily linear elastic)  of
              the composite material from the constituent properties.  The goal of the
              proposed research is to create a toolbox of computational components with which
              engineers can design and analyze composite materials directly form the
              microstructural level.   The approach taken in this proposal is the adapt the
              emerging methods for high performance parallel computation, being developed for
              computational modeling in other domains, to micromechanical analysis of
              composite materials.  The application of large-scale computation to this calls
              of problems has been impeded by the fact that neither available  computation
              power nor available computational methods were adequate for realistic
              micromechanical models.   The methods to be adapted in this project are:  (i)
              parallel h-P ada tive fineite element and boundary element methods for
              computational fluide dynamics and acoustics, and (ii) parallel fast multipole
              methods emerging form many-particle dynamics.  The most significant properties
              of these methods are:  Superalgebraic  convergence rates, permitting effective
              simulations with models requiring a minimum computational effort to achieve
              acceptable accuracy's.    Amenability to ca common infrastructure for efficient
              parallel implementation.  Development of an initial version of this
              infrastructure under pervious research is  one cr itical enabling factor for
              this proposal.  Natural applicability to micromechanical modeling of composite
              materials since they perform similar roles in their current domains.  The
              methods are complementary in their domains of application to composite
              materials.  The development of the methods and of the toolbox will be empirical
              and example driven.  The algorithms and methods will be evaluated by
              application to known composite materials supplied by industrial collaborators. 
              the toolbox will consist of libraries of object classes:  (i) infrastructure
              for distributed dynamic arrays, (ii) h-P adaptive  finite element modules,
              (iii) h-p adaptive boundary element modules, (iv) parallel linear algebra
              modules,  (v) fast multipole modules, and (vi) and interface which facilitates
              composition of applications form the libraries of modules.  The toolbox is to
              be initially built around the PHLEX computational kernel which provides
              object-oriented data management of hp-meshes and adaptive methods.  This is
              truly interdisciplinary research.  It is no to be expected that the adaptation
              of the parallel adaptive methods will be trivial.  The interactions in
              composite materials are quite complex and substantial redesign and extensions
              of the methods to be effective for composite materials is anticipated.  The
              Research team includes expertise in micromechanical modeling of composites
              (Rodin), H-p adaptive methods (Oden), high performance parallel computing (van
              de Geijn and Browne), data structures (Browne), and application development
              environment (Browne).  It is also very high leverage results since research
              accomplishments form other fields,  with decades of development effort behind
              them, are being exploited in this project.
