Title       : Magnetospheric Current Sheets and Boundary Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9422918

Award Number: 9422918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bengt U. Sonnerup   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The proposed work represents continuation of an ongoing research  program
              concerned with some of the physical processes and  structures that occur in
              thin electrical current sheets and plasma  boundary layers in the Earth's
              magnetosphere, with special emphasis  on the magnetopause.  This current sheet
              forms the outer boundary  of the magnetosphere and separates it from the
              rapidly streaming  solar wind.  The proposed research is concerned with five
              related  problem areas:  o    Construction, from spacecraft data, of magnetic
              field    "transects" describing the draping of magnetic field inside or    
              outside the magnetopause over elongated bulges moving in a  transverse sense
              along that layer.  The result will be a robust and  thoroughly bench-marked
              data analysis tool that can be used by  other researchers.  Applications
              include, not just traveling bulges  and waves on the magnetopause, but other
              moving current filaments,  e.g., in the low latitude boundary layer or in the
              geomagnetic  tail.  o    Construction of similar transects describing mesoscale
                magnetic structures, such as tearing mode islands, in the  magnetopause
              itself.  Again, the goal is to develop and test a  robust data analysis tool
              that is expected to be of utility and  importance for study of two-dimensional
              structures in the  magnetopause.  o    Theoretical study of weakly nonlinear
              wave pulses propagating  on the magnetopause and their relation to observed
              bulges moving  along that year.  o    Theoretical study of strong
              nonlinearities in steady, two-  dimensional, field-aligned MHD flows, including
              transitions between  elliptic and hyperbolic states.  Search for, and  analysis
              of,  illustrative events in spacecraft data.  o    Theoretical study of MHD
              flow in two-dimensional reconnection  layers.  In each area, the research will
              start with analytical and  associated numerical work, including, where
              appropriate, the  generation of synthetic spacecraft data for bench marking of
              the  data analysis techniques; this phase will  be followed by  identificaion
              of sample events and by testing of the new techniques  on spacecraft data,
              initially from AMPTE/IRM, but later in the  project, from the CLUSTER mission.
