Title       : Bayesian Model Evaluation and Prediction of Economic Time Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1997     
File        : a9422922

Award Number: 9422922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234568             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Phillips peter.phillips@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422922  Peter Phillips    Model choice, model simplification and the
              determination of good models for prediction are all important elements in
              empirical econometric research.  When times series are nonstationary, an aspect
              of model choice is how to model the nonstationarity of the data (e.g.,
              stochastic trends versus deterministic trends versus trend breaks).  Although
              difficult this choice has a substantial impact on the performance of
              out-of-sample forecasts and forecast confidence sets.  Furthermore, in
              practical business and financial research we are sometimes faced with the need
              to model or predict large number of series simultaneously.  In such situations
              we need automated procedures for model selection that can take account such
              critical aspects of a series as its stationarity or lack thereof.  The first of
              the three projects in this research is concerned with the development and
              justification of such procedures for use in the analysis of economic time
              series.    The methods employed are Bayesian and build on ideas on model
              determination, hypothesis testing, and forecasting in the presence of
              non-stationarity that the PI has put forward in recent research.      The
              second project by the PI looks at kernel regression when the errors are
              nonstationary.  Although kernel regression theory is quite well developed in
              the stationary time series case, there appears to be no theory for case of unit
              roots or integrated processes.  One problem with kernel regression in this case
              is that estimators are often inconsistent.  The research develops modified
              kernel estimators that are consistent in the presence of nonstationarity both
              with and without long memory.    The third project is an extension of the PIs
              work on "fully modified" VAR (FM-VAR) estimators.  These estimators can take
              advantage of potential cointegrating links between series without having to be
              explicit about their form or dimension and without preliminary testing.  This
              research extends the previous work so as to allow for I(0), I(1) , and I(2)
              regressors simultaneously in the same VAR.  It proceeds without making any
              specific assumptions about the degree of cointegration or the order of
              cointegration of any of the regressors, and without pretesting of the
              cointegrating rank.
