Title       : The Institutional Economics of Software Sourcing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1996       
File        : a9422976

Award Number: 9422976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia M. Beath   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project extends transaction cost theory to decisions  regarding inter-firm
              research and development services in  the particular context of software
              development.  The  research is supported under the Joint NSF/Private Sector 
              Initiative and involves a collaborative effort between  twenty-one
              private-sector organizations and the principal  investigators.  The objective
              of the study is to test  important questions benchmarking sourcing procedures
              for  software development.  This project's model of sourcing  decisions and
              outcomes is richer than those usually found in  research on vertical
              integration.  No other study has  examined both the sourcing decision and
              supplier performance  separately, although there are strong theoretical reasons
               why this design is advisable.  The design enables conceptual  distinctions to
              be made between important questions.  Also,  the data are not subject to the
              usual problems of hindsight  measurement bias or to difficulties in attributing
               causality.  The model for this research is grounded in  problems of software
              sourcing that the cooperating  organizations currently face.  The resources
              dedicated to  choosing and managing new developers have been rapidly 
              increasing in recent years.  The results of this study  should lead to new
              approaches to solving sourcing problems  more generally in a world of
              inter-firm reliance and  cooperation.  Thus, although the projects is based in 
              theory, it has strong operational component.  This project  will help both the
              cooperating organizations and academic  researchers learn how to initiate and
              carry out this kind of  research partnership.
