Title       : Collaborative Research on Measurement with Theory: A Bayesian Approach to
               Dynamic Macroeconomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9422828

Award Number: 9422828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169494             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. DeJong dejong@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9422828  David DeJong    In conducting empirical research, guidance from
              theory is extremely valuable.  Yet in macroeconomics, as theoretical models
              have become increasingly complex and stylized, such guidance has become
              difficult to incorporate in a formal statistical sense.  This project develops
              and then implements a coherent statistical framework for combining theoretical
              and empirical information.  The framework is Bayesian and enables the formal
              yet probabilistic incorporation of theoretical restrictions (e.g.,
              cross-equation restrictions) in working with reduced-form models.  A
              distinctive feature of the approach proposed here is that theoretical models
              are viewed as sources of prior information which can then be formally combined
              with data information via Bayes' Rule.  This is particularly useful in working
              with reduced-form models such as vector autoregressions (VARs), where
              researchers frequently have strong views about the parameterization of the
              theoretical model but only weak views about the parameterization of the VAR. 
              The new framework also enables economists to incorporate prior information
              about parameters values in the estimation of structural models.  This stands in
              marked contrast with the current practice of incorporating such information
              only informally and implicitly.  The result of this practice is inference
              without a firm statistical basis.    The methodology is then used in a variety
              of empirical projects: an analysis of the source of shocks which have driven
              the U.S. post-war business cycle; an analysis of competing sources of economic
              growth; construction and estimation of a fully specified nominal business cycle
              model (which includes monetary and fiscal policy variables) for the purpose of
              conducting policy analysis; an analysis of the empirical viability of simple
              heterogeneous agent models with incomplete markets; and an analysis of the
              usefulness of theoretical asset pricing models in the modeling of financial
              time series.
