Title       : Joint Ventures and Engineering Management in the Bay Area Rapid Transit
               District, 1958-1975.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9422267

Award Number: 9422267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51535              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn E. Bugos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Bugos is examining the theory that joint ventures were an important form of
              organizing technology in the post war period. In contrast with the corporate
              form of organization, which is dedicated to the general increase of capital,
              the joint venture form of organization is dedicated to the efficient design,
              construction and management of a specific technological system. The laws
              pertaining to joint ventures allow them to be organized in whatever way allows
              the most efficient flow of engineering information pertaining to a project.
              Important adjuncts to joint ventures in the post-war period are program
              management and systems engineering, two new approaches to engineering
              management also focused on large, complex technological systems.    Several
              impacts can result from a fuller understanding of joint venture theory and
              practice. On a policy level, we can analyze whether public needs have been
              served by allowing engineering labor to be controlled by increasing numbers of
              joint ventures: as limited alliances of corporations, as partnerships allowing
              American firms to set up operations abroad, and as consortia of public and
              private bodies developing new technologies. Engineering education will feel an
              impact, since courses in engineering management increasingly emphasize the need
              for students to understand nuance in joint venture strategy and structure, a
              topic underserved by the historical literature. Studies of science, technology
              and society will be impacted, in that an investigation of joint ventures opens
              a bridge between the dominant paradigm in business history, which focuses on
              the integration of technology under the capital umbrella of the corporation and
              in the history of technology, which focuses on the corporation as only one form
              of organization contributing to the growth of large technological systems.   
              Dr. Bugos is examining this theory on the importance of joint ventures  through
              a case study of engineering management in design and construction of the Bay
              Area Rapid Transit Distr ict (BARTD). BARTD was formed in 1958 as a special
              district dedicated to constructing a rapid rail transit system throughout the
              San Francisco Bay, which it completed in 1975. Five facets of BARTD especially
              illuminate the variation and importance of joint ventures: the BARTD special
              district as a fixed-purpose government; the joint venture of the consulting
              engineers Parsons, Blinkerhoff, Tudor and Bechtel and program management tools
              invoked by their Joint Venture Control Office; the debate over designating a
              systems engineer for the automatic train control system; the association of
              insurers; and the role of professional architects as advocates for public
              amenities.    Research methods include intensive research in archives collected
              by BARTD in Oakland, California; research in archives of Bay Area universities
              and public agencies; extensive interviews with members of the involved
              corporations; and reading in the press reports on BARTD and in the literature
              of joint venture law and policy.
