Title       : Homicide in Historical Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9422881

Award Number: 9422881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84863              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric H. Monkkonen emonkkon@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will create a two century long data series of homicides per capita
              for New York City.  It will use multiple archival sources to created an
              individual level file for all homicides prior to 1875.  The understanding of
              homicide is a specific area is important because the composite national
              data--when they exist--blur the details needed for careful analysis.  No annual
              time series on a specific locale exists for the years prior to 1930, and the
              picture created using post-1930 data probably give an incorrect or at least
              ambiguous understanding of prior homicide rates.  With a time series that
              extends back through the nineteenth century, we will be able to examine some of
              the major social shifts thought to affect the frequency of homicide. These
              include the effects of mass immigration, urban growth, the Civil War, changes
              in available weapons, demographic changes and Prohibition.  Furthermore, a
              complete time series will allow the United States to be compared to other
              placed, particularly England, in order to increase understanding of the post
              World War II wave of violence.   This data set is essential to constructing a
              serious explanation of long term variation in homicides.  %%% The Long term
              perspective on homicide rates for the United is dominated by ignorance.  There
              is no consistent long term data series on any particular place which precedes
              the FBI's Uniform Crime Reports.  This means that the answers to even the
              simplest of questions regarding homicide can be distorted using existing series
              to support any  analysis one  wants to endorse.  This project will generate a
              new, valid, `close to the source,` and  very long term (two century) source of
              annual data on homicides in America's largest city, New York,  that should
              enable researchers to answer questions about homicide more accurately and
              reliably and  with less possible distortion. The understanding of homicide is a
              specific area is important because  the composite national data--when they
              exist--blur the details needed for careful analysis.  No annual  time series on
              a specific locale exists for the years prior to 1930, and the picture created
              using  post-1930 data probably give an incorrect or at least ambiguous
              understanding of prior homicide rates.  With a time series that extends back
              through the nineteenth century, we will be able to examine some  of the major
              social shifts thought to affect the frequency of homicide. These include the
              effects of  mass immigration, urban growth, the Civil War, changes in available
              weapons, demographic changes and  Prohibition.  Furthermore, a complete time
              series will allow the United States to be compared to other  placed,
              particularly England, in order to increase understanding of the post World War
              II wave of  violence.  This data set is essential to constructing a serious
              explanation of long term variation in  homicides                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
