Title       : The Market for Congressional Votes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1995      
File        : a9422755

Award Number: 9422755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43071              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Stratmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9422755  Stratmann    This project introduces a new approach in studying
              whether  campaign contributions are used to influence legislative  decisions. 
              If Political Action Committees (PACs) contribute to  legislators in exchange
              for a vote favoring their interest,  legislators, who are expected to vote
              against constituency  interests, have incentives to both accept contributions
              and to  cheat on the vote-for-money agreement.  Contracts between PACs  and
              legislators are not legally enforceable - no third party  penalizes reneging or
              cheating.  One expects that in the absence  of a third party enforcer of
              vote-for-money contracts, market  arrangements are sought, providing a cheap
              method to guarantee  contract performance.  This project is an empirical
              examination  of those market arrangements.  This project focusses on time 
              patterns of contributions and whether these patterns are  consistent with the
              hypothesis of a quid pro quo between  legislators and PACs: it is shown that
              legislators who have  incentives to cheat on an agreement with a PAC,
              specifying a  vote-for-money exchange, are expected to receive contributions 
              after performance of the agreed to task.    The project is a study of the
              timing of contributions by PACs  representing a number of industries. 
              Detailed, previously  unemployed data, specifying the date on which
              contributions were  received by legislators, will be used in this project. 
              Patterns  of contributions over the entire election cycle will be examined  and
              related to Congressional votes, primaries, and general  elections.  The
              distribution of contributions in months prior and  after Congressional votes
              will be analyzed.  Legislators who have  incentives to renege on a
              vote-for-money contract are expected to  receive contributions after the vote-
              if they voted in a PAC's  interest.  Differences in contribution patterns for
              votes that  could be well anticipated and votes that could not be as well 
              anticipated, will be examined.  Further, leads and lags of  election yea r
              contributions will be studied; for example, whether  contributions in 1986 (an
              election year) reflected votes in 1985  or influenced votes in 1987.
