Title       : TQO Improving Quality Transformations in a Dual Workforce, Research and
               Development Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9422334

Award Number: 9422334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan R. Sanderson                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $484026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Y.H. Andrew Liou y.liou@csuohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. S. Case  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. C. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              L. M. Shrader  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick C. Schoenig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland State University
	      East 24th and Euclid Ave
	      Cleveland, OH  44115    216/687-2000

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will examine the implementation of quality transformation in a
              public sector research and development work environment (i.e., NASA) consisting
              of both in-house and contract employees.  Members of the work force have
              diverse cultural backgrounds, a multitude of different leaders, and are subject
              to widely varying motivators. The unit of focus and analysis will be project
              teams that include both civil servants and contract employees, resulting in a
              mix of disciplines as well.  These factors result in an environment in which it
              is very difficult to develop teamwork.  The objective of the research is to
              develop a multi-dimensional model for quality transformation in a diversified
              dual work force.  The model will identifydrivers and constraints associated
              with quality transformation, and will include evaluation tools, methods for
              implementing quality changes, and recommended measures of effectiveness. 
              Organizational, demographic, and qualitative data will be collected and used to
              design survey instruments for administration to team members.  Project outcome
              measures will be included in the analysis.  The project includes an advisory
              panel consisting of the NASA Lewis Research Center Quality Council, as well as
              bothpermanent and contract NASA employees.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
