Title       : Coalition Politics: Simulation of a General Model of Multiparty Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1995    
File        : a9422548

Award Number: 9422548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123701             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman Schofield schofld@wuecon.wust1.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Itai Sened  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Parks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Scholfield    Forty years of theoretical research has produced a generally 
              accepted basic model of two-party electoral competition.  This  basic model is
              fundamentally premised on the overriding objective  that parties wish to win
              the election.  Given that the formal  structure of the model is understood, it
              is possible to examine  variants of the model through incorporating more
              sophisticated  behavior on the part of the electorate, or varying degrees of 
              competence on the part of candidate.  Most theories of pre-  election behavior
              in competitive elections have focussed on  "policy-blind" models where parties
              compete to maximize votes or  to maximize the expected number of seats.  Other
              models focus on  "coalition risk" that assume parties care about policy and
              form  specific coalitions based on policy agreements.  The proposed  research
              builds on the investigators previous work on an  equilibrium model of
              multiparty competition which incorporates  the beliefs of political parties
              concerning both electoral risk  and coalition risk.  This work  will refine the
              general electoral  risk-coalition risk model.  Two major questions will be
              examined:  (1) Do parties simply maximize the expected number of seats or do 
              their preferences incorporate variances in the electoral  response? and (2)
              Does the incorporation of policy concerns  provide a superior explanation of
              party declarations?    It is envisioned that this research, through using
              computer  simulation and econometric analysis in combination, will not only 
              advance understanding of democratic theory but also provide a  strong
              methodological tool that will suggest general techniques  for modelling two
              stage differentiable games.    ****
