Title       : The Newest Law Merchant: Private Commercial Law in the U.S.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1995      
File        : a9422795

Award Number: 9422795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Bernstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422795  Bernstein  This project analyzes a type of law that has become very
              important in the business economy of the United States, but that has been
              largely ignored by legal scholars:  private commercial law developed by trade
              associations and enforced through association-run arbitration tribunals.  This
              private law exists in a wide variety of industries such as grain, textiles, 
              rubber, movies, and diamonds.  It is embodied in detailed rules and standard
              form contracts that cover most of the same aspects of commercial transactions
              as the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC).  These rules are supplemented by customs
              and usages of trade as well as by industry specific ethical codes that set out
              standards defining proper commercial behavior.  These standards are similar to
              the UCC's obligations of good faith and fair dealing, but tend to be far more
              specific.  The tribunals that enforce these rules operate under detailed
              procedural codes.  This project will explore why these private legal systems
              developed and endured.  In addition to in-depth case studies of several private
              law systems, the project will create a data base of trade rules, standard form
              contracts, ethical rules, association bylaws, and procedural rules, as well as
              information about the associations obtained through interviews.  It will seek
              to establish the substance and extent of private commercial law and compare and
              contrast this law with the formal commercial law produced by the state.  The
              analysis will be presented in a book entitled THE NEWEST LAW MERCHANT:  PRIVATE
              COMMERCIAL LAW IN THE UNITED STATES.  It will focus on the reasons for the
              development of the private law systems, the costs and benefits associated with
              their use, and the mechanisms through which the enforcing tribunals achieve
              compliance with their rulings without recourse to the courts.  It will thus
              make a contribution to understanding dispute resolution in the United States in
              both the private and public spheres.  %%%%  This project analyzes a type of law
              that h as become very important in the business economy of the United States,
              but that has been largely ignored by legal scholars:  private commercial law
              developed by trade associations and enforced through association-run
              arbitration tribunals.  This private law exists in a wide variety of industries
              such as grain, textiles,  rubber, movies, and diamonds.  The tribunals that
              enforce these rules operate under detailed procedural codes.  This project will
              explore why these private legal systems developed and endured.  In addition to
              in-depth case studies of several private law systems, the project will create a
              data base of trade rules, standard form contracts, ethical rules, association
              bylaws, and procedural rules, as well as information about the associations
              obtained through interviews.  It will seek to establish the substance and
              extent of private commercial law and compare and contrast this law with the
              formal commercial law produced by the state.  It will focus on the reasons for
              the development of the private law systems, the costs and benefits associated
              with their use, and the mechanisms through which the enforcing tribunals
              achieve compliance with their rulings without recourse to the courts.  It will
              thus make a contribution to understanding dispute resolution in the United
              States in both the private and public spheres.
