Title       : Science and Technology-Based Economic Development Programs in the States: A
               Study of Evaluation Efforts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1994   
File        : a9422433

Award Number: 9422433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80459              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia E. Melkers jmelkers@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 This research examines evaluation activities of science and technology-based
              programs at the state level in the United States.  S&T-based programs are those
              that stimulate the science base or technology development in a geographic area
              with the purpose of attracting or stimulating industrial investment and
              development there.  State S&T programs form an important part of the national
              effort to use its technical base to improve the economy and competitiveness. 
              Understanding whether and how they work -- which is the job of evaluation--is
              thus significant for national well-being.   The goal of this project is to
              survey the existing approaches and methods of evaluation in order to improve
              state-level practice. The project is organized into two phases. The first phase
              involves a telephone survey of state science and technology programs. The
              purpose of this first phase is twofold. First, it provides a fairly
              comprehensive inventory of current evaluation, it act as a screening device for
              the case study selection. This first phase of the project involves compiling
              data on evaluation activities in state technology-programs. The second phase of
              the project involves about several state programs that are active in evaluation
              activities. Selection of these cases based on materials gathered from the
              states and the mail survey data.   This research is important because it will
              provide a unique data source on evaluation and assessment activities in the
              states. The results of this project will be beneficial to evaluation
              practitioners, managers/decision makers of state science and technology-based
              programs, and to the academic community.  Importantly, it will provide a data
              source and access to information of individuals in state technology programs
              who either must conduct or are considering conducting some sort of assessment
              of their activities. It also has the potential to act as a networking mechanism
              for individuals interested in this topic.
