Title       : Age Differences in the Effects of Repeated Questions on Eyewitness Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9422177

Award Number: 9422177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Bjorklund dbjorklund@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422177  Bjorklund  The purpose of this study is to investigate age differences
              in eyewitness memory of children as a result of repeated interviews using sets
              of misleading questions and unbiased leading questions.  The increasing
              participation of children in the legal system as victims and as witnesses has
              led to a concomitant concern for the reliability of their eyewitness reports. 
              It is now well-documented that younger children remember less information and
              are more prone to follow the suggestions of an interviewer than are older
              children.  However, the mechanisms underlying such patterns are less well
              understood.  In particular, there is debate concerning whether young children's
              susceptibility to suggestion results from actual changes in their memory
              representations (memory impairment) or from the demand characteristics of the
              situation (complying with a persistent adult).  This issue assume especial
              importance when children are interviewed frequently, as is typical of most
              court cases.  Three experiments will be executed in which changes in the
              eyewitness reports of kindergarten, grade 2, and grade 4 children and adults
              are assessed.  The experiments will assess the extent to which the subjects'
              eventual compliance with an interviewer's suggestion represents acquiescence to
              the demand characteristics of the situation or to memory impairment.  The
              results of the study should be of great significance in assisting policymakers
              and participants in the legal system to assess accurately and use fairly the
              eyewitness testimony of children involved in the legal system.  %%%%  The
              increasing participation of children in the legal system as victims and as
              witnesses has led to a concomitant concern for the reliability of their
              eyewitness reports.  It is now well-documented that younger children remember
              less information and are more prone to follow the suggestions of an interviewer
              than are older children.  The purpose of this study is to investigate age
              differences in eyewitness memory of children  as a result of repeated
              interviews using sets of misleading questions and unbiased leading questions. 
              Three experiments will be conducted to assess the extent to which the subjects'
              eventual compliance with an interviewer's suggestion represents acquiescence to
              the demand characteristics of the situation or to memory impairment.  The
              results of the study should be of great significance in assisting policymakers
              and participants in the legal system to assess accurately and use fairly the
              eyewitness testimony of children involved in the legal system.  ****
