Title       : LANDSCAPES: Visions of Programming Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1997 
File        : a9422625

Award Number: 9422625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven P. Reiss spr@cs.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This project involves the development of practical  programming  tools in an
              integrated and open framework. Tools  that support modern  programming must
              deal with large  systems, multiple programmers, multiple  languages, a mixture 
              of existing and new code, and multiple processes and  threads. The work
              combines a variety of tools in an open,  extensible, and  powerful setting
              using control integration  and a simple form of data  integration based on
              fragments.  Fragments are semantically significant portions  of a program 
              artifact: definitions or scopes in a source file, sections  of  documentation
              file, rules in a configuration description,  etc.  The approach to  integration
              identifies such fragments  and keeps references to them in a simple  and small
              central  database.  This information is augmented with the data  necessary to
              identify fragments using database queries,  essentially usedef  chains and
              small amounts of tool-specific  information. In addition to fragment  and
              control  integration, the environment provids common facilities for  defining
              and managing the files and contexts that make up a  project, and a  common
              editor for all software artifacts.  The project manager serves as a front  end
              for managing  version control, configuration management, and multiple 
              programmers.  The common editor provides high quality  typography along with 
              support for hypertext links and  graphics.    On top of this environmental 
              framework, this project  investigates the development and utility of a variety 
              of  programming tools.  The research extends visualization tools  using a 3D 
              visualization package developed under a previous  NSF grant.  A single front
              end  would allow the programmer to  specify both what information (from a
              variety of  sources)  should be visualized and how it should be presented for
              each  particular application. Experiments measure the ffectiveness  of
              visualizations  for understanding both the static  structure and the dynamic
              behavior of complex  systems.  A  third set of tools involves editing.  The
              project would  extend an  existing editor to allow programmers to view the 
              system as a single electronic  document with dynamic and  static links
              connecting the various software  artifacts.  These links would be defined
              either by built-in queries  (e.g. go to  the definition of a name), by
              user-defined  queries, or by static links.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
