Title       : Estimation for Hierarchical Models with Dichotomous Outcomes in Small-Sample,
               Social Research Settings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1997     
File        : a9422901

Award Number: 9422901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Seltzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hierarchical models (HM) provide a valuable means of analyzing the kinds of
              nested data structures that are frequently encountered in social science
              research (e.g., program participants nested within different evaluation sites).
               Applications include studies of equity in educational opportunities and
              attainment, studies of factors central to program success in multi-site
              evaluation studies, and longitudinal analyses of change in cognitive skills. 
              Whereas most applications of the HM to date have involved the analysis of
              continuous outcomes, numerous research questions entail the analysis of
              dichotomous outcomes.  While sample sizes in social research settings are
              frequently modest due to budget constraints, standard approaches to estimation
              and inference for HMs with dichotomous outcomes become extremely problematic
              when samples are small to moderate in size.  In particular, we run the risk of
              obtaining misleadingly small confidence intervals for parameters of interest,
              and our results are potentially highly sensitive to outliers (e.g., a program
              site at which an intervention was unusually ineffective).  A newly developed,
              general estimation technique termed the Gibbs sampler has been shown to provide
              a means of obtaining sound parameter estimates and intervals in a variety of
              complex modeling settings.  The purpose of this project is to utilize this
              technique in developing and implementing estimation strategies that will enable
              researchers to obtain robust estimates of parameters and appropriate intervals
              in applications of HMs with dichotomous outcomes in small-sample, social
              research settings.  Guidelines for proper implementation and use of these
              strategies will be developed through analyses of a series of simulated data
              sets and through analyses of the data from two studies:  A multi-site
              evaluation of a dropout prevention initiative, and an NSF-funded study of the
              effects of different mathematics.  The software programs that are developed for
              implementation of these Gibbs-sampling-based estimation strategies will be
              shared with all interested researchers.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
