Title       : Patterns of Democratic Transition: Democratization in Italy After 1860 (With
               Comparison to Britain, Norway, and Argentina)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1998     
File        : a9422811

Award Number: 9422811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145024             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Spencer Wellhofer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9422811  Welhofer  As the world seemingly experiences the collapse of empire,
              the  spread of democracy and the expansion of capitalism, we must  recognize
              that the past contains lessons for our understanding of  the present. This
              research examines democratic transition in  Italy during the late nineteenth
              and twentieth centuries -- a  crucial period of nation- and state-building
              marked by the  extension of political citizenship, the construction of national
               consciousness and the transition to market capitalism.    Democratization is a
              longitudinal, dynamic process best  understood in comparative, historical
              perspective. Previous  theoretical and empirical work on Britain, Norway and
              Argentina  furnish the comparative, historical context for the Italian 
              experience. Italy constitutes a pivotal case in the study of  democratic
              transition; its origins in the collapse of empire, its  struggle to institute
              liberal-capitalist democracy, its collapse  into Fascism and imperialism, its
              post-war transition and current  crisis make it a central case for the study of
              democracy. The  research design examines four stages in the democratization 
              process across the four cases: non-democratic regimes prior to  democratization
              in the 19th century, transitional regimes in the  late 19th and early 20th
              centuries as well as stable and unstable  democratic outcomes. Norway provides
              the case of the transition  to stable social democracy; Britain, the case for
              triumph of a  stable liberal democracy, and Argentina, a non-European case of 
              democratic break-down and unstable politics. Italy provides a  third European
              case in which democratic transition was followed  by break-down and a return to
              democracy in the post-war period  and currently undergoing a second democratic
              transition.    Three interpretations of democracy initially guide the inquiry 
              into democratic transition: political cultural, institutional  design and
              social structural explanations. In addition, the  research employs
              core-periphery analysis to exam ine the impact of  peripheral nationalism,
              state traditions, and crossnational  forces on democratization. The research
              examines a mix of micro-  and macro-level processes, employing both qualitative
              and  quantitative historical information to test explanations of  democratic
              transition.     Historical, comparative in-depth studies systematically
              consider  the political cultural, social structural and institutional  design
              elements before, during and after efforts at  democratization. The proposed
              project is the first systematic,  quantitative historical investigation of
              Italy's transition to  democracy and provides important theoretical insights
              into  Italy's past and current politics. Moreover, when coupled to the 
              comparative analysis of Britain, Norway and Argentina, the  current project
              generates valuable theoretical and substantive  findings in the study of
              democratic transition for newer  democracies, particularly in eastern and
              southern Europe and  Latin America.
