Title       : A High Throughput Parallel Processing System Using Three Dimensional
               Optoelectronic Interconnect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1997        
File        : a9422452

Award Number: 9422452
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $723508             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald S. Wills scott.wills@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              April S. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin A. Brooke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nan Marie Jokerst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9422452  Wills  This activity will study a  highly parallel computer that
              features a three dimensional, optical interconnection network.  The extremely
              compact system is design to process high throughput data streams in
              applications such as image processing.  The high density and large I/O
              bandwidth result from optical communication channels between Si-based
              processors.  By using integrated optoelectronic devices operating at
              wavelengths to which silicon is transparent, through-wafer vertical optical
              communications channels are formed between stacked silicon circuitry.  Thin
              film optoelectronic devices are bonded directly to SI integrated circuits to
              realize this self contained vertical optical interconnect.  To construct the
              system, silicon chips containing a digital processor, network interface, and
              router, plus analog interface circuitry for the thin film devices, are
              fabricated through a standard IC foundry.  The chips are then post processed to
              integrate the thin film optoelectronic devices using standard,  low cost, high
              yield microfabrication techniques.  Two dimensional planes of these chips are
              then stacked to form the three dimensional system which is connected by the
              vertical optical channels.  The use of integrated through-wafer optical
              interconnect will lead, long term, to extremely dense systems (4096 processors
              in a four inch   cube with high throughput  (820 Gbits/sec external I/O
              bandwidth, 3.2 Tbits/sec aggregate bandwidth).  The proposed system will
              accelerate an established, interdisciplinary collaborative group of faculty and
              students in the areas of parallel computational architectures, analog circuits,
              optoelectronic devices and integration, and crystal growth.  It is  this type
              of collaboration that enables the realization of a revolutionary, predominantly
              electronic system with simple point-to-point optoelectronic interconnects, and
              helps to identify for each of the researchers the critical points and
              trade-offs which must be considered from a system perspective.
