Title       : Theoretical Studies of Molecular Ions and Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1995  
File        : a9422210

Award Number: 9422210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Jordan jordan@a.psc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Kenneth D. Jordan at the Department of Chemistry, University of  
              Pittsburgh, is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program at NSF for studies related to the   electronic and geometric
              structure of molecular systems. His work under   this grant is, primarily, in
              three areas. The first research area   concerns the thermodynamic properties of
              modest size clusters. This work   involves accurate quantum chemical
              determination of the total interaction   energy for various cluster geometries
              followed by simulation of the   dynamics of motion on the energy surfaces. The
              second area concerns the   study of reactions on a Si surface. For this work,
              finite clusters are   being used to model the motion and reaction of adsorbates
              on and with the   surface. Finally, research is being carried out to validate
              and to extend   various theoretical methods which are used for the study of
              larger   molecules and clusters.   Theoretical electronic structure methods
              have been firmly established and   are regularly applied at two extremes; at
              one extreme are small systems   composed of only a few atoms and at the other
              extreme are crystalline   solids. The work under this grant deals with the
              intermediate case of   clusters which are being studied for two scientific
              purposes. The first   reason is to examine the properties of matter in the
              intermediate state   between the extremes; this state is especially important
              because it has   properties which are fundamentally different from those at the
              extremes.   The work under this grant is helping to explore these fascinating
              and   potentially useful cluster properties. The second reason is to study the 
               properties of the surfaces of solids with suitable cluster models. Such  
              models are especially useful to elucidate surface chemistry because they  
              enable theory which explains and predicts chemistry in molecules to be  
              applied to processes which occur at the surfaces of condensed matter.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
