Title       : Environment, Health, And Safety In Poland: Confronting The Transition To
               Democracy And A Free Market Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1998     
File        : a9422653

Award Number: 9422653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Halina S. Brown Hbrown@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Angel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1094,5953,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Facilitating economic growth while avoiding damage to health and the environment
              concerns both emerging and mature democracies.  This collaborative two-year
              study will test and further develop the hypothesis that the transition to
              democracy and free market economy in Poland has structural characteristics that
              can in the long run deemphasize the environment, health and safety (EH&S)
              interests.  It has three main objectives.  One is to identify major barriers to
              satisfying the EH&S concerns in Poland.  These barriers are grounded in the
              pursuit of other national values related to economic growth, improved social
              welfare, development of civic society, and so on.  The second is to identify
              regulatory approaches that can assist in protecting EH&S interests during the
              current societal transition and beyond.  A final objective is to contribute to
              theory of industrial EH&S management in the context of major societal
              transitions.  The research approach consists of empirical case analysis of the
              process of licensing of new and privatized industrial manufacturing facilities.
               It will be approached by (i) analysis of the policies, procedures and
              institutional missions in relation to permitting industrial facilities, and
              (ii) analysis of the specific process of implementation of official policies in
              the course of licensing four facilities.  A heuristic model of facility
              licensing guides the faculity-based field work.  Data collection includes
              interviews, review of relevant documents, analysis of EH&S performance
              indications, and observations during site visits.  This research will produce
              articles and other publications and presentations that will assist
              decisionmakers in reconciling growth and environmental protection.  It will
              contribute to the growing body of research on the adaptability and mitigative
              capacity of societies undergoing dramatic change, and generate data for
              international comparative studies of environmental hazard management.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
