Title       : An International Workshop to Define Research Priorities for Russian Arctic Land
               Shelf Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1995     
File        : a9422025

Award Number: 9422025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36156              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Forman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kaye R. Everett  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5219,9189,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                        ABSTRACT      This project is a workshop and is a contribution to the 
              Arctic System Science Program. It will  be held  at the Byrd  Polar Research
              Center  where key scientific questions  related to processes and environmental
              change in the Russian  Arctic  continental  shelves and adjacent lowlands will
              be  defined.  A total of 35 participants, covering a range of  disciplines in
              the bio-, geo- and social sciences will be  invited to  formulate scientific
              priorities.  This workshop  will focus on defining interdisciplinary and
              circumarctic  research themes that would elucidate land/shelf  interactions.  
              A broad topical, temporal and spatial  framework for the workshop is proposed
              to attract a wide  group of scientists and identify the most compelling 
              research ideas.    The direction and mechanisms of climate change cannot be 
              adequately addressed without a  better understanding of  processes and
              environments of the shelf seas of the Russian  Arctic and the adjacent
              lowlands.  Epicontinental shelf seas  bounded by the Atlantic, Pacific and
              Arctic Oceans  comprise  25% of  the shelf  area of oceans and modulate key
              climatic  parameters  such as the exchange of oceanic heat,  atmospheric gases,
              sea-ice and fresh water input.   Large  uncertainties  remain on the cause,
              magnitude and timing of  past glaciations in Siberia and concomitant changes in
              sea-  ice, vegetation, fluvial discharge and animal migrations.  Many present 
              day issues relating to land/Arctic Ocean  interactions also need to be
              evaluated.    This is a "ground up" effort to assess the American  scientific
              community's sense of  priorities for research in  the Russian Arctic.  The
              workshop is an important step for  the integration of North American
              scholarship with that of  Russian colleagues who have decades of experience on
              these  problems.   The consensus of research priorities will  provide a
              conceptual nucleus for proposing a  Russian Arctic  Science dimension for
              ARCSS.
