Title       : TQO A Socio-Technical Systems Framework for Quality Transformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1996  
File        : a9422337

Award Number: 9422337
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321235             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Falkenburg falken@focushope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian R. Chambers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Felicia Seaton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julia Gluesing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Olugbenga Mejabi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              50        Engineering                             
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,9147,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This NSf project is focused on quality oriented product design with the specific
              objective of developing a better understanding of the interdependencies among
              technological and human/organizational/cultural variables within the automotive
              product design.  The research builds upon a four year program of industry
              sponsored mission oriented research conducted by The Laboratory of
              Socio-Technical Systems Integration at Wayne State University in Detroit
              Michigan.  In the current project, the laboratory team will take the next steps
              in building its research program, and extending knowledge made beyond General
              Motors and Ford to other parts of the American automobile industry.  The
              specific of the project are as follows.  1) refine, formalize, and test
              propositions emerging from earlier work on factors that are critical to product
              design at the work group level; 2) to construct and field - validate a formal
              simulation model that incorporates the full suite of key variables that impact
              the timing and quality performance of product design work groups; 3) to
              strengthen the theoretical and methodological foundations of socio-technical
              systems theory, which is an important change methodology that is fully
              compatible with the quality principles and; 4) to improve, validate and
              transfer to industry the prototype management tools developed in earlier
              research.  Research to meet these objective will be carried out at GM and Ford.
               At GM, the research team will utilize network analysis methodology and
              ethnohistorical mapping to examine longitudinally the nature of horizontal and
              vertical linkages between work groups involved in product design.  At Ford the
              team will engage in both ethnographic and survey research designed to uncover
              the key variables that impact on timing and quality outcomes of work group
              performance in a finite segment of product design.( the Reliability Report Out
              process, a vital part of Ford's  quality assurance program).  The research will
              define variables in operational terms, measure them with selected indices and
              scales, determine relationships among variables using a variety of
              methodologies, and construct and test a formal simulation model.  Each of these
              linked project will provide the automotive industry with new tools for managing
              the complex process of quality transformation, and will shed light on important
              questions in organizational science, including questions related to
              organizational and cultural change process.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
