Title       : Superpositions of Chiral Amplitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9422428

Award Number: 9422428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42113              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Harris raharris@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Robert A. Harris at the Department of Chemistry, University of  
              California at Berkeley, is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and  
              Computational Chemistry Program at NSF for theoretical research related  
              chiral coherences. There are several topics where research is required in  
              order to establish fundamental understandings of these coherences and of   the
              special chemistry which may arise from them. One important topic   concerns the
              investigation of methods to prepare chiral coherences; in   particular, to
              identify methods which will have a high degree of coherent   behavior. Another
              important topic concerns the measurement of this   coherence; here, research to
              asses the usefulness of neutron scattering   as a way of making such
              measurements could lead to a valuable   experimental tool. In addition,
              research is required to develop a   suitable theory of second harmonic
              generation in order to interpret and   explain the activity of chiral
              adsorbates on surfaces.  The concept of chirality, the notion of left handed
              and right handed   chiral molecules, has been known and studied by chemists for
              sometime.   The recent discovery that excited states of molecules can be used
              to   create coherent superpositions of chiral molecules opens the way to a  
              range of new phenomena. In particular, it may open the way to the   discovery
              of systems which have a new chemistry governed by the   principles of
              superposition and parity conservation.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
