Title       : Theory of Chemical Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9422559

Award Number: 9422559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $628000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Miller miller@neon.cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              William Miller, University of California Berkeley, is supported by a   grant
              from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to   continue his
              research on the theory of chemical dynamics.  The goal of   Miller's research
              is to develop the theoretical concepts and   methodologies that can provide a
              quantitative description of chemical   dynamics, a kind of ab initio chemical
              dynamics akin to the ab initio   quantum chemistry of electronic structure
              theory.  Challenging and novel   applications of these approaches to specific
              chemical systems will also   be carried out when they illustrate or demonstrate
              the new methods and   concepts or when the specific application is of
              importance in its own   right.  The primary focus is on the dynamics of
              chemical reactions, but   other dynamical processes are also treatable by these
              approaches.  The   proposed research deals with both the most detailed level of
              description   (state-to-state reactive cross sections) and also more averaged  
              quantities (cumulative reaction probabilities and rate constants).    Methods
              are proposed for providing an absolutely rigorous treatment of   simple
              chemical reactions, and approximate methods for describing more   complex
              chemical systems, for which completely rigorous calculations are   not
              feasible, are also pursued.  Miller's research is directed at the most
              fundamental level of chemistry,   i.e., the chemical reaction taking place in
              the gas phase between two   colliding molecules.  This very basic, yet highly
              complex, process is the   simplest chemical reaction to which theory can be
              rigorously applied, and   forms the basis for understanding all other more
              complex chemical   processes.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
