Title       : TQO MANAGING EXPERTISE FOR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9422284

Award Number: 9422284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan R. Sanderson                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411562             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Venkatraman venkat@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee S. Sproull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project will investigate the role of enterprise expertise in how
              organizations develop and leverage one particular organizational capability,
              namely: fast-cycle response.  The investigation will be undertaken in
              collaboration with six organizational partners--IBM, ITT Hartford, Ameritech,
              Swiss Bank Corporation, U.S. Army, and New England Medical--and will consist of
              both intensive case studies and extensive survey research.  The research is
              distinguished by four attributes. One: A conceptualization of enterprise
              expertise as a multi-level construct as opposed to a single level of
              analysis--individual, group, organization, or network.  Two: An examination of
              the specific role of information technology in supporting enterprise expertise
              as well as organizational capability, thus contributing to the emerging body of
              research on the impact of information technology on organization strategy and
              design.  Three: A focus on how enterprise expertise can affect a previously
              under-emphasized aspect of quality, namely fast-cycle response capability,
              which is particularly critical given the seeming tension between quality and
              speed of organizational response.  Four: Using organizational processes as the
              sampling unit for survey research, thus developing specific methodological
              suggestions on how to use process as the focus of analysis in organizational
              research.                                                     
