Title       : Mechanistic Studies on Dinuclear Hydrolytic Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1997   
File        : a9422098

Award Number: 9422098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Holz RHOLZ@CC.USU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In this project, which is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
              Organometallic Chemistry  Program, Dr. Richard C. Holz of Utah State University
              will undertake a study of the roles that the  individual metal ions in
              multinuclear hydrolytic enzymes play in their catalytic reactions.  The 
              initial phase of the work will be built around studies of the dinuclear Zn(II)
              aminopeptidase from  Vibrio proteolytica, for which a plasmid is available that
               can be used to overexpress the enzyme  in E. coli.  The approach will involve
              substitution of individual zinc ions in the enzyme with  spectroscopically
              active Co(II), Ni(II) or Cu(II) ions, which have already been demonstrated to 
              also show enhanced enzymatic activity.   Cadmium(II) will also be used for
              substitution in some  studies.  Methods to be used include UV-VIS, NMR, EPR and
              EXAFS spectroscopies, as well as  steady state kinetics.  Specific questions to
              be considered include:  1) What is the nature and  geometry of the ligands upon
              substitution with other metal ions such that hyperactivity is  obtained.  2)
              What specific role does each metal center play in catalysis?  3) How do
              substrates  interact with the dinuclear active site?  and 4) Does one or both
              metal ions serve as a Lewis acid  to bind and activate a water molecule for the
              hydrolysis reaction?    Hydrolytic enzymes that contain more than one metal ion
              (multinuclear enzymes) have been  demonstrated to exist only recently.  The
              mechanisms by which these enzymes effect catalysis  are presently unknown. 
              This research is designed to determine the role that the individual metal  ions
              play in the catalytic reaction.  The results may lead to the development of
              synthetic  enzymes that can be used in biotechnology.
