Title       : The Dynamics of Relationships with Incomplete Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1995  
File        : a9422196

Award Number: 9422196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38252              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Watson jwatson@weber.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9422196  Joel Watson    It is often beneficial for agents to form
              relationships in order to cooperate over time. Businesses create alliances and
              initiate joint ventures, countries sign treaties, managers seek to establish
              productive associations with their workers, and oligopolists seek to collude. 
              In each case the parties involved hope for cooperation from their partners. 
              One barrier to achieving cooperation is uncertainty about the motives of the
              other party and the risk of "being led down the garden path."  If the
              uncertainty is too high, no cooperation may be possible. One solution is use a
              mechanism by which to credibly signal when cooperation can be sustained.  For
              example, a country may show its willingness to adhere to a treaty by offering
              concessions on an unrelated issue.  Another mechanism that may buffer the
              parties from the risk associated with asymmetric information is to begin the
              relationship on a small scale and build it gradually.  In this way, a party
              that would not benefit from long-term cooperation may be induced to cheat early
              on when the stakes are low.  This research project examines the implications of
              this idea for understanding how economic relationships evolve over time.   
              "Starting small" appears to be ubiquitous.  Take as an example bilateral
              treaties on arms reductions or troop withdrawals.  It is rare to see a huge
              agreement made quickly, for this would be disastrous for the country that
              followed through if the other cheated.  Instead, countries generally reach
              agreements in phases, starting with a small set of issues and then gradually
              adding more.    This research compares the benefits from starting small with
              those of other signaling mechanisms, such advertising.  The focus is on
              coordination in the face of incomplete information.  The research identifies
              what path a relationship should take in order to develop a cooperative
              relationship with a minimum of risk.  This abstract work is then applied to a
              number of settings: an employment model, a model of a  debt market, an a model
              of collusion by oligopolists.
