Title       : CAREER: Carbon Nanotube Electrodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2001      
File        : a0093881

Award Number: 0093881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369571             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa M. Rieger rieger@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: Melissa M. Rieger 
Institution: University of
              Oklahoma
Proposal Number: 0093881

This CAREER grant combines research and
              educational initiatives in the area of electrochemical engineering.

The
              research plan focuses on nanomaterials and electrochemistry for use in energy
              storage and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS).  Carbon nanotubes offer
              promise for chemical sensing, chemical processing, electrochemical storage and
              mechanical manipulation.  This research is intended to further the
              understanding of carbon nanotube electrochemistry and materials science.  The
              PI intends to study the electrochemical behavior of carbon nanotubes for use as
              intercalation electrodes for lithium batteries and potential chemical sensors. 
              The project will be divided into three main areas: (1) electrode fabrication
              and carbon nanotube growth, (2) electrochemical evaluation, and (3) surface
              morphology and chemical modification.  Techniques such as cyclic voltammetry
              and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy will be employed to characterize the
              chemical and physical structure of the carbon nanotube electrodes.  Also, the
              physical and chemical structure of the electrode materials will be studied and
              related to the chemical mechanism for intercalation and surface
              adsorption.

Complementing the research plan is the PI's commitment to women
              in engineering.  As faculty adviser for the Society of Women Engineers (SWE),
              she is working with other women engineers on the primary issue of recruiting
              and retaining women in engineering.  To increase retainment of undergraduate
              women in engineering, a Women in Engineering Orientation for freshman and a
              Women in Research Seminar Series will be implemented.  Through contacts with
              SWE, one female engineering student will also be recruited to serve as
              undergraduate assistant in the PI's lab.  The PI is working with teachers and
              students involved with Oklahoma Network for Excellence in Education (ONE) on
              education in engineering and science.  The plan is to build partnerships
              between local elementary schools and the College of engineering.  These
              partnerships will be coordinated through SWE and ONE to promote science and
              engineering principles in surrounding elementary schools.

