Title       : CAREER: Systematics Research and Training in the Flies of the Culicoidea
               (Diptera: Culicomorpha)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0093392

Award Number: 0093392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darlene D. Judd juddd@science.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0093392
Darlene D. Judd

Dr. Darlene D. Judd of Oregon State University
              has been awarded a five-year CAREER grant that will support a novel research
              and training program for two Ph.D. students and two M.S. students to undertake
              systematics research on four families of understudied flies of prime relevance
              to human health.  Each student's research will focus on one of the families in
              the Culicoidea (Diptera: Culicomorpha), or a small natural group within a
              family, for which we have little understanding of relationships.  Monographs
              will provide comprehensive global coverage of each group and will include
              treatment of nomenclature, descriptions of species for all life stages,
              illustrations of informative character systems, and distribution and life
              history information.  Identification keys and specimen/digital image databases
              will be made available on WWW.  Each of these studies will contribute
              morphological and molecular character data that will be combined and analyzed
              using cladistics methods.  These four fly families were chosen because the
              combination of characters they display suggests their positions within the
              Culicomorpha (the most important vectors of human disease) are unstable, yet of
              fundamental interest to higher classification and questions focusing on the
              evolution of blood-feeding in flies.
Flies are one of the most successful
              taxonomic groups on the planet and figure prominently in discussions of
              agricultural pests, issues in human and animal health, nutrient cycling and
              biodiversity.  Despite their importance, relationships among flies and their
              close relatives are controversial. Morphological studies to date in the
              primitive flies (e.g. mosquitoes, gnats, black flies, punkies) have relied
              heavily on groundplan coding in phylogenetic analyses, while molecular studies
              are often plagued by problems in taxon sampling.  This CAREER grant will
              integrate modern methods in taxonomic research, graduate education and natural
              history collections into a program that provides a firm foundation for solving
              problems on one of the most important lineages of pestiferous flies.

