Title       : CAREER: Fundamental Reliability Physics of MOS Devices Based on Deuterium
               Isotope Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0093156

Award Number: 0093156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374879             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi Chen zhichen@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed CAREER development program is an integrated research and teaching
              effort in MOS
transistor reliability physics.  The research component of this
              CAREER proposal focuses on fundamental study of mechanisms for the MOS device
              degradation and its isotope effect. The MOS transistor degradation is caused by
              Si-H (hydrogen) bond breaking at the SiO2-Si interface due to the energetic hot
              electrons. The current theory and experiments suggest that the Si-H bond
              breaking is caused by two competing processes: the excitation due to the
              energetic hot electrons and the de-excitation by energy coupling between the
              vibrational modes of the Si-H bonds and the phonon modes of the Si lattice. The
              energy coupling between the Si-D (deuterium) bonds and the Si lattice (TO
              phonon) is much more efficient than that between the Si-H bonds and the Si
              lattice. Therefore the Si-D bonds are more robust than Si-H bonds, which is the
              so-called isotope effect. Based on this principle, the deuterium-treated MOS
              transistors exhibit much longer hot-carrier lifetime (over 50 times) than the
              traditional hydrogen treatment. Evidence shows that there is a potential for
              further improvement of MOS transistor lifetime by over 100 times, if the
              mechanisms for degradation and its isotope effect are understood. The
              characterization of the efficient energy coupling between the two vibrational
              modes is that their frequencies are the same or very close. The study of the
              energy coupling is vital to understand the mechanisms for degradation and its
              isotope effect.  The proposed research program will focus on two thrusts: 1)
              Degradation mechanisms for deep-submicron MOS transistors from fundamental
              point of view and 2) Study of dynamic hot-carrier
degradation of MOS devices
              in CMOS inverters. In the first thrust, I will use Raman and Infrared
              (IR)
spectroscopy to study the vibrational modes of the Si-H and Si-D bonds.
              The ultimate goal of the
research program is to develop predictive principles
              from which the processing can be designed to
achieve the maximum lifetime
              improvement for MOS transistors. In the second thrust, I will study
              the
deuterium isotope effect for transistors under the dynamic stress or AC
              stress, because the transistors are
operating in AC conditions in the real
              circuits. The proposed research builds upon and expands the
research work that
              the PI is already undertaking.
The educational component of this CAREER
              program seeks support for development of a new
experimental course, integrated
              circuit device fabrication, and focused educational outreach activities
in
              Appalachian communities (underrepresented groups). With the support from the
              State of Kentucky
through the Research Challenge Trust Fund (RCTF), a Device
              Fabrication Facility is under construction
at UK. A new experimental course
              focused on fabrication of integrated circuit devices will be developed,
which
              is equivalent to similar courses in other universities in the US. The class is
              a hands-on lab course
where students have the opportunity to build
              semiconductor devices for integrated circuits. This class will
first be taught
              in the Fall 2001 for senior undergraduate students and graduate students.
              The
multidisciplinary nature of this program will provide students with a
              unique environment for research
and learning. The goal is to build bridges
              between these traditional disciplines such as physics, materials
science, and
              electrical engineering by conducting research and teaching through an
              integrated approach.
The other component of the educational objectives
              involves the educational outreach activities targeted
for high school students
              from Eastern and Southern Kentucky including Appalachian communities. One
of
              the objectives is to encourage those high school students to pursue high-tech
              career by presenting a
series of seminars in microelectronics. Another one is
              to offer an experimental project to teach them to
build some useful digital
              circuits. The high school students will be recruited from the already
              established
program, the Rogers Scholar Program organized by the Center for
              Rural Development, which the PI
already participates.

