Title       : CAREER: Enhancing Selectivity and Yield of Complex Multi-phase Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2001   
File        : a0093129

Award Number: 0093129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes G. Khinast khinast@sol.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI: Johannes G. Khinast 
Institution: Rutgers  University
              
Proposal Number: 0093129

This CAREER grant combines research and
              educational initiatives in the area of chemical reaction engineering, with a
              special emphasis on pharmaceutical and fine-chemical manufacture.

The
              research portion focuses on the development of experimental and modeling
              techniques that allow a complete characterization and a fundamental
              understanding of multi-phase flows and their impact on selectivity and yield in
              complex reactions.  The first specific aim is to create a new experimental
              system for the complete and concurrent characterization of flow fields, mixing
              patterns, and complex reactions throughout a reactor, using techniques such as
              planar laser-induced fluorescence, in-situ FTIR, and particle-imaging
              velocimetry.  The selective hydrogenation of p-isobutyl acetophenone, a
              catalytic route developed by Hoechst to produce ibuprofen (an anti-inflammatory
              drug) will be used as a test reaction.  The selectivity of this reaction
              depends strongly on the hydrodynamics.  Based on experimental data, advanced
              multi-phase CFD tools will be developed that integrate bubble coalescence, mass
              transfer, catalyst distribution, and complex reaction chemistry.  Another
              objective is the development of experimental and simulation tools that enable
              analyses of very fast reactions at gas-liquid interfaces.  Finally, the effects
              of flow-regime transitions in multi-phase reactors, which are known to have
              strong influence on the reactor performance will be studied.

The overall
              goal of the educational component is to provide a state-of-the-art education
              for students with wide varieties of backgrounds, to integrate - on all levels -
              research into education, and to extend outreach to the numerous companies and
              high schools in New Jersey.  The first specific aim is the development of a
              graduate reaction engineering course that reflects modern developments critical
              to the discipline (computational molecular sciences, nanotechnology, membrane
              reactors, etc.) and which is designed to strengthen the ties between Rutgers
              and Hew Jersey's industry.  Another objective is to develop a short course in
              pharmaceutical reaction engineering reflecting the rapid development of
              pharmaceutical technology, which calls for better training of next-generation
              pharmaceutical engineers.


