Title       : CAREER: Automatic Retargeting of Network Server Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0093351

Award Number: 0093351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivek Pai vivek@cs.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              High-performance network server software is already central to many users'
              day-to-day interaction with computers, and its importance will increase as more
              services become networkcentric.  Despite widespread commercial and academic
              interest in network servers, the process of developing and maintaining this
              software remains in its infancy.  The underlying difficulty is the blurring of
              the service (what gets done) with particular implementations (how it gets
              done).

This research focuses on automating the development and maintenance
              of the software's infrastructure, allowing programmers to focus their attention
              on the server's core functions.  The approach uses semi-automatic
              parallelization of network applications via source-to-source transformation. 
              This approach is well suited to the network server software domain, since
              common design patterns and behavior exploitable in a domain-specific manner are
              often used.

Fundamentally, this research advocates completely separating the
              server's behavioral model from its underlying software architecture.  Allowing
              programmers to specify the behavioral description of the software in a
              high-level manner frees developers from worrying about hardware details and
              operating system interfaces.  This decoupling provides benefits for server
              developers, and will spur new research in parallelization techniques, operating
              system interfaces, and software architectures.

