Title       : PECASE: Photopolymerization Kinetics and Consequent Nanostructure of Lyotropic
               Liquid Crystalline Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0093911

Award Number: 0093911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan Guymon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0093911
University of Southern Mississippi
Allan Guymon


The
              unique ordering presented by polymerizable lyotropic liquid crystalline (LLC)
              systems provides a wide variety of structures for a number of potentially
              important applications.  The major obstacle in using polymerized LLC materials,
              however, is the ability to remain and control this structure throughout the
              polymerization.  Typically, thermodynamically driven phase separation occurs
              during polymerization, leaving little or no liquid crystalline order.  The
              theme of the research planned by the PI is to use the photopolymerization
              kinetics as a nanoscopic probe to predict and control the nanostructure of LLC
              systems.  Two fundamental and complementary questions will be addressed using a
              combination of polymerization of LLC monomers and LLC templated
              polymerizations.  First, what role do order and the degree of order have in
              influencing the polymerization behavior?  The photopolymerization of materials
              spanning the gamut of LLC phases will be monitored to understand changes that
              occur during polymerization.  Factors that may influence phase behavior and
              structure control including temperature, LLC phase structure and stability,
              composition, polymerization time scale, and mobility will be examined.  Second,
              what influence does the polymerization have on structural evolution and the
              ability to control this structure?  Factors influencing phase behavior, phase
              separation, polymer structure and anisotropy will be examined extensively
              before, during and after polymerization.  Results for both questions will be
              related forming a complete model of the factors, both kinetic and
              thermodynamic, governing the ultimate polymer structure.  Tangible outcomes of
              this research are (1) development of a complete understanding of the
              polymerization and the mechanisms governing ultimate polymer structure and (2)
              establishment of the principles and methods for the molecular level design of
              LLC systems with controllable and adjustable nanostructure designed for
              particular applications.

A prevailing theme in this PECASE project will be
              student education.  Extensive involvement of undergraduate and graduate
              researchers in a discovery learning environment will be emphasized.  As a means
              to attract the best and brightest students to polymer science and engineering,
              a polymer module for high school chemistry is a primary element of the
              educational component.  In collaboration with Petal High School, a three-week
              module will be developed that presents the fundamentals, applications, and
              research opportunities in the field of polymer science.  Lecture,
              demonstration, laboratory, and testing materials will be correlated to
              emphasize the importance of polymers in everyday life.  Virtual labs, web-based
              materials and hands-on experiments will be incorporated.  The curriculum will
              involve extensive planning and involvement from the school district, the
              university, and local industry.  After successful implementation, the module
              will be brought to the Hattiesburg and Oak Grove school districts.  From these
              experiences a two-day instruction course will be developed for high school
              chemistry teachers throughout the state.  Special focus will be placed on
              involvement of districts with high percentages of underrepresented groups in
              science and engineering.  The module will also be modified appropriately for
              introductory chemistry courses at both junior colleges and
              universities.




