Title       : CAREER: Automated Storage Manager - An Operating System for Input/Output Devices
               on Storage Area Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0093111

Award Number: 0093111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Varki varki@cs.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Storage systems have evolved from simple disks under the control of file servers
              to large, indepen-
dent disk-array systems connected to the network using
              Network-Attached Storage (NAS) and Storage
Area Network (SAN) technology. A
              unique feature of these storage systems is that they are directly
accessible
              by applications running on independent computers without the intervention of
              file servers.
A downside, however, is that these systems are very difficult to
              manage because of the increased de-
mands placed on them by data intensive
              applications and the number of storage devices connected to
the network. We
              propose to improve the management of such storage systems by automating
              the
storage management tasks and incorporating performance techniques to
              provide the system with the
\intelligence" to adapt to varying storage and
              workload conditions. In essence, this storage manage-
ment software system
              will control and manage all access to storage devices on the network, much
              as
an operating system manages and controls all access to a computer system.
              The storage manager will
allow applications to express their response time,
              availability, and bandwidth requirements, and then
use this information along
              with its knowledge of device behaviors and application access patterns
              to
decide how best to map data to devices such that application constraints
              and storage system goals
are met. Based on this work, we anticipate the
              development of user-friendly, self-managed storage
systems that are more
              cost-effective, efficient, and available than current systems that are
              configured
and managed manually.
Our education goal is to integrate
              performance evaluation tools and techniques into the Computer
Science
              curriculum at the University of New Hampshire. Students who will work on the
              storage
management system will require performance evaluation skills and our
              education plan addresses this
issue. Our long-term goal is to coordinate with
              industry and other institutions to implement a
self-managing storage system
              and make itavailable for research and educational purposes.
