Title       : CAREER: Assessing the Potential for Natural and Enhanced Abiotic Transformation
               of Organic Pollutants in Natural Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0093332

Award Number: 0093332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth C. Butler ecbutler@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0093332
Butler
The National Research Council estimates that between 300,000
              and 400,000 sites with soil and
ground-water contamination exist in the United
              States, and that up to $1 trillion will be spent to
clean up these sites over
              the next 30 years ( 1 ). To be effective, this cleanup effort will require
              a
variety of remedial technologies. While natural attenuation is a
              demonstrated "technology" for
the remediation of certain contaminated sites,
              the processes that constitute natural attenuation,
including sorption,
              biodegradation, and abiotic transformation, are only generally understood.
The
              least studied of these processes is probably abiotic transformation of organic
              pollutants by
minerals, both alone and in the presence of natural organic
              matter--the focus of this proposed
research. Abiotic transformations are
              likely to be particularly important under conditions
inhospitable to microbial
              growth, such as high pollutant concentrations and low temperatures.
Since
              these conditions prevail at many contaminated sites, it is important to
              quantify to the
fullest extent possible the contribution of mineral mediated
              transformations to pollutant natural
attenuation.
The specific objectives of
              this research are: (1) identification of the pollutants and pollutant classes
              likely to undergo significant abiotic transformation in the presence of
              minerals
and compounds representative of natural organic matter (NOM), (2)
              correlation of reaction rates
with the molecular properties of the pollutant
              and NOM model compound, and with solution
conditions such as pH, ionic
              strength, and temperature, and (3) identification and evaluation of
techniques
              for enhancing abiotic pollutant natural attenuation.
While there is
              international recognition of the need for interdisciplinary research on complex
              environmental problems such as pollutant natural attenuation, there is no
              consensus on
how best to train scientists and engineers to conduct
              interdisciplinary research. The educational activities described in this
              proposal seek to train students in these strategies, and to identify effective
              practices for teaching environmental scientists and engineers to be
              interdisciplinary. Specific objectives include (1) implementation of an
              interdisciplinary undergraduate research program in which students from
              chemistry and environmental science and engineering departments serve as
              visiting researchers in each others' laboratories and (2) development of an
              interdisciplinary graduate course addressing pollutant natural attenuation. A
              suite of techniques will be employed to assess the effectiveness of these
              educational activities, including student portfolios and written
              self-assessments, student questionnaires, and interdisciplinary peer and
              faculty review of student reports and presentations.***

