Title       : CAREER: Mitochondrial Genome Evolution and Land Plant Phylogeny
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0093012

Award Number: 0093012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yin-Long Qiu yqiu@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0093012
Qiu
	Plants are primary producers on the earth, supplying our food
              directly and indirectly, creating the habitat we live in, and providing many
              other materials for everyday life.  However, our knowledge of plant evolution
              remains scanty.  Improvement of crops and understanding the
roles of plants in
              our environment partially hinge on our knowledge of plant evolution. 
              Revolutions in molecular biology, phylogenetics, and computer science have made
              it possible for the first time in history to reconstruct accurately the
              phylogeny of plants.
	In this project by Dr. Yin-Long Qiu at the University of
              Massachusetts-Amherst, three different approaches will be employed to
              understand both organismal and molecular aspects of land plant evolution. 
              First, several genes from all three plant genomes (nucleus, chloroplast,
              mitochondrion) will be sequenced and analyzed in combination with the data
              available from the public domain to reconstruct a multigene land plant
              phylogeny.  Second, several genomic structural features from the mitochondrial
              genome, such as intron acquisition, intron transposition, and gene cluster
              disintegration, will be investigated independently to evaluate critical parts
              of the sequence-based phylogeny and at the same to understand mitochondrial
              genome evolution in early land plants.  Last, a few mitochondrial genomes will
              be sequenced to gain an in-depth look at mitochondrial genome evolution during
              early land plant radiation and to provide more genomic structural characters
              for assessing robustness of the relationships resolved through gene sequence
              analyses among major lineages of early land plants: liverworts, mosses,
              hornworts, and vascular plants.
	Plant science is at the dawn of a new era. 
              After two decades of separate development along distinst lines of morphology,
              systematics, genetics, physiology, and ecology, these sub-disciplines begin to
              integrate into a new comprehensive plant biology.  Thus, this project also aims
              to reach two educational goals.  One is to train several graduate students and
              postdoctoral associates in the newly emerging field of evolutionary genomics. 
              They will fill in a knowledge rift between traditional systematics and modern
              genomics that is developing in many biology departments.  The other is to
              develop three courses, Plant Evolution, Evolutionary Genomics, and
              Phylogenetics, which are emerging fields with a recent explosion of new
              information.  These courses will serve the function for both undergraduate and
              graduate education.  In summary, the five lines of work outlined in this
              project are likely to enhance significantly our knowledge of land plant
              evolution.


