Title       : CAREER: Evolutionary Research and Education at CSU
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0093251

Award Number: 0093251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Voss   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0093251
Voss

During the last decade, concepts and techniques from various
              biological disciplines have yielded new tools for studying patterns and
              processes of evolution.  Accordingly, it is becoming increasingly important to
              pursue evolutionary questions that draw upon interdisciplinary concepts and
              research skills.  In this Career Development Plan, evolutionary research,
              education, and service objectives are proposed to introduce undergraduates,
              graduate students, and faculty at Colorado State University (CSU) to the
              emerging, interdisciplinary nature of evolutionary biology.  The overall goal
              of the research component is to integrate genetic and genomic approaches into
              an existing evolutionary research program that focuses on salamander biology. 
              The specific objectives are to construct the first comparative genome map of
              any amphibian and pursue quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping of
              ecologically, evolutionarily, and developmentally important traits.  A
              comparative gene map will allow identification of homologous chromosomal
              segments between salamanders and other vertebrates, thereby providing the first
              amphibian perspective to vertebrate genome evolution.  This objective will be
              accomplished by determining the genome location of approximately 600 protein
              coding loci using existing material from an interspecific mapping cross
              (Ambystoma mexicanum x A. mexicanum/A. tigrinum tigrinum).  The second research
              objective will be accomplished by performing comparative QTL analyses of two
              unique urodele traits: metamorphic failure (paedomorphosis) and limb
              regeneration.  Background data are presented to show the feasibility and
              significance of the research objectives.  The specific objectives of the
              education component are to: (1) Coordinate the development of a new, required
              course for undergraduate Biology majors at CSU: "BZ220: Introduction to
              Evolution", (2) Further develop a course for upper division undergraduates and
              graduate students entitled "BZ478: Molecular and Developmental Evolution.", (3)
              Establish a recurrent graduate seminar that focuses on evolutionary biology,
              and (4) Provide research opportunities for undergraduates through the REU
              program.  Finally, the specific objective of the Service component will be to
              serve as a meeting organizer of the annual meeting of The Society for the Study
              of Evolution, which will be hosted by CSU in 2004.  Taken together,
              accomplishment of these research, service, and education objectives will
              further strengthen the program in Evolutionary Biology at CSU.  

