Title       : CAREER: Effective Grid Programming with EveryWare and G-commerce
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2001   
File        : a0093166

Award Number: 0093166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles H. Koelbel                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344208             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Wolski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As network performance has increased, the high-performance computing community
              has begun to
turn to distributed systems to meet their performance needs.
              Research that combines the concurrency
management techniques from parallel
              computing with scalable and adaptive distributed systems design has resulted in
              a new software architecture known as the "Computational Grid". Its main tenet
              is that user programs should be able to draw computational "power" from a
              distributed resource pool the way
electrical appliances draw electricity from
              a power utility: ubiquitously, seamlessly and reliably. This
project will
              investigate a novel approach to building software systems that implement the"
              Computational
Grid"  model of computing and how to foster new curricular
              directions based on this investigation.

As vehicles for this proposed work,
              two research thrusts will be combined in the form of EveryWare and G-commerce
              to define a new programming methodology for the Grid. EveryWare is a software
              toolkit for building robust, high-performance distributed applications that can
              use existing Computational Grid
middleware as building blocks. An EveryWare
              program is structured as a set of application customizable
services that use
              the EveryWare toolkit as an adaptive server framewirk while leveraging the
              functionality
provided by existing Grid systems. G-commerce is a computational
              economic system that allows applications to purchase resources from
              computational suppliers. A key feature of G-commerce is that it is a
              macro-economic system which provably achieves economic equilibrium and market
              stability. By combining these two we will define a new and powerful approach to
              programming Grid applications.

To do so we will:
.extend and implement the
              EveryWare software toolkit,
.study and develop economic formulations that will
              form the basis of G-commerce
based resource allocation strategies,
.develop a
              computational exchange for implementing resource economies an
infrastructure
              for empirical G-commerce resource scheduling studies and,
.verify our results
              using non-trivial Grid applications in "live" Grid settings.

The research
              approach of this project is both analytical and experimental.
It will approach
               the problem of ensuring resource allocation stability and
equilibrium
              theoretically and using simulation. Then implement promising
economic
              formulations using the computational exchange, and test their
validity with
              EveryWare implimentations of Grid applications. At the same
time, EveryWare
              will be enhanced so that it enables the aplication programmers
and schedulers
              to consider computational price when making resource
              allocation
decisions.

EveryWare and G-commerce will also serve as the basis
              for new directions in
curriculum development. A course sequence will be
              designed that combines
distributed computing techniques, statistical analysis
              of load conditions, and
economic modeling methods from the literature with
              practical implementation
using Computational Grids. The resulting
              multi-disciplinary course will allow
students to compare and combine different
              strategies easily for the purpose of
making quantitative evaluations, which
              will be a primary focus of each sequence.

Practica will also be organized in
              which students from different Universities
will be invited to participate.
              Each practicum will focus on the implementation
of a chosen application using
              different Computational Grid infrastructures.
Students will compare different
              techniques and use the EveryWare toolkit and
G-commerce to combine those that
              are the most effective.  



