Title       : CAREER
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0093349

Award Number: 0093349
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Muriel Medard medard@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CCR-0093349

ABSTRACT

This project investigates aspects of reliable
              communications for very
different types of network variability.
The first
              part of the project is concerned with capacity and robustness of
networks to
              permanent failures such as removal of a link or node. The
approach in this
              project moves away from a pure graph-theoretic approach,
based purely on
              routing, to consider network capacity using an algebraic
framework. Capacity
              is considered as the characterization of  the set of
connections that can be
              supported by a network in which the nodes are not
only capable of traditional
              routing functions, but can also perform
processing of the data that arrives to
              them. Such processing is considered
as a code over the network. Coding is also
              applied to recovery to maintain
certain connections in a network even after
              failure of a portion of the
network, for instance after the disappearance of a
              link in the network. The
second part of the project considers robustness in
              channels where fading
varies over both time and frequency, especially over
              ultra wide frequency
bands. The goal of this part of the project is to
              establish theoretical
results that relate capacity, peak power, energy,
              bandwith and probability
of error in such a way as to characterize the
              practical achievable
performance in wide band wireless systems.

The first
              part of this project investigates the reliability of networks
under normal and
               failure conditions when coding is used to ensure
continuity of connections.
              This project shows that traditional methods of
recovery in networks, such as
              rerouting, are subsets of network coding and
establishes coding methods to
              increase the realibility of networks under
failure conditions. Moreover, the
              projects investigates the issue of network
management, where network
              management represents the information needed to
modify the behavior of the
              network, defined as the code of the network, in
response to failures. The
              algebraic approach taken in this project allows
some characterization of the
              fundamental limits of the number of bits
required to effect changes on the
              network code and of the portions of the
network that require knowledge of
              failures. The second part of the project
considers capacity of very wide band
              channels and the applicability of
different types of signals and codes to
              achieve performance at or near the
theoretical maximum. In particular, it
              explores to what extent very high
peak power symbols, which are known to
              achieve capacity in the limit of very
large bandwidths, are necessary to
              achieve capacity. The project also
explores the ranges of bandwidth in which
              ultra-wideband results are
achievable. This work bridges the theoretical
              limits of the channel
(capacity) with the applicability of the techniques that
              achieve capacity by
providing an explicit bound to the probability of error in
              terms of rate,
bandwidth and peak power of the signal. Finally, the project
              consider the
applicability, in the range of moderate to large bandwidths, of
              traditional
spread spectrum approaches, such as direct-sequence code-division
              multiple
access, that perform poorly in the limit of very large
              bandwidths.



