Title       : CAREER: Laser Micro- and Nano-Processing of Biodegradable Polymers for
               Biomedical and BioMEMS Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2001    
File        : a0093364

Award Number: 0093364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaochen Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1605,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development ( CAREER) project integrates research and
              educational initiatives focusing on micro- and nano-scale processing of
              biodegradable polymers using laser techniques for biomedical and bioMEMS
              applications.  Research focusing on laser micro- and nano-scale processing with
              parametric studies using both a UV excimer laser and a femtosecond laser to
              produce controlled micro-features on polymer surfaces will be addressed. 
              Biodegradable polymers hold immense promise as new materials for implantable
              biomedical micro-devices due to their biocompatibility and ability to naturally
              degrade and disappear in tissues over a desired period of time.  This
              degradability eliminates a second surgery to retrieve the implanted
              micro-devices.  The CAREER project will:   (1) develop an advanced laser
              technique with a near-field beam delivery system to produce controlled micro-
              and nano-scale patterns on biodegradable polymer surfaces; (2) develop an
              experimental system and a numerical model to investigate the transient
              laser-material interaction process on extremely small time and length scales;
              and (3) implement the research into the development of biodegradable micro- and
              nano-devices.  This research will make significant contribution to the emerging
              and interdisciplinary field of micro- and nano-manufacturing science and
              technology, bioengineering, and polymer science.

The integrated education
              plan will focus on curriculum development in micro- and nano-manufacturing at
              the undergraduate and graduate levels by infusing emerging and
              multi-disciplinary research into the classroom. This plan also encourages women
              students in research and adopts cooperative learning techniques in teaching.
              The PI also incorporates a learning plan for himself in new methods of 
              educational pedagogy and curriculum development.
