Title       : CAREER: Regulation of Growth Cone Dynamics by Actin Depolymerizing Factor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0093359

Award Number: 0093359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $501711             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Meberg peter_meberg@und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN 0093359
PI: Meberg, Peter

Abstract
	During the development of the
              nervous system individual neurons must extend their axons and form synaptic
              contacts with other neurons or muscles.  The growing tips of axons, the growth
              cones, are able to navigate to their appropriate synaptic targets by responding
              to extracellular cues.  This growth cone motility and navigation is regulated
              by the directed assembly of actin filaments.  Many extracellular matrix
              proteins, growth factors and other signaling molecules can regulate actin
              dynamics, but the intracellular effectors that link signal transduction
              pathways to actin reorganization in neurons are not well characterized.  Actin
              depolymerizing factor (ADF) and related proteins may be important targets of
              these signals since: 1) ADF is essential for actin-dependent motility in other
              simpler systems; 2) ADF is present in growth cones; 3) ADF activity is
              regulated by many signal pathways; and 4) increased ADF activity increases the
              extension of axons. The first objective of Dr. Meberg and his students will be
              to determine how changes in ADF activity affect growth cone structure and
              dynamics in primary neuronal cultures.  Changes in ADF activity will be
              accomplished though antisense suppression of ADF expression as well as the
              expression of mutant forms of ADF and LIM kinase using recombinant
              adenoviruses.  LIM kinase inhibits ADF activity by phosphorylation. Dr. Meberg
              will then ascertain if growth cone responsiveness to extracellular cues
              involves changes in ADF activity.   This will be accomplished first by assaying
              if changes in the phosphorylation state/activity of ADF are locally or globally
              induced within growth cones and neurons by guidance cues normally present in
              the nervous system.  Finally, they will perform assays to determine if
              signaling through ADF is required for responsiveness to discrete extracellular
              cues, using the ADF and LIMK mutants that prevent signaling through ADF
              phosphorylation.  Such studies are essential for determining whether ADF simply
              stimulates outgrowth in general or if it is also an integral component for
              growth cone navigation. These studies will not only extend our understanding of
              how actin dynamics are regulated in growth cones, but also how neurons grow and
              are able to form appropriate connections during brain development. The
              integration of the proposed research activities and facilities with teaching
              responsibilities will enhance graduate and undergraduate education at the
              University of North Dakota by direct student involvement in the research
              project together with increased capabilities in the teaching labs. 


