Title       : PECASE: Shape Memory Alloy Technology for Seismic Retrofit of Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0093868

Award Number: 0093868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald DesRoches   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
This PECASE award combines multi-disciplinary, multi-scale, research and
              education programs to study the innovative use of shape-memory alloys (SMAs) as
              seismic dampers in Civil engineering structures.  Shape memory alloys are a
              class of alloys that display several unique characteristics, including high
              damping characteristics.  The research program ranges from micro-scale studies
              to full-scale proof-of-concept experimental tests.  The research plan has the
              following tasks: (1) Determine the effects of thermo-mechanical heat treatment
              on the mechanical properties of shape memory alloys; (2)  Develop SMA-based
              passive dampers for use in seismic resistant design and retrofit; (3) Develop
              analytical models for SMAs; (4) Conduct full-scale tests of structures with SMA
              dampers; and (5) Develop code procedures for using shape memory alloy
              dampers.

The integration of research and education is accomplished through a
              Research Experience for Undergraduates program in the area of "smart
              materials."  Students from interdisciplinary fields such as materials science,
              mechanical engineering, as well as civil engineering will work collaboratively
              on both experimental and analytical aspects of the applications of smart
              materials.

The research will provide a unique database of experimental
              results on large-scale shape memory alloy material, which can be used as a
              basis for the development of a new family of innovative energy dissipating
              devices.  The research will also lead to the development of analytical tools
              and methodologies to allow practicing engineers to determine potential benefits
              of a variety of applications of shape memory alloys.  Finally, the research
              will lead to code development and implementation for using shape memory alloys
              in Civil  Engineering structures.  In light of the recent economic losses in
              major earthquakes, this research will lead to innovative, simple, and highly
              effective methods for seismic rehabilitation of structures.



