Title       : CAREER: Models and Representations for Digital Images and Video
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0093179

Award Number: 0093179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Onur G. Guleryuz onur@danbala.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Increased connectivity to information networks and the widespread availability
              of high bandwidth links are expected to result in much increased interest in
              digital image and video applications providing very high quality and advanced
              processing and compression options. This research is geared toward addressing
              this need by providing more accurate representations, modeling,  processing and
              compression for digital images and video. The main objective is the development
              of localized, multiresolutional models and the design of related estimation,
              optimization, and processing strategies. The developed techniques are
              specifically targeted at digital images and video depicting natural scenes,
              which are characterized by localized singularities separating regions of
              uniform smoothness/texture in the camera plane. Statistical multiresolutional
              models for the singularities combined with global optimization techniques
              constitute the foundations of the research track. The developed techniques are
              utilized in a variety of applications including compression, estimation of
              missing data, noise removal, segmentation and resolution enhancement. The
              results of this research are expected to have an impact in a variety of areas,
              such as wireless communications and multimedia applications over the Internet.
              Modern engineering education involves many courses that assume students are
              familiar with detailed technical background material. The educational component
              of this is geared toward addressing significant variations in student
              background by allowing the students to enhance their learning experience at
              their own pace. Educational objectives include the development of computerized,
              multimedia assisted course material, including problems and example solutions
              with rich annotations. Extensions of this material to distance learners,
              including outreach to broader communities of learners over information
              networks, are expected. 
