Title       : Career: A Prediction-based Approach to Responsive Distributed Interactive
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0093221

Award Number: 0093221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Dinda pdinda@cs.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              	Over the next few years, large high resolution displays and immersive displays
              will enable and popularize new kinds of interactive applications that will
              drive a vast increase in the demand for computational and communications
              resources.  These demands will be met by using increasingly wider area
              distributed computing environments such as computational grids.  Unfortunately,
              there is a mismatch between the aperiodic soft real-time requirements of these
              distributed interactive applications and the shared, unreserved, highly dynamic
              and competitive environments they will run in.  To achieve responsiveness these
              applications will have to adapt their behavior to the vagaries of their
              execution environments.
	A number of adaptation mechanisms have been developed
              or proposed, but there is comparatively little work on how to control these
              mechanisms to achieve soft real-time constraints.  The goal of this project is
              to develop a control system that can competently advise an application as to
              how to make use of its adaptation mechanisms to achieve such constraints.  The
              approach is to apply rigorous statistical prediction techniques to predict both
              how the application's resource demands will vary over time and how the
              environment's resource availability will vary over time.  Such predictions,
              which are computed on demand at run-time, can then be used by the application
              or other user-level middleware services to choose an appropriate mapping for
              the application's tasks with which they can meet their constraints with high
              probability.
	The contributions of this project will include a statistical
              characterization of the dynamic behavior and predictability of the demand for
              CPU and network resources in distributed interactive applications, a
              statistical characterization of the dyunamic behavior and predictability of the
              availability of these resources in distributed computing environments,
              practical tools for predicting resource demand and availability online and
              providing application-level performance predictions and adaptation advice to
              distributed interactive applications, and courses that will introduce graduate
              students and undergraduates to statistical prediction techniques and data
              analysis within the context of computer systems research and practice.  The
              project will also produce at least two Ph.D. dissertations.
	This project will
              build on the researcher's earlier work, which has shown , for a simplified
              problem, namely scheduling compute-bound real-time tasks using time series
              predictions of host load, that the approach described in this proposal can work
              and can lead to the kinds of contributions described above.  In addition to
              producing scientific results, software artifacts, and educating students, the
              researcher believes that the path shown here will develop his reputation as the
              authority on prediction-based services for distributed interactive applications
              within the high performance distributed computing community.

