Title       : CAREER: Subsurface Heterogeneities, Interfaces and Biodegradation: Defining the
               Limits on In Situ Bioremediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0093857

Award Number: 0093857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Seagren eseagren@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Billions of dollars are invested world wide for the remediation of soil and
              groundwater contamination, making it important that appropriate remedial
              strategies be selected.  In situ technologies are proving to be economical and
              popular remediation alternatives.  One such technology is in situ
              bioremediation.  For in situ bioremediation to be used successfully and
              economically, additional fundamental research is required to allow for more
              informed field implementation.  The CAREER award will provide an opportunity
              for the continued development of the PI's research goals in the application and
              evaluation of in situ bioremediation technologies, as part of a balanced and
              integrated program of research, education, and
              scholar/practitioner
partnerships that will broaden and enrich the PI's
              capabilities and contributions.

Research:  Intrinsic and engineered in situ
              bioremediation are made technologically challenging by the physically and
              chemically heterogeneous nature of the subsurface environment. 
              Indeed,
subsurface heterogeneities have been identified as an important factor
              impacting the success of in situ bioremediation since its first application. 
              Despite this, the understanding of the impact of
heterogeneities on in situ
              biodegradation is still relatively limited.  The main hypothesis of this
              research is that a quantitative framework based on a set of dimensionless
              coefficients can be de eloped that will capture the effects of the competing
              interfacial- and bio-kinetic processes and define limits on the successful
              application of in situ bioremediation.  This research proposes to rigorously
              evaluate this hypothesisby developing such a framework and testing it using a
              combination of numerical modeling and experimentation.  Specifically, a
              systematic and integrated set of modeling and laboratory experiments will be
              performed. The proposed research will improve the fundamental understanding of
              the impact of subsurface heterogeneities on in situ bioremediation and will be
              a step toward the development of a practical, relatively easy to use tool to
              help practitioners in the field define when in situ bioremediation will work
              and, if so, whether an engineered or intrinsic approach is best.

Education: 
              The overall goal of the proposed education activities is to work to develop the
              potential of undergraduate and graduate engineering students.  Specifically,
              the educational efforts are focused into two objectives:  (1) to test
              instructional strategies that enhance the problem solving and decision making
              skills of students, and (2) to develop and promote research activities and
              productive scholar/practitioner partnerships that provide opportunities for
              students to develop as researchers and practitioners.  To achieve the first
              objective, a variety of instructional strategies will implemented and tested
              including:  assessment of student learning styles and development of approaches
              addressing those styles; increased use of cooperative learning  via small group
              discussions featuring controversy, case studies, ethics, and role playing;
              increased use of experiments, field trips and demonstrations; improved use of
              technology for Web-based activities and asynchronous learning; and
              incorporation of research results into classroom teaching.  The second
              objective will be achieved through the continued pursuit of undergraduate
              research opportunities and improved mentoring of students involved with
              research.  In addition,
scholar/practitioner partnerships are being developed
              that will provide interesting industry-based
cases for class discussions and
              projects, and provide an opportunity for student work experience.

