Title       : CAREER: Phase and Amplitude Noise in Heterostructure Transistor Amplifiers and
               Oscillators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2001  
File        : a0093918

Award Number: 0093918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva S. Ferre-Pikal evafp@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0093918
Ferre-Pikal

The PI proposes a five-year career development program
              that integrates research and educational activities in the area of radio
              frequency (RF) and microwave electronics.  The research plan includes a
              comprehensive study of sources of 1/f noise phase modulation (PM) noise and
              amplitude modulation (AM) noise in heterostructure transistor amplifiers and
              oscillators.  The educational plan includes curriculum development in the area
              of RF and microwave electronics, in addition to participation of undergraduate
              students in the research activities.  A mentoring program to improve retention
              and recruitment of women in the college of engineering is also included in the
              educational activities.

PM and AM noise in oscillators limit the performance
              of wireless communication systems, precision navigation systems, and radar
              systems.  In receivers, the PM noise of the local oscillator is very important
              since it degrades the receiver's sensitivity and the rejection of adjacent
              channels.  In oscillators above 500 MHz, the main source of PM noise is the
              noise in the electronics (amplifier).  In recent years, there have been an
              emerging number of heterostructure transistors that promise to have a large
              impact on the electronics of communication and radar systems.  These devices
              have shown improved injection and transport characteristics, and thus an
              improved performance over homojunction devices.  In addition, these devices are
              potentially low noise.  A study of 1/f noise up-conversion into PM and AM noise
              about the carrier frequency in heterostructure transistor amplifiers and
              oscillators is proposed.  Both heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs) and
              heterostructure field-effect transistors (HFETs) will be included in the study.
               The studies will be made in amplifiers and oscillators at carrier frequencies
              of 500 MHz, 1 GHz, 2 GHz, and 4 GHz.  This investigation will identify the
              advantages and disadvantages of the different technologies and will determine
              the optimum technology for low noise amplifiers and oscillators in
              communication systems and radar applications.  In addition, transistor
              parameters affecting the noise up-conversion will be identified and this
              information will lead to improvements in the design of heterostructure
              transistors.

As part of the educational plan, the PI will enhance the
              curriculum in the area of high frequency electronics.  The PI will develop a
              two-course sequence in microwave and RF electronics.  The University of Wyoming
              does not have formal courses in this important and growing area.  Some of the
              topics included in this sequence will be transmission line concepts, scattering
              parameters, matching networks, amplifiers, filters, mixers, and oscillators. 
              The PI will also develop a graduate course on noise in high frequency devices. 
              This course will cover sources of noise in devices such as diodes, mixers,
              amplifiers, and oscillators.  In addition, it will include a discussion of PM
              and AM noise concepts and measurement systems.  This course will make the
              University of Wyoming one of the very few universities that address the problem
              of precision frequency control.  The educational plan also includes a mentoring
              program to improve recruitment and retention of women in engineering.  The PI
              will organize an annual reception for women entering the engineering program,
              as well as informal lunches for electrical engineering female students in which
              issues concerning the students will be discussed.  The PI will also organized
              visits to middle schools and high schools to talk to female students about the
              exciting field of engineering.

