Title       : The Role of Local Political Hierarchies in Colonization of Mexico's Southern
               Frontier
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2001  
File        : a0093739

Award Number: 0093739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nora M. Haenn nora.haenn@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0093739
Haenn

Colonization of agricultural frontiers is a crucial factor
              driving global deforestation.  Tropical forests house valuable biodiversity
              which contributes to the health of the global environment.  This project by a
              cultural anthropologist from Arizona State University examines the
              micro-political processes shaping settlement of Mexico's tropical frontier to
              assess how these processes contribute to land use decisions by swidden farmers.
               The project focuses on the ejido, or communally managed farm community, to
              examine how village power dynamics affect migration and farming practices. The
              project studies Calakmul, Campeche, Mexico, home to 25,000 migrant farmers and
              the Calakmul Biosphere Reserve, Mexico's largest protected tropical ecosystem.
              Preliminary studies show that village conflict affects farming decisions. 
              Calakmul residents distinguish between landed and non-landed farmers, the
              latter having no voice in ejidal assemblies that formulate local policies.  The
              project will employ a team of researchers from a regional university and local
              communities to conduct village and household level surveys in 10 communities
              over a period of five months. The surveys, coupled with archival information,
              will document the range of variation in inequality in the area. Hypotheses will
              be tested relating the political status of newcomers and the quality and
              quantity of land available to them, as well as the focus on cash rather than
              subsistence crops, intercropping and input levels of labor and fertilizer.
              Given the recent growth of Calakmul as a site of in-migration, and changes in
              Mexico's ejido legislation, this research will provide valuable information on
              the nature and sources of change in local environmental practices. This new
              knowledge will be relevant to other situations of threats to biodiversity in
              tropical areas of expanding population. 

