Title       : CAREER: Genetic Control of Axon Guidance in C. Elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a0093192

Award Number: 0093192
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $552461             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik Lundquist elundqst@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,9178,9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental question in developmental biology concerns the mechanisms by which
              cells and tissues assume their proper forms and positions in a developing
              organism.  Morphogenesis is typified by the developing nervous system, where
              neurons extend cellular processes called axons that make specific contacts with
              other neurons to form an axon scaffold upon which functional neuronal
              connections are made.  How are axons guided to their targets in the nervous
              system?  Recent studies have identified genes that encode "sensor" molecules,
              transmembrane receptor proteins on the surface of the axon that detect
              information about guidance.  However, the genes and mechanisms involved in
              translating a guidance signal into a morphological change in axon structure,
              mediated by the cellular scaffolding, remain largely a mystery.  Dr.
              Lundquist's research aims to identify and analyze genes involved in the
              mechanisms of translating axon guidance information into axon morphological
              change.  A molecular-genetic approach utilizing the nematode worm
              Caenorhabditis elegans will be taken to characterize new genes involved in axon
              morphogenesis.  To this end, the role of lip-1 in axon pathfinding and unc-115
              function will be determined. Furthermore, Dr. Lundquist will initiate a genetic
              screen for new mutations that disrupt axon morphogenesis.  Genes involved in
              the regulation of the actin cytoskeleton will be targeted by screening for
              mutations that synergize with mutations in the unc-115, a gene encoding a novel
              actin-binding protein that is active during axon morphogenesis.  New genes
              defined by these mutations will be isolated to determine the nature of the
              genes' function in morphogenesis.  These studies will be greatly aided by the
              completely known C. elegans genome sequence.  Similar studies using C. elegans
              and the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster have uncovered fundamental mechanisms
              of cellular function, including mechanisms of cell fate determination and cell
              signaling during development.  The studies described here will identify new
              genes and mechanisms used by neurons to translate guidance information into
              axon morphological change.  Indeed, the roles of these genes will most likely
              be conserved in tissues other than neurons and in organisms other than C.
              elegans.  Therefore, these studies will elucidate fundamental aspects of
              cellular morphogenesis during development and provide insight into the
              processes by which the rather unformed single-celled embryo develops into a
              complex organism.  By incorporating these research activities into classroom
              and laboratory teaching, Dr. Lundquist will provide many opportunities for
              undergraduate and graduate student training in modern molecular genetics and
              genomics as well as in the skills of critical thought.

