Title       : CAREER: Resonant MEMS for Sensing Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0093994

Award Number: 0093994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly Turner turner@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Applications utilizing microelectromechanical system (MEMS) components are
              becoming increasingly more numerous and important. A hallmark of MEMS is that
              unlike merely miniaturizing existing designs and ideas, it provides an
              innovative technology which will enable experiments in biology, nanotechnology,
              materials, and physics which have not been previously achievable.  However, to
              make these devices robust, and improve on the sensitivity of existing sensors,
              new ideas must be employed in sensor design, as well as in calibration, test
              and characterization, and fabrication.
The research goals of this proposal are
              to design, build, and test dynamic MEMS sensors for mass (chemical) and
              pressure which possess high sensitivity due to unique dynamic effects; to
              extend the understanding of parametric oscillators to  coupled systems, and
              develop tunable filter applications.   An integrated educational program is
              also proposed that uses the aforementioned sensors in internet-based
              experiments geared toward eighth grade students, and uses the above sensors as
              demonstration and teaching modules in the newly formed MEMS undergraduate
              curriculum at UCSB. 
One important class of devices, on which this proposal is
              based, is dynamic MEMS.  Vibratory sensors can often provide higher sensitivity
              than that shown with static, or quasi-static devices. In this proposal, the PI
              plans to achieve important results in fundamental understanding of the dynamics
              of microsystems.  Unique designs for resonant MEMS having applications in bio
              (chemical) sensors, tunable mechanical filters, switches,  and pressure sensors
              are proposed, as well as the fundamental science which enables them.  As well
              as studying single oscillators, studying systems of coupled oscillators will
              lead to a deeper understanding of electrostatic and mechanical coupling between
              nearby elements, which also has widespread benefit.  
MEMS and
              Nanoelectromechanical Systems (NEMS) provide a unique opportunity to introduce
              people to science at varying degrees of complexity.   Using the internet (www),
              interactive modules are proposed which aim to interest potential young
              scientists about the future in micro-engineering.  Web modules also provide a
              non-gender specific way of presenting interesting science to students.  The
              novelty of MEMS devices can draw and maintain the interest of young people, and
              illustrate fundamental physics principles, as well as give students an idea
              about what makes engineering an exciting career choice.  Through existing
              programs at UCSB, a middle school teacher will spend part of the summer in the
              PI's research lab developing the web-based experiments, and learning the
              necessary skills to teach the material in the classroom.   
Dynamic MEMS
              provide an engaging educational medium, as well as tools which will lead to
              important advances in sensing, filters, and data storage.  This proposal aims
              to address some of the fundamental issues in micro-sensor development, as well
              as use the simplicity and novelty of micro-devices to encourage middle school
              students to pursue exciting areas of science.

