Title       : CAREER: Microscopic Study of Photon Localization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0093949

Award Number: 0093949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hui Cao h-cao@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In a highly disordered medium, light may be localized in small regions of the
              size on the order of  an optical wavelength. So far most experiments on photon
              localization are performed on the macroscopic level. We propose microscopic
              studies of photon localization using a near-field scanning optical microscope
              and a scanning electron microscope. The interplay of light localization and
              coherent amplification is a fascinating new field of research. We will
              investigate the effect of optical gain on light diffusion in a random medium.
              In addition to experimental studies, we will simulate photon localization
              numerically with a new approach based on the finite-difference time-domain
              method. The proposed interdisciplinary research will make a significant impact
              on condensed matter physics, optics, and laser physics. The proposed
              educational activities include: (1) establishment of a new multidisciplinary
              course, Applications of Optics in Medicine and Environmental Science; (2)
              initiation of an outreach program through the World-Wide-Web; (3) involvement
              of undergraduate students and high school science teachers in leading-edge
              research work. 
%%%
Light scattering is a common phenomenon, occurring in
              clouds and human tissue. The behavior of light in disordered media is of great
              interest not only to physicists, but also to biologists. One extraordinary
              phenomenon is photon localization: light can be "trapped" in a micrometer-sized
              random medium. So far there has been no direct evidence of photon localization.
              With the recent advance of nanotechnology, we propose to use nanometer-sized
              tips to directly probe localized photons. In addition to experimental studies,
              we will calculate photon localization with a new numerical simulation method.
              By comparing the simulation result with the experimental data, we will gain a
              deep insight of photon localization and its difference from electron
              localization. The proposed interdisciplinary research will make a significant
              impact on condensed matter physics, optics, and laser physics. The proposed
              educational activities include: (1) creation of a new multidisciplinary course,
              Applications of Optics in Medicine and Environmental Science; (2)  initiation
              of an outreach program through the World-Wide-Web; (3) involvement of
              undergraduate students and high school science teachers in leading-edge
              research work.
*** 




