Title       : CAREER: A Methodology to Systematically Characterize and Diagnose Manufacturing
               Variation with In-Process Measurement Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0093580

Award Number: 0093580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel W. Apley apley@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to
              develop, implement, and teach a systematic and generic methodology for
              diagnosing product and process variation in a modern data-rich manufacturing
              environment.  The methodology developed in this CAREER plan will provide a
              means of effectively utilizing the measurement data for manufacturing variation
              reduction, leading to higher quality manufactured products that boost the
              competitiveness of our nations industries.  The primary focus of the research
              is on representing, characterizing, and quantifying the precise nature of the
              temporal and spatial patterns. The intent is that graphical displays of the
              variation pattern characteristics will serve as powerful diagnostic aids which
              facilitate the identification and elimination of root causes of variation by
              human operators.  The methods that will be employed have a strong
              multidisciplinary emphasis. Temporal and spatial representations of variation,
              which are based on underlying physical and engineering principles, will be
              incorporated into the proposed statistical diagnosis algorithms in order to
              effectively extract and interpret meaningful information from the data. Linear
              and nonlinear spatial representations and joint time-frequency temporal
              representations will provide general, yet descriptive, characterizations of
              process variation. As the structure of in-process measurement data becomes
              increasingly dense, methods developed for signal and image processing
              applications gain importance as tools for statistical process control (SPC) of
              manufacturing variation. Concepts from sensor array processing and
              time-frequency analysis will be used extensively in the research plan. The
              proposed education plan emphasizes the need for this multidisciplinary approach
              to SPC. The curriculum will provide training in the physics and modeling of
              complex manufacturing processes (from a mechanical engineering perspective) and
              sensing and signal processing technology (from an electrical engineering
              perspective), as well as in the statistical fundamentals of SPC. Virtual plant
              tours and case studies from the results of the research plan will be used to
              illustrate the complexity of advanced manufacturing processes, the prevalence
              of in-process measurement technology, and the multidisciplinary methods needed
              to effectively utilize the data.

The methodology developed in this CAREER
              plan will provide a concrete basis for integrating systematic diagnosis
              strategies into SPC, which will advance the body of scientific knowledge on SPC
              for manufacturing variation reduction. To reach a wide audience, the results
              will be broadly disseminated in applied statistics, quality control, signal
              processing, and manufacturing conferences and journals. The multidisciplinary
              emphasis will strengthen the link between the signal processing and SPC
              disciplines and help to attract students and researchers from other academic
              areas to the field of manufacturing quality control, bringing with them an
              infusion of new ideas.  The plan involves close collaboration with major
              representatives of two industries that are vital to the US economy - automobile
              and electronics manufacturing.  Both have demonstrated a strong commitment to
              ensuring the success of this CAREER plan, and their manufacturing facilities
              will serve as testbeds for directly implementing the results. It is expected
              that the results will be broadly applicable in a variety of manufacturing
              industries.

