Title       : CAREER: Managing Complexity: Fidelity Control for Optimal Usability in 3D
               Graphics Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0093172

Award Number: 0093172
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $416666             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin A. Watson watsonb@cs.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Improvements in the speed of 3D graphics rendering hardware have been
              accompanied by even more drastic increases in the size of displayed models. 
              Full-system CAD, 3D model scanners, procedurally generated models, and
              visualization data sets are now approaching hundreds of millions or even
              billions of polygons in size.  Researchers trying to display these models have
              been forced either to reduce display speed and interactivity, or instead to
              reduce the fidelity of the displayed views of their models.  What are the best
              methods for preserving visual fidelity as model complexity is automatically
              reduced or "simplified"?  What is the most effective way of striking the
              display speed vs. visual fidelity compromise?  And in the increasingly
              important graphics application of visualization, how can we preserve the
              meaningful elements of the displayed data, and make users effective managers of
              information complexity?   This research will take its three complementary
              directions from the three above questions.  The PI will develop prototype
              systems and investigate their effectiveness with user studies.  Many of these
              studies will take place in the context of driving applications developed for
              existing collaborations with colleagues in academia and the gaming industry. 
              Specific goals will include the development and evaluation of automatic methods
              for measuring fidelity; an examination of the hypothesis that fidelity control
              should minimize visual error, whether it is introduced by compromises in visual
              fidelity or display speed; and for abstract information visualization, study of
              fidelity measures and summarization techniques not necessarily inspired by
              knowledge of perception in the natural world.  While many technical solutions
              have addressed the issues of measuring similarity and summarizing complex data,
              only a few of them have been evaluated in rigorous usability studies.  This
              research will fill this gap, producing knowledge, guidelines, heuristics and
              software that will improve the usability of interactive 3D graphics
              applications.
