Title       : CAREER: Efficient Encoding Communication and Data Fusion Strategies for Wireless
               Networks of Sensors and Actuators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0093137

Award Number: 0093137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haralabos C. Papadopoulos babis@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
The focus of this project is the investigation of the performance limits and
              the devel-opment of an algorithmic framework for resource-efficient encoding,
              communication, and fusion of measurements in wireless networks of distributed
              sensors and actuators. Such networks are attractive solutions for a broad
              spectrum of applications due to the inherent sensor/actuator mobility, the
              spatial flexibility these networks allow in taking actions and collecting
              measure-ments, and consequently the quality of the data they can provide. In
              particular, they find use in "smart-space" type applications, target tracking
              and surveillance for robot navigation and radar applications, and data
              gathering for weather forecasting and environmental applications. 

 The
              research focus of the project is the development of low-power minimal-delay
              algo-rithms for encoding noisy information-bearing signals at the sensors,
              bandwidth-efficient tech-niques for communicating the encodings over the common
              RF bandwidth to a host, and reliable methods for host data fusion. A key
              component of this effort involves the development of a hierar-chy of sequential
              encoding algorithms at each sensor for a large class of signal-in-noise models
              and under various processing complexity and delay constraints. These are to be
              complemented with the development of resource-efficient algorithms for
              synchronous and asynchronous multisensor  communication of the sensor encodings
              to the host over fading channels, and associated signal estimation algorithms
              for data fusion at the host. The teaching component of the work uses the
              project investigation as a vehicle for encouraging the involvement of students
              into research while exposing them to the fields of wireless communication and
              data fusion. In particular, it involves incorporation of various components of
              the proposed research objectives into graduate and un-dergraduate education
              through the development of an experimental wireless simulation testbed, whose
              role is to allow students to implement and test a select subset of the
              algorithms developed
in the research part of the project.


