Title       : CAREER: Designing Practical Scheduling Algorithms Based on Fluid Relaxations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0093981

Award Number: 0093981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayachandran Sethuraman jay@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 1045,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
              is to develop a theory of sequencing, routing, and admission control, based on
              fluid relaxations. The techniques developed in this project, and the algorithms
              derived from them will have the potential to improve the practical performance
              of several real-life systems. This research will address a variety of questions
              such as:   (1) How should a resource optimally allocate its effort to competing
              jobs?  (2)How do the presence of additional physical and technological
              constraints affect system performance?  (3)What are the methodological
              connections between deterministic and stochastic scheduling models?  (4) What
              effect does the stochastic nature of the system parameters have on the optimal
              policy?  The results of this research will provide insight into how scheduling
              interacts with other operational and strategic decisions such as due-date
              setting and pricing. The work will also contribute to the development of
              dynamic optimization, and to our understanding of continuous linear programming
              problems.  The main objective of the education plan is the introduction of the
              exciting recent developments in the area of scheduling in the undergraduate and
              graduate curriculum. To that end, two courses on scheduling and its
              applications will be developed.  The first course will be at the undergraduate
              level and will serve as an introduction to scheduling problems that arise in
              production planning. This course will cover basic concepts in deterministic and
              stochastic scheduling, and will conclude with an examination of the role of
              scheduling in other areas, including logistics and supply chain management. The
              second course will cover algorithmic and structural results in deterministic
              and stochastic scheduling, with an emphasis on recent research.  Graduate
              students will have an opportunity to read and present research papers,
              participate in problem sessions, and/or work on a research problem. In addition
              to the development of new courses, the education component of this plan will
              result in the involvement of undergraduates in research, and in outreach
              activities through the dissemination of expository articles.

Deterministic
              and stochastic scheduling models have been successfully used to analyze and
              control  complex systems in which several classes of jobs compete for a limited
              number of shared resources. Examples include manufacturing systems that produce
              different types of products, shared computer systems, and telecommunications
              systems where heterogeneous traffic types (e.g., email, file transfers, video)
              share common resources (e.g., buses in a local area network, routers).  In
              spite of the similarities in the motivating problems, the methods used in
              analyzing deterministic scheduling models have little in common with those of
              the stochastic scheduling literature. The central aim of this career
              development project is to develop a unified approach to analyze both
              deterministic and stochastic scheduling models arising in diverse application
              domains.

