Title       : PECASE: Analysis of Novel Composite Tissue Engineered Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0093805

Award Number: 0093805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen J. Burg kburg@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0093805
Karen Burg
Research and development of engineered tissue has potential
              widespread medical application, including lumpectomy reconstruction, liver
              repair, cartilage replacement, or other conditions.  Tissue engineering
              involves taking a small number of healthy cells from a patient, growing the
              cells into large numbers in a laboratory environment, combining them with an
              absorbable (similar to biodegradable) material that has been sculpted into the
              anatomical shape of the injured part, allowing the cells to develop, implanting
              the cell-material system into the patient, and then allowing the cells to grow
              and acquire the original anatomical shape.  The material gradually breaks down,
              is "absorbed" by the body, and is thus removed.

The proposed 5-year work is
              a focus on the basic science of breast tissue engineering for cancer patients
              who have undergone a mastectomy or lumpectomy.  The effort will be to develop a
              program in tissue engineering, encompassing the research and development of new
              injectable materials and training of graduate and undergraduate students.  It
              also will promote public awareness of bioengineering and critical thinking
              through the development of a K-12 educational outreach program, a program
              developed through the combined efforts of the Department of Bioengineering and
              the Department of Education at Clemson University.  The mission of the proposed
              research is to present and justify a new materials approach to tissue
              engineering.  It is hypothesized that by providing a two-phase, composite,
              injectable material, cell growth and tissue development may be enhanced within
              a clinically viable solution.  Previous studies by the applicant have
              demonstrated general efficacy of such systems, but have not encompassed a
              careful assessment of the components.  A selection of crafted materials of
              varying proportions will be addressed and the research will be conducted using
              a comprehensive battery of mechanical and chemical tests to assess the systems.
               The success of the basic research concept relies on a well-orchestrated
              research plan, as well as on education of the involved scientists and future
              scientists.  The science and technology derived from this work will be
              transferred to other clinical applications presenting similar
              requirements.



