Title       : CAREER: The Design of Resource-Efficient Communications Systems by Combining
               Decision Feedback with Error-Control Coding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0093114

Award Number: 0093114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tommy R. Guess trg6f@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The ubiquity of communications technology is becoming more evident
every day.
              As the number of customers grows within each market, along
with their demand
              for higher and higher data rates, the need to use 
available resources such as
              power and bandwidth as efficiently as possible 
becomes paramount. Typically a
              communications system that is operating near 
theoretical limits requires a
              receiver whose computational complexity
is prohibitively large. To reduce
              complexity, it is common to linearize
a portion of the receiver but this can
              severely reduce system performance
relative to theoretical potential. However,
              there is a class of nonlinear
receivers known as decision-feedback receivers
              whose complexity is essentially 
no more than that of linear receivers but
              whose performance is often much 
closer to that of optimal receivers.  This
              research explores the 
decision-feedback receiver structure as a practical
              means of realizing 
resource-efficient communications systems.  The research
              is also integrated 
into educational activities at all student levels. Aspects
              of the research 
are purposefully  introduced to undergraduate students in the
              classroom,
during summer work programs, and through senior-level thesis
              advising. 
This prepares them both technically and motivationally to enter
              industry
or to pursue further studies in graduate school. Graduate students
              are
provided an environment conducive to doing quality research in the
              exciting 
field of communications, whether they choose careers in industry or
              academia.

The technical aspects of the research involve three components.
              First, it 
is determined, at least in principle, how to combine a
              decision-feedback 
receiver with error-control coding for a variety of
              important communications 
channels. Then, within these decision-feedback
              frameworks analytical 
relationships between available resources and system
              requirements are derived, 
and  resource-efficient systems are designed.
              Lastly, the transition is made 
from theoretical random codes to actual
              encoders and decoders that are 
simulated in software.  Together these
              investigations provide communications 
systems that are  highly efficient in
              regard to their conservation of 
resources, yet with low enough complexity to
              be amenable to implementation. 


