Title       : PECASE: Automated Design of Multi-Piece Molds -- A Step towards Manufacturing of
               Geometrically Complex Heterogeneous Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0093142

Award Number: 0093142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Satyandra K. Gupta skgupta@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              
This Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE)
              grant supports an integrated research and education project in the area of
              automated design of multi-piece molds for manufacturing geometrically complex
              heterogeneous objects.  Its goal is to develop underlying algorithms that will
              enable development of computer-aided design and manufacturing (CAD/CAM) systems
              for automatically designing multi-piece molds. The research effort will focus
              on:  (1) characterization of the new design space enabled by multi-piece molds;
              (2) development of geometric reasoning algorithms for decomposing molds into
              manufacturable components; and (3) development of geometric reasoning
              algorithms for incorporating assembly features into mold components for
              facilitating mold assembly.  The education effort will focus on:  (1)
              introduction of rigorous algorithmic foundations into CAD/CAM courses; (2)
              familiarizing students with the challenges in the CAD/CAM system development;
              and (3) providing students an opportunity to develop prototype CAD/CAM systems
              for design and manufacturing of multi-piece molds.  Outreach projects will be
              initiated to expose high school students to the CAD/CAM field and give them an
              opportunity to make a more informed career choice; and, allow industry to learn
              about new CAD/CAM and heterogeneous object manufacturing technologies. 

If
              successful this project will have the following impacts.  First, it will lead
              to the development of new geometric reasoning algorithms in manufacturability
              analysis and manufacturability-driven spatial partitioning areas.  In addition
              to mold design, these algorithms will be useful in several other CAD/CAM
              applications.  Second, it will provide a commercially viable method for making
              geometrically complex heterogeneous objects.  The ability to manufacture
              geometrically complex heterogeneous objects economically will significantly
              expand the design space and will allow development of new products in many
              different areas.  Finally, integration of geometric reasoning principles into
              the mechanical engineering curriculum will help in creating a new generation of
              engineers who will have exposure to geometric algorithms in addition to
              traditional mechanical engineering curriculum.  This exposure is expected to
              help in preparing engineers for participating in the development of the next
              generation CAD/CAM systems.

