Title       : CAREER: Efficient Cryptography with Provable Security Guarantees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0093065

Award Number: 0093065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander C. Russell acr@cse.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research develops efficient cryptographic tools which offer provable
              security guarantees. Such tools rectify the widely-recognized deficiency
              associated with extant provably-secure cryptosystems: their prohibitive
              computing demands.  Indeed, despite the highly amplified security offered by
              provably-secure systems, efficiency considerations have prevented their
              widespread adoption; as a result, tools in common use typically involve ad-hoc
              methods designed with speed, rather than security, as their first priority. 
              This re-search resolves this difficulty, constructing cryptographic tools (like
              encryption engines, digital signature schemes, and pseudo-random generators)
              which can simultaneously boast provable security guarantees and competitive
              efficiency. This program is undertaken in concert with an educational
              initiative which develops security and general information technology course
              material at the University of Connecticut.  Security in provably-secure
              constructions is generally accumulated by repeated application of some
              underlying cryptographic primitive (a one-way function, for example). For a
              fixed underlying primitive, the computing time required to "generate enough
              security" to, say, encrypt a long message, depends essentially
on (i.) the
              quantity of security which can be quickly extracted from a single application
              of the underlying primitive, and (ii.) the total quantity of security necessary
              for the encryption process.  This research ad-dresses both of these issues,
              developing provably-secure frameworks for cryptography which fully exploit the
              security capacity of underlying primitives and utilize this distilled security
              in the most effective manner.
Issue (i.) is addressed by the development of
              quantitative bounds for the security capacity of one-way functions and bounds
              on the computational complexity of extracting security from general one-way
              functions.  Issue (ii.) is addressed by the development of a new family of
              cryptographic primitives, balancing provable security and competitive
              efficiency. For encryption, a focal point of the research, this is attained by
              coupling strong (information-theoretic) pseudo-random constructions with
              semantically secure encryption machinery. Such methods have direct
              applicability to encryption, cryptographically strong hashing, and pseudo

