Title       : CAREER: Optimization and Control of Metalworking Fluids in Environmentally
               Benign Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2001    
File        : a0093514

Award Number: 0093514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373365             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Skerlos skerlos@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding for the
              development of a research and education program in environmentally benign
              design and manufacturing (EBDM).  The EBDM research program will be focused on
              developing environmentally benign metalworking fluid systems.  Metalworking
              fluids (MWFs) are ubiquitous in manufacturing, comprise a major percentage of
              process costs, and contain significant environmental and health hazards.  This
              funding supports a major new initiative to eliminate these liabilities by
              researching the relationships between MWF chemistry, machining performance,
              system economics, and the effectiveness of state of the art MWF re-use
              technology.  These relationships will be researched in four phases:  (1)
              physicochemical characteristics of MWFs will be classified based on their
              ability to affect machining performance; (2) optimal MWF application rates will
              be established; (3) the fundamental mechanisms of MWF deterioration will be
              determined; and (4) the effectiveness of re-use technologies in addressing MWF
              deterioration mechanisms and health hazards will be modeled.  The knowledge
              generated by these research tasks will be fully integrated into tangible
              process planning, monitoring, and control technologies that will achieve
              cost-effective and environmentally benign MWF systems.

The educational
              component of this program will focus on outreach and transfer of EBDM
              strategies to manufacturing stakeholders.  This includes transfer of advanced
              research in environmental product design and manufacturing, as well as basic
              education regarding how to achieve simultaneous improvement of economic and
              environmental performance.  The EBDM education program will engage a diversity
              of stakeholders, including university students, practicing engineers, and
              governmental providers of technical assistance.  At the university level,
              several original curriculum elements will be developed, including two EBDM
              courses, two web-based EBDM educational tools, and a modular EBDM sequence for
              undergraduate design and manufacturing programs.  The Environmental and
              Sustainable Technology Research and Teaching Laboratory (EAST RTL) will be
              established to facilitate the integration of EBDM research and education, and
              will be exclusively dedicated to furthering the integration of manufacturing
              and environmental technologies.

