Title       : Point-Based and Image-Based Volumetric Rendering and Detail Modeling For Volume
               Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a0093157

Award Number: 0093157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373351             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus Mueller mueller@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              "CAREER: Point-Based and Image-Based Volumetric Rendering and Detail Modeling
              For Volume Graphics"

This project will advance and promote the emerging
              field of volume graphics for science, engineering, medicine, education, and
              entertainment. It will develop new data representations, rendering techniques,
              and modeling schemes that are all geared toward making the processing of
              volumetric datasets more feasible and realistic in a wide range of application
              domains. Volumetric data - essentially, stored values for every point in a
              volume - has been most popular in computational science and medicine. For
              example, a mathematical simulation in computational fluid dynamics produces
              pressure and speed of the fluid at every point. Similarly, medical scanners
              like MRI, PET, SPECT, and CT produce a value at every point in the body that
              they scan. Recently, the size of these datasets has grown at an alarming pace.
              Medical datasets of over one billion volume elements (voxels) have become
              frequent, and simulations will soon produce datasets that require terabytes to
              petabytes of storage.  The need to develop efficient visualization methods for
              these has been identified as an immediate national interest.

Technically,
              this project addresses two critical issues in the larger field of volume
              visualization. The first is the persistent lack of interactive volume
              rendering, which is hampered by the immense computational requirements of even
              moderate-sized datasets. The other is the inherently discrete nature of
              volumetric datasets. This is important because it establishes a boundary
              between reality and model, and pushing this boundary therefore provides
              increased realism in applications. More concretely, the work
              includes:
Point-based representations of data, Point-based volumetric objects,
              Image-based rendering to assist in volume rendering and, Subdivision volumes
              with detail-on-demand.

This research agenda is accompanied by a solid
              education plan that provides students with comprehensive knowledge in fields
              pertinent for visualization, volume rendering, and volume graphics. These
              fields are rather diverse, ranging from image processing to user interfaces to
              computer vision. Teamwork among the participating students is promoted by
              integrating all the research into a common application.

