Title       : CAREER: Investigations of Methylation, Mobile Elements and Hybrid Genomic
               Instability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  2002  
File        : a0093250

Award Number: 0093250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $645002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel J. O'Neill roneill@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1174,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Decades of genetic research have established the destructive influence
              endogenous mobile DNA elements have on genomes. Relatively little, however, has
              been learned about the strategies that have evolved to combat the disruptive
              influence of transposable elements. 
Disruptions in DNA methylation have been
              directly associated with activation of mobile elements, and it has been
              theorized that methylation's primary purpose is to keep mobile elements silent.
              We have observed a dramatic change in DNA methylation and consequent mobile
              element activation in hybrid marsupials. This observation suggests that,
              antithetical to their deleterious effects, transposable elements may confer
              genetic variability within populations. This project focuses on interspecific
              hybrids known to exhibit genomic instability, and investigates the breakdown of
              DNA methylation and the activity of mobile elements in the face of
              hybridization-induced genomic stress. Likewise, the genomic alterations
              observed in interspecific hybrids known to exhibit disruptions in methylation
              are being characterized more fully in order to ascertain the molecular
              mechanisms underlying genomic instability. These experiments promise to broaden
              our understanding of the mechanisms that maintain the integrity of karyotypes
              once they are fixed in a species. The molecular biological and cytogenetic
              techniques utilized in this study are uniquely suited for broadening the
              educational experience of molecular biology students at the University of
              Connecticut. An Applied Genomics Initiative in the department of Molecular and
              Cell Biology has been instigated with the primary goal of teaching students the
              latest conceptual and technical advances in functional genomics. As part of
              this CAREER project, new curricula is being developed that offers graduates,
              undergraduates, underprivileged secondary school students and continuing
              students from the private sector the opportunity to learn these topics. In
              newly designed lecture and laboratory courses, as well as in independent
              research projects, students learn about genome structure and the de-stabilizing
              influence of hybridization.  Not only can students gain technical knowledge
              through hands-on experience at the bench, but also through observation and
              sample collection in the field.



