Title       : CAREER: Hybrid Surfaces to Control Cell Adhesion and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0093226

Award Number: 0093226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andres J. Garcia andres.garcia@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0093226
Garcia
The research and education activities of this proposal focus on
              cellular receptor-ligand interactions and the engineering of surfaces to
              control the binding of adhesion receptors and cell spreading to direct cell
              function.  Cell adhesion to extracellular matrices is primarily mediated by the
              integrin family of adhesion receptors.  In addition to anchoring cells,
              integrins provide signals that regulate cell function.  Due to its central role
              in cell function, cell adhesion is crucial to many biotechnological and
              biomedical applications, including in vitro culture systems, biomaterials and
              tissue engineering.

The overall research objective of this project is to
              engineer bioadhesive surfaces inspired by fibronectin, an essential and
              ubiquitous extracellular matrix protein, to direct cell function. 
              Specifically, synthetic micropatterned surfaces will be engineered to present
              specific domains of fibronectin that bind to particular integrins and control
              cell spreading.  Cell adhesion to these engineered surfaces will be analyzed in
              terms of integrin binding, adhesion strength, intracellular signaling, and
              focal adhesion assembly.  The effects of specific integrin binding and cell
              spreading on the differentiation of osteoblasts, bone-forming cells, will then
              be examined.  By focusing on a mechanistic analysis of adhesive interactions,
              this project will provide a deeper understanding of cell function and novel
              biomolecular strategies for the rational design of bioactive surfaces.

The
              educational component of this project focuses on the development of interactive
              Web-based software modules to model receptor-ligand interactions.  Simulation
              modules will be developed for middle school science courses to illustrate
              fundamental concepts of receptor-ligand interactions using highly animated
              graphical interfaces.  Another modeling platform will be developed for a
              graduate-level cellular engineering course to provide a graphical interface for
              the in depth examination of receptor-ligand interactions, including parametric
              analysis, time-dependent simulations, and analysis of experimental data.  These
              instructional tools allow for the integration of research into the educational
              experience and permit virtual experimentation that is not possible in
              conventional laboratory settings.  Finally, the Web-based format of these
              modules allows for wide spread dissemination and outreach.

