Title       : CAREER: Using Photonic Crystals to Control the Emission of Rare Earth-Doped
               Semiconducting Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2001   
File        : a0093502

Award Number: 0093502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. McGehee mmcgehee@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) made with semiconducting (conjugated) polymers
now
              have quantum efficiencies as high as 4 % and operating lifetimes of 50,000
              hours.
Several companies are developing flat panel displays with these LEDs.
              One of the
limitations of polymer LEDs is that triplet excitons are
              non-emissive. Initial steps
towards solving this problem by transferring
              energy to phosphorescent molecules and
rare earth complexes have recently been
              taken. One of the goals of this project is to
optimize energy transfer and
              charge transport in "doped" polymer films so that high
quantum efficiencies,
              low operating voltages and high device stability can be obtained.
Another
              limitation of current polymer LEDs is that most of the emitted photons
              are
trapped in the device by total internal reflection and that the photons
              which do escape
cannot conveniently be collimated into a beam or coupled into
              a waveguide. The second
major goal of the project is use photonic crystals,
              e.g. one-dimensional dielectric stacks
and two-dimensional gratings, to
              control the directionality of emission. Previous
attempts to do this have not
              been fully successful because it was not possible to make
photonic crystals
              with a photonic band gap wide enough to completely control the
emission of
              conjugated polymers, which have an emission spectrum with a width of more
than
              100 nm. By using rare earth-doped polymers, which have emission bandwidths
              of
less than 4 nm, it will be possible to use photonic crystals to control the
              directionality of
emission. This project will not only increase the efficiency
              and functionality of polymer-based
LEDs, but will also provide a convenient
              light source for developing the science
and technology of photonic
              crystals.
The project provides many excellent research opportunities for
              students. They
will work with a team of chemists to design new rare earth
              complexes and learn the
quantum mechanics that regulate energy transfer,
              charge transfer and light emission.
They will interact with members of
              industry to learn how to optimize polymer LEDs.
They will use computer
              modeling to design one-, two-, and three-dimensional photonic
crystals to
              control the emission of light. They will also get to interact with a team
              of
researchers at 3M and have the opportunity to push polymer-photonic crystal
              science and
technology into new directions. Most of the research will be done
              by two graduate
students, but there will be many opportunities for
              undergraduates and M.S. students to
take on short-term projects.
New courses
              on nanotechnology and organic optoelectronics will be developed to
prepare
              students for research. The course on nanotechnology is designed to
              make
students in several departments aware of the opportunities in this
              exciting area and to
foster multidisciplinary research. The course on organic
              optoelectronics will have several
lab sessions in the PI's labs so that
              students can reinforce what they learn in class. High
school teachers will
              visit the labs during the summer and be trained to use a kit of
              optical
equipment so that they can demonstrate photonics experiments to their
              students.

