Title       : CAREER: Coordination of Transportation and Inventory Decision - Premises,
               Models, and Justification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0093654

Award Number: 0093654
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $371327             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sila Cetinkaya sila@ie.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant provides funding for an
              investigation of the latest industrial trends in integrated logistical
              management. The major concentration is on recent supply chain initiatives
              enabling the integration of transportation and inventory decisions.  The
              specific initiatives of interest include Vendor Managed Inventory (VMI), Third
              Party Warehousing/Distribution (3PW/D), and Time Definite Delivery (TDD)
              applications. Under these initiatives, substantial savings are realizable by
              carefully incorporating a shipment strategy with inventory replenishment
              decisions.  The impact is particularly tangible when the shipment strategy
              calls for a consolidation program where several smaller deliveries are
              dispatched as a combined load realizing the scale economies inherent in
              transportation. Recognizing a need for analytical research in the field, this
              project concentrates on analysis of integrated policies where shipment
              consolidation and inventory control decisions are coordinated under VMI, 3PW/D,
              and TDD agreements.

The research objective is to develop a modeling
              framework and theoretical understanding of integration issues in the context of
              these supply chain initiatives. The goal is to address the question of under
              what conditions integration works and to render insights into distribution
              policy design and operational control.  The research agenda of this career plan
              has been developed in collaboration with industry. Hence, if successful, the
              results will provide a better understanding of real-life integration problems
              in supply chain practices.  On the educational side, in response to a growing
              demand for a new generation of logistics engineers, this career plan builds on
              industrial collaboration.  In partnership with industry, new educational
              materials and courses that unify the practice and theory of integrated
              logistics will be developed, and new student projects will be designed to
              satisfy the needs of students in pursuit of careers in this emerging field.
