Title       : Characterization of the In Vivo Targeting of Cytoplasmic Dynein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0093106

Award Number: 0093106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xin Xiang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H M Jackson Fdn Mltry Med
	      1401 Rockville Pike, Suite 600
	      Rockville, MD  20852    301/294-1276

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Cytoplasmic dynein is a minus-end-directed microtubule motor protein that uses
              ATP and an
accessory complex, dynactin, to move vesicles along intracellular
              microtubule frameworks. In
neurons, it is required for moving vesicles at
              neuronal synaptic terminals back to the cell body, a
process termed
              "retrograde transport". Cytoplasmic dynein has also been implicated in
              other
cellular activities, such as spindle assembly, formation and positioning
              of the Golgi complex,
proper distribution of the endosomes and lysosomes in
              mammalian cells and nuclear migration in
fungi. Although cytoplasmic dynein is
              involved in multiple cellular functions, little is known
about how its
              intracellular targeting is regulated.
The filamentous fungus Aspergillus
              nidulans is an excellent genetic model system to study the in
vivo function
              and regulation of cytoplasmic dynein. In A. nidulans, cytoplasmic dynein is
              required
for the process of nuclear migration along the growing hyphae.
              Components involved in
cytoplasmic dynein function have been and will
              continuously be isolated as the nud (nuclear
distribution) gene products.
              Several of the nud genes we have previously characterized encode
subunits of
              the cytoplasmic dynein and dynactin complexes. For example, the nudA gene
              encodes
the heavy chain of cytoplasmic dynein that contains the motor
              activity. Potential regulators of
cytoplasmic dynein not in the
              dynein/dynactin complexes have also been isolated, which include
the nudF gene
              product that is homologous to the human protein LIS1 required for
              neuronal
migration during brain development.
Recently, the investigator has
              made an exciting observation that both NUDA (cytoplasmic dynein heavy
chain)
              and NUDF (LIS-1-like protein) localize to the dynamic ends of microtubules.
              This
observation was made in living cells by using the green fluorescent
              protein (GFP) tagged NUDA
and NUDF constructs that are functional in vivo. How
              NUDA and NUDF get targeted to this
cellular location is an important cell
              biological question. To identify which nud gene products are 
required for the
              localization of NUDA and NUDF to microtubule ends, the nudK gene that encodes
              the
 Arp1 (the actin related protein) protein in the dynactin complex, and the
              nudI gene, which encodes an intermediate chain of cytoplasmic dynein were
              cloned. The in vivo localization as well as the requirement 
for other NUD
              proteins will be investigated.  Finally, other gene products which may regulate
              the function of cytoplasmic dynein will be sought out.   Results obtained from
              these studies will be analyzed in relationship with the
              microtubule-end-targeting of NUDA or NUDF to reveal novel aspects of

              dynein/dynactin and NUDF targeting in vivo.  This work to be carried in a
              fungal model system will potentially lead to insights of general significance
              into the control of dynein.

