Title       : SGER: Novel Protein Mimics for a Biomimetic Lung Surfactant Replacement: Design,
               Synthesis, and Biophysical Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a0093806

Award Number: 0093806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75172              (Estimated)
Investigator: Annelise E. Barron a-barron@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0093806
Barron
A current frontier in bioengineering is the design of
              non-natural, sequence-controlled polymers that can effectively mimic some of
              the structures and activities of natural proteins, but that are non-immunogenic
              and stable as in vivo therapeutics.  This exploratory research requires an
              integration of principles and paradigms taken from biochemistry and biophysics
              with methods of biochemical and biomedical engineering.  A focused,
              medically-relevant research project is proposed that, even if only partially
              successful, will have far-reaching, fundamental implications for the new field
              of biomimetic polymer engineering, 

An important and tractable problem is
              chosen:  The criticalneed for improved synthetic analogs of the human
              surfactant proteins SP-B and SP-C.  Preliminary data is shown and new
              strategies are proposed towards the development of novel SP-mimics based on
              polypeptoids: non-natural polymers based on a peptide backbone, yet differing
              in that sidechains are bonded to backbone nitrogens rather than to a-carbons. 
              N-substituted peptoids with proteinogenic sidechains previously have been shown
              to be extremely protease-resistant, and further to raise only very low-level
              immune response in vivo.  In the investigator's lab and elsewhere, some peptoid
              sequences have been shown to adopt stable, helical secondary structure in
              aqueous or organic solution.  Sequence-specific peptoids can be synthesized
              easily, at substantially lower cost than peptides, with facile access to
              diverse sidechain chemistries.

Natural lung surfactant coats the internal
              surfaces of mammalian lungs and enables normal breathing.  It is a complex
              mixture composed of 95% lipids and 5% surfactant-specific proteins (SP).  Both
              protein and phospholipid fractions play critical roles in lung surfactant s
              physiological properties, providing a decrease in the work of breathing by
              regulating surface tension at the air-liquid interface of alveoli as a function
              of their surface area.  The amphipathic, helical surfactant proteins SP-B and
              SP-C (79 and 35 amino acids, respectively) promote rapid phospholipid
              adsorption to the air-liquid interface, facilitate respreading of the
              phospholipid monolayer throughout the respiration cycle, and regulate the phase
              behavior of the monolayer to yield the lowest possible alveolar surface
              tension.  The absence or dysfunction of lung surfactant on alveolar surfaces
              leads to respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) in which lungs are incompliant and
              vulnerable to collapse.  Patients with severe RDS cannot be mechanically
              ventilated without damage to lung tissue, and require immediate surfactant
              replacement therapy.  Premature infants (< 30 weeks) are born with immature
              lungs lacking surfactant, and often suffer from severe RDS.  These patients
              typically receive surfactant replacement therapy at birth with an
              animal-derived surfactant formulation.  Synthetic formulations exist, but are
              significantly less efficacious than natural surfactant in enabling proper lung
              functioning, primarily because they lack effective functional mimics of SP-B
              and SP-C.  Medicines sourced from animals raise concerns about a possibility
              for cross-species pathogen transmission and also for immunogenicity. 
              Therefore, the development of an effective synthetic biomimetic surfactant
              replacement is a present need.

Aims to address this need, as well as to
              carry out important fundamental research are:

(1) To design, synthesize,
              purify, and characterize the secondary structure of peptoid-based mimics of the
              helical, amphipathic lung surfactant proteins SP-B and SP-C.  Methods include
              organic synthesis, analytical and preparative HPLC, mass spectroscopy, and
              circular dichroism (CD);

(2) To confirm and further characterize the in
              vitro biophysical functioning of peptoid-based SP-B and SP-C mimics as
              spreading agents for biomimetic phospholipid admixtures.  Experimental
              approaches include both pulsating bubble surfactometry and Langmuir-Wilhelmy
              surfactometry.

(3) Based on these carefully-repeated preliminary results, to
              prepare another proposal to the NSF Directorate of Bioengineering to continue
              the research project thereafter.

