Title       : CAREER: A New Approach For Analysis of RNA Dynamics During Pre-mRNA Splicing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0093003

Award Number: 0093003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $531819             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik Sontheimer erik@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0093003  Erik Sontheimer
   It has been known for over two decades that
              functional messenger RNA is not a raw copy of DNA but is instead a highly
              edited molecule wherein non-functional portions (introns) are precisely
              "spliced" away. The faithful expression of genetic information requires that
              intron removal occur with remarkable accuracy.  The splicing machinery consists
              of five RNA molecules that (along with several dozen proteins) comprise an
              extremely dynamic complex in which multiple RNA interactions form, break, and
              rearrange.  Despite intensive efforts, the mechanistic principles that underlie
              this structural plasticity have remained obscure, largely because of the
              inability to control individual rearrangements directly and specifically.  In
              the research component of this CAREER project, the investigator will develop a
              new biochemical technique that allows the reversible covalent fixation of RNA
              structure within a complex protein-containing environment.  This approach takes
              advantage of the high affinity between arsenic and sulfur atoms.  Incorporation
              of two sulfur atoms into each strand of an RNA duplex will generate a
              four-sulfur binding site for a compound containing two arsenic atoms
              ("biarsenical").  The investigator will then develop biarsenical compounds that
              can crosslink the modified RNAs in a way that can be reversed upon addition of
              an excess of antidote containing two sulfur atoms.  Once the crosslinking
              system has been developed and characterized, it will be used to trap dynamic
              RNA interactions within the splicing machinery.  This will then permit the
              biochemical characterization of splicing complexes that are stalled at discrete
              stages of the splicing pathway.  The reversibility of the crosslinks will allow
              the investigator to define the roles of enzymes thought to control RNA
              rearrangements in the spliceosome, including proteins previously implicated in
              promoting accurate splice site selection.  The techniques developed in the
              course of this project will be applicable to many other systems that involve
              nucleic acid rearrangements.  
   Over the past twenty years, it has also
              become clear that many central workings of the cell involve large
              macromolecular assemblies that dwarf many of the enzymes that have been so well
              characterized structurally and mechanistically.  To understand gene expression
              at a similar depth, the challenges presented by this size and complexity must
              be faced.  Much of the biochemistry curriculum required of sophomore- and
              junior-level biology students provides a solid grounding in relatively simple
              and well-defined biochemical systems, predominantly from intermediary
              metabolism. The processes of eukaryotic gene expression, however, have often
              been taught in a more descriptive and less quantitative and mechanistic
              fashion.  As the field of gene expression progresses beyond the "parts list"
              phase, undergraduate biochemistry courses should reflect this, to incorporate
              the most exciting current research and to spur interest in addressing some of
              the great challenges that remain.  In the educational component of this CAREER
              award, the investigator will develop a junior-level biochemistry course that
              (as before) covers the fundamentals of macromolecular structure, function, and
              energetics, but that draws many of its illustrations and examples from areas of
              molecular and cell biology that are the subjects of intense current
              investigation.  The intended goal of this approach is to emphasize the current
              excitement in the field, to prepare students for the exploding opportunities
              that await biochemists in the post-genome era, and to impress upon them the
              creativity and interdisciplinarity that will be necessary to tackle the
              workings of larger and more complex systems.
