Title       : CAREER: Robust and Efficient Restoration and Segmentation of Signals and Images:
               A Non-linear Scale-Space Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a0093105

Award Number: 0093105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilya Pollak ipollak@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Pollak ABSTRACT

This research addresses various problems of extracting
              information from digital signals and images.  A prototypical example is that of
              image segmentation: given a picture stored on a computer as an array of numbers
              (e.g., a medical image), the objective is to design an algorithm to
              automatically partition the image into meaningful regions (e.g., into a tumor
              and healthy tissue).  More generally, this research is motivated by many
              applications---for example, in the areas of medical imaging and remote
              sensing---which are characterized by high complexity and poor quality of images
              (due to, for instance, noise, blurring, or clutter, which are caused by
              imperfections of the imaging process).Extracting and restoring objects from
              such images are challenging and important problems.  Since good models of the
              intervening degradations are often very complex or even unavailable, these
              problems must be addressed in such a way that the resulting algorithms are
              insensitive to the precise structure of degradations.  When precise modeling is
              possible, however, the algorithms should be flexible enough to take advantage
              of it.  In addition, the large quantity of data in many applications of
              interest makes methods that are fast particularly valuable.

This project is
              developing develop a novel scale-space estimation framework applicable to such
              problems.  Built on the foundation of recent non-linear scale-space approaches
              to image analysis, it is making important links with optimal estimation and
              sliding-mode control, thereby producing efficient methods for segmentation and
              restoration of 1-D signals and 2-D images.  Theoretical analysis of these
              methods reveals their robustness, their applicability to a wide range of
              problems, and the fact that they admit fast numerical schemes.  A number of
              practical image processing problems are being pursued, in particular, analysis
              of dermatoscopic imagery (magnified pictures of skin lesions used to improve
              the accuracy of screening for skin cancer).
