Title       : CAREER: Solid State Solvation in Doped & Nanostructured Organic Thin Films: A
               Novel Method for Tailoring Energy Level Structure of Organic Materials in
               Active Optoelect. Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2001   
File        : a0093866

Award Number: 0093866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Bulovic bulovic@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Vladimir Bulovic recently demonstrated a new general method for tuning
              the
energy level structure of organic materials by adjusting the strength of
              the local electric
field inside the organic films with intermolecular
              dipole-dipole interactions. His group
will now apply this "solid state
              solvation" (SSS) effect to demonstrate practical, efficient
organic
              optoelectonic devices such as organic LEDs, lasers, and solar cells, and
              develop a
theoretical understanding of this phenomenon. The SSS effect is
              present in every
molecular organic solid, but is most clearly observed in
              strongly polar materials and
composites. It originates from dipole-dipole
              interactions between neighboring molecules
that generate strong local electric
              fields, stretching the intramolecular bond lengths and
deforming charge
              distributions on molecules. This physical change in the molecular
structure is
              manifested in the modified energy level structure for the molecule, which
              we
can utilize to optimize performance of organic optoelectronic
              devices.

Prof. Bulovic previously demonstrated that local electric fields
              generated in dipole-dipole
interactions between polar organic molecules in a
              solid thin film can result in a shift of
molecular energy levels by more than
              0.25 eV, tuning the luminescence of the same
molecular species from yellow to
              orange to red. In this program his group will extend the
initial studies and
              utilize dipole-dipole interactions to tune the carrier injection properties
at
              organic heterojunction interfaces, modify exciton energy transfer rates from
              the host to
the dopant in mixed organic layers, and access triplet energy
              levels in efficient
phosphorescent organic materials. These effects will be
              optimized to improve
luminescence efficiencies of organic LEDs, lower lasing
              thresholds of organic lasers, and
increase photogeneration efficiency of
              organic solar cells. The theoretical framework
quantifying intermolecular
              interactions in molecular organic thin films is not presently
known and will
              be developed within this program.

Findings discovered in the course of this
              program are fundamental in nature and will have
a strong impact on practical
              applications of molecular organic solids in optoelectronic
devices. They will
              enhance the understanding and the applicability of the vast field of
molecular
              organic materials, influencing treatment of organic thin films,
              heterojunctions,
multilayers, quantum wells, and nano-patterned organic
              materials. These findings will be
incorporated in the graduate "Seminar on
              Organic Optoelectronics" that Prof. Vulovic is
presently preparing for the MIT
              graduate curriculum.

