Title       : CAREER: Silicon and Gallium Arsenide Nanowire Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0093552

Award Number: 0093552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy P. Hogan hogant@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               
This paper proposes the development of a research and educational program to
              further the knowledge and understanding of nanotechnology through laboratory,
              classroom, project, and demonstration experiences.  A directed effort toward
              the development of nanowire devices and circuits is proposed, utilizing the
              self-assembly of nanowires through the vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) technique.  The
              merit of this work is in the investigation of an additional control mechanism
              through the use of electrostatic forces to join individual nanowires, and the
              development of a procedure for epitaxially interconnecting to the nanowires
              from macroscopic electrodes.  Investigations will include nanowire p-n
              junctions, field effect transistors, light emitting diodes, and heterojunction
              devices.  Using the VLS technique to fabricate nanowire interconnects may also
              prove a viable method of interfacing to molecular electronic circuits, for the
              fabrication of scanning probes used in scanning tunneling microscopy, or atomic
              force microscopy, and for making micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) such as
              electrical conductivity probes.
This proposal outlines three methods of
              extending the scholarly impact beyond the students directly involved in the
              research, to include other graduate students, undergraduate students, and local
              area schools.  A course has been developed around future directions in
              semiconductor devices including nanotechnology that will be further expanded
              upon.  Second, scanning probe tips will be fabricated as part of this effort,
              and a group of undergraduates will be assisted in building a working scanning
              probe microscope (SPM).  The third outreach effort includes using the
              fabricated SPM for both on-campus and off campus demonstrations at local high
              schools and middle schools.

