Title       : PECASE: Galois Representations and Modular Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0093542

Award Number: 0093542
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Conrad bdconrad@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator's previous work on elliptic curves and Galois representations
              leads in the direction of several questions which are ultimately concerned with
              understanding the nature of Galois representations, either from the point of
              view of geometry or deformation theory.  One such problem is to find a
              conceptual moduli-theoretic interpretation of the Coleman-Mazur eigencurve. The
              investigator also proposes to study the problem of incorporating conditions
              such as semi-stability (in the sense of Fontaine) in the deformation theory of
              Galois representations, continuing a line of development growing out of the
              work of Wiles.  In a somewhat different direction, Buzzard has recently
              observed in numerous examples that the slopes of eigenforms seem to possess
              much more structure than conjectured by Gouvea-Mazur.  These surprising
              observations do not fit into any general framework, and the investigator
              proposes to determine the general nature of such phenomena.  In addition to
              studying these problems, the investigator continues his efforts in the
              direction of supporting active student interest in mathematics at the high
              school level.  Through personal contacts at a local school, he arranges regular
              meetings in which he leads informal group discussions with students on an
              assortment of interesting mathematical ideas (taken from a wide variety of
              disciplines:  number theory, geometry, probability, etc.).  The idea is to
              expose students to important and interesting concepts which are not usually
              encountered in the classroom but which can be presented in an elementary
              context.

The investigator also provides these students with information
              about summer math programs and research opportunities, in order that they can
              experience mathematics as a living field of scientific inquiry.  Number theory
              is the branch of mathematics which is concerned with the properties of whole
              numbers.  It abounds in deep and unsolved problems, particularly concerning
              properties of prime numbers and geometric objects called elliptic curves. 
              Prime numbers and the theory of elliptic curves also lie at the heart of modern
              cryptographic systems, without which secure diplomatic transmissions and
              Internet commerce would be impossible.  The RSA cryptosystem and the elliptic
              curve factorization algorithm are two such prominent applications in this
              context.  Improvements in our theoretical understanding of elliptic curves is
              expected lead to further applications along these lines.  The investigator's
              scientific work is concerned with several questions naturally arising from the
              theory of elliptic curves, and partly aims to continue the development the
              techniques that were used to recently settle the Shimura-Taniyama Conjecture,
              one of the most important problems in the theory of elliptic curves.  The
              investigator also regularly visits with local high school students, showing
              them important mathematical ideas that are not usually encountered in school,
              such as the inner workings of the RSA cryptosystem and the role of probability
              in the design of medical tests for rare diseases.  The investigator also
              provides these students with nformation about summer opportunities for
              education, research, and work in mathematics, and offers guidance for students
              who wish to take part in several prestigious high school science research
              competitions.  The Faculty Career Development Program makes it possible for the
              investigator to continue his scientific work while at the same time enabling
              him to give some high school students a deeper appreciation for mathematics and
              its important role in modern society.

