Title       : CAREER: Fast Efficient Adaptive Filter Banks and Applications in Digital
               Multimedia Coding/Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0093262

Award Number: 0093262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trac D. Tran trac@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: Fast Efficient Adaptive Filter Banks and Applications in Digital
              Multimedia Coding/Processing

Tran Project Summary

With the recent
              emergence in popularity of the Internet, the demands for and the interests in
              digital multimedia are growing exponentially. A high-performance filter bank is
              typically at the heart of every state-of-the-art digital multimedia system. For
              example, current international image/video compression standards JPEG, MPEG,
              H.261 and H.263 are all based on the 8x8 Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT), an
              8-channel 8-tap orthogonal filter bank. Of great importance is the ability to
              design a filter bank that can fully exploit (i) the statistical properties of a
              particular signal or class of signals; (ii) the goals of the applications;
              (iii) the computational resources available at the processing systems.
              Particularly, fast, efficient, and low-cost transforms have played a crucial
              role in revolutionary advances throughout the history of digital signal
              processing. 

This research involves the development of next-generation fast
              efficient adaptive filter banks for applications in digital multimedia
              coding/processing. The implementations are VLSI-friendly, entirely
              integer-based, possibly even multiplier-free, while still maintaining a high
              level of coding performance. Moreover, all of the filter banks are constructed
              from modular cascades of similar building blocks where the same basic
              components are employed repeatedly in a highly regular fashion, resulting in
              smaller chip area and lower power consumption. The investigator incorporates as
              many desirable transform properties onto the structure as possible, leading to
              a much smaller space of free parameters and hence improving the effectiveness
              of optimization algorithms, especially in real-time adaptive systems.
              Well-proven techniques in optimization, linear prediction, and adaptive
              filtering theory are being applied toward the lattice structure optimization.
              The new family of filter banks is expected to provide versatility, flexibility,
              and adaptivity in time-frequency mapping, coding performance, cost of
              implementation as well as integration into modern digital multimedia
              processing/communication systems.
              
-------------------------------------------------------------------
Level of
              Effort Statement.

At the recommended level of support, the PI will make
              every attempt to meet the original scope and level of effort of the
              project.

Trac D. Tran 

