Title       : CAREER: Wideband Slot-like Antennas and Enhancement of Applied Electromagnetics
               Education at UPRM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2001        
File        : a0093650

Award Number: 0093650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374879             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafael A. Rodriguez rafaelr@ece.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 9001, Mayaguez,P.R.00681
	      Mayaguez, PR  00681    787/834-7620

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0093650
Rodriguez

The proposed Career Development plan seeks to establish a
              balanced research and teaching program for the professional development of Dr.
              Rafael A. Rodriguez Solis, in the area of microwave antennas at the University
              of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez (UPRM).  The research activities proposed have been
              carefully structured to advance the performance of planar, broadband, microwave
              antennas for wireless communications applications, taking advantage of the NSF
              MRI grant ECS-9977178 funding the UPRM Radiation Laboratory.  The proposed
              research and education efforts will count with the collaboration of several
              faculty from The Pennsylvania State University, University of Colorado at
              Boulder, University of Massachusetts, the Arecibo Observatory and UPRM.

The
              increasing demand for interactive multimedia applications in wireless
              communication networks requires larger bandwidths made available for such
              services; at the same time, smaller antennas are desired in wireless
              applications in order to keep the size of the mobile terminals small.  In the
              future, mobile terminals will tap to a variety of wireless services provided at
              different frequency bands, and it will be of interest to have only one antenna
              to cover the different bands.  This will help to reduce the coupling and
              interference between different antenna structures and to reduce the space
              required by the antennas.  The slot-like antennas and arrays to be studied
              through this grant are planar, conformal, compact, structures that can provide
              large impedance and pattern bandwidths.

The research plan is focused in
              studying ways of improving the impedance bandwidth of slot, folded slot and
              slot ring antennas and arrays of such elements.  Also, log-periodic arrays of
              the aforementioned elements will be studied.  The antenna elements will be
              characterized following using Design of Experiments techniques and statistical
              modeling.  The antenna models developed will be used in the development of a
              procedure for the array design and in the development of pattern synthesis
              procedures for arrays of log-periodic structures.  Because of the importance of
              smart antennas in the new generation of wireless systems, digital beam-forming
              techniques for these antennas will be studied.

The proposed educational
              activities are centered in the revision of the engineering electromagnetics
              two-course sequence to combine these courses into a 4 credit-hour course with
              an integrated laboratory.  The results of the proposed research activities will
              help in the introduction of slot antennas in the Antenna Theory and Design
              undergraduate course and in the Microwave Antenna Engineering graduate course. 
              The mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students and their engagement in
              research projects and the development of an Applied Electromagnetics Workshop
              to be offered to high-school students participating at the pre-engineering
              summer program at UPRM are also part of the educational activities proposed. 
              This educational plan seeks to enhance the teaching and evaluation techniques
              of Dr. Rodriguez Solis and to integrate his research activities into the
              classroom.

