Title       : CAREER: Routes and Regulation of Cyanobacterial Carbon Catabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0093327

Award Number: 0093327
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $507384             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Summers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  913308309    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The research goals of this CAREER project are to identify novel routes of
              catabolic carbon flow and to isolate and characterize regulated genes following
              a switch from a photoautotrophic to a photo-or dark heterotrophic growth in a
              blue-green (cyanobacteria) alga, Synechocystis sp.  Target genes that are under
              control of a cyclic-AMP receptor protein will also be identified in this
              facultative heterotrophic cyanobacteria. Both biochemical and genetic methods
              of analysis will be used to gain a deeper understanding of the metabolic
              potential of Synechocystis. Understanding the basic physiology of cyanobacteria
              and the genetic regulation of physiological changes in response to
              environmental stimuli could lead to formation of new beneficial plant
              interactions or biodegradation of xenobiotic compounds from surface waters. 
              The project's teaching goals are intertwined with the research component. 
              Enhanced scientific thinking and research experience will be provided at the
              pre-college level through the use of Synechocystis as a classroom model.  High
              school teachers will be teamed up with graduate students for summer laboratory
              research, resulting in the development of physiological and genetic experiments
              appropriate for high school students.  Laboratory equipment will be assembled
              by the high school teacher/graduate student teams, enabling area students to
              perform hands-on experimental research in the classrooms of these trained
              teachers. Partnerships with local schools will provide original biological
              research experience to students and promote an interest and passion for
              science.

The undergraduate educational focus is to involve students in
              original research experiences.  Research utilizing mutagenesis, molecular
              genetics and computer assisted sequence analysis will be incorporated into the
              appropriate microbiology laboratories and into a new upper division microbial
              genetics laboratory course. The focus on graduate student education will
              provide the skills required for research on genetic, biochemical and
              physiological aspects of biology and will provide opportunities to share these
              skills.

