Title       : CAREER: Learning Entropy and Energy Project (LEEP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0093093

Award Number: 0093093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456793             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter M. Stroup WStroup@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Absent an adequate language to talk about change and the direction of change,
              science
curricula are fundamentally constrained to over-emphasize static
              constructs like
taxonomies and memorized sequences of events. In contrast with
              these over-simplified,
statics-based curricula, the world students live in is
              complex and dynamic. A
fundamental disconnect is created between what learners
              know of their world and the
current statics-based science they are taught in
              school. In addition to moving toward a
math of change strand in school
              curricula and early university curricula (e.g. early non-calculus
sciences), a
              full dynamics-based curriculum needs to address the directed-ness
we
              experience in the world around us. When we get up in the morning, energy
              always
flows from our warm feet to the cold floor and never the other way
              around. The second
law of thermodynamics  the entropy law  is the only law of
              science that allows
learners to understand the directed-ness of physical
              process. Replacing statics-based
curricula with a full dynamics-based reform
              depends vitally on being able to talk about
change but also on being able to
              talk about the direction of change. Recent educational
innovations related to
              the early introduction of the math of change  e.g. the use of
motion detectors
              and powerful simulation software  are starting to find their way
              into
significant curricular reform. Unfortunately, entropy related fundamental
              research,
materials development, and course-work aimed at advancing the
              dynamic-based
understanding of all learners is all but non-existent. This
              grant is aimed at addressing
this critical missing element in pursuing
              dynamics-based reform.
Over a decade of entropy-based research and innovation
              leads me to believe that
entropy ideas can be incorporated into learning about
              energy dynamics early on in
science education, that entropy can be taught in a
              way that is cross-disciplinary and cross-level
(from the very small to the
              very large), and that moving in this direction not only
advances student
              understanding of entropy but that the ability of all students to
              better
understand and succeed, at virtually all levels of their science
              learning, is significantly
advanced. Although I intend for this
              entropy-focused work to impact science learning
from late elementary through
              the wide range of undergraduate science courses, my
primary focus will be on
              two critical junctures in students' lives relative to formal
science learning:
              early high school and early university level work. Coming into these
junctures
              many students are "still in the game" and are interested in further
              science
study. Coming out of these junctures many students decide to leave,
              especially students
from under-represented groups. Courses taught at these
              levels will serve both as
testbeds for the efficacy of entropy-based learning
              and as research settings. In schools, I
will focus primarily on the
              state-mandated, ninth-grade Integrated Physics and Chemistry
course. At the
              university level I will focus on a newly developed undergraduate
              science
course titled Entropy and Energy that I will co-teach with a research
              physicist who is also
Co-Director of the completely restructured and rapidly
              growing new secondary
certification program called UTeach. Domain courses,
              such as this, in the new UTeach
program are to model Standards-based teaching
              at the university level. Research
insights related to student learning as such
               learning with entropy  will be integrated
with my newly developed Knowing and
              Learning course that is the first required
education course for all the UTEACH
              students. Through the establishment of a work
circle of teachers in schools,
              through the establishment of a brown-bag seminar series at
the university,
              through research presentations and publications, and through the
development
              of a Learning Entropy and Energy (LEEP) website, this project is intended
to
              support a larger conversation related to the efficacy and significance of
              learning about
and with entropy as a vital part of moving towards a
              dynamics-based curriculum for all
students.
