Title       : SICB Symposium: Taking Physiology to the Field: Advances in Investigating
               Physiological Function in Free-Living Vertebrates, to be held January 3-7,
               2001, Chicago, IL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0093715

Award Number: 0093715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Goldstein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Berry Pinshow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc for Intgr and Comp Bio
	      1313 Dolley Madison Blvd
	      McLean, VA  221013926    703/790-1745

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Over the past decades, comparative and ecological physiologists have succeeded
              in describing numerous marvelous ways in which organisms from a variety of
              habitats are specialized for life in those habitats.  However, the great
              majority of these investigations have been performed in the laboratory, where
              animals and their environments are under control and manipulable.  An important
              direction in which comparative and ecological physiology is now proceeding is
              to explore physiological function under natural conditions and with ecological
              context in mind.  

Toward that end, the PIs have assembled a panel of
              speakers who are pushing forward the ability to measure and interpret
              physiological function of free-living animals. These speakers will focus on
              vertebrate animals and will approach this topic from several directions. 
              First, they will address a variety of physiological systems; presentations will
              focus on energy, body condition, temperature regulation, digestion and
              metabolism, osmoregulation, reproduction, stress, and others.  Second, they
              will explore a variety of methodological approaches; presentations will focus
              on endocrinology, telemetry, stable isotopes, phenotypic engineering, immune
              testing, evaluation of tissue and body fluid composition, and more.  Third,
              they will discuss a variety of vertebrate types; authors will speak on
              migratory birds, marine mammals, nectarivores, and others.  This symposium will
              be held in conjunction with the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative
              and Comparative Biology (Chicago, IL, January 2001).

Together, it is
              anticipated that these presentations will provide an overview of conceptual and
              methodological advances in the investigation of physiological systems under
              natural conditions with a view to answering questions of ecological importance.
               In the process, they will continue to enhance our appreciation of how animals
              survive under varied and stressful circumstances.  Moreover, they will help to
              provide insights into ecological questions such as what limits the
              distributions of animals on Earth, and how this might be affected by patterns
              of environmental change.

