Title       : CAREER: Design and Analysis of Iteratively Decodable Codes for Wireless
               Communications and Digital Magnetic Recording
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0093020

Award Number: 0093020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna Narayanan krishna@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Future generation wireless systems and data storage systems will certainly take
              advantage of the recent developments in coding theory and signal processing. In
              the last decade, concatenated coding and iterative processing have emerged as
              powerful paradigms in coding theory and signal processing. Both wireless
              communications and magnetic recording systems place particular constraints and
              limitations. In wireless communications, maintaining high power and spectral
              efficiency is key. In addition, in some systems, it may be necessary to
              maintain a constant envelope for the transmitted signals. Digital magnetic
              recording systems can tolerate very little redundancy and require very low end
              to end bit error rates.  It is crucial to develop an understanding of the
              potential and limitations of concatenated coding and iterative processing
for
              use in these systems.  While exact analysis of concatenated codes with
              iterative decoding is difficult, a recently proposed technique called density
              evolution is a powerful tool that permits analysis of iterative decoding and
              offers considerable insight.  Using this technique or, a variation thereof,
              this research aims at furthering the design and analysis of iteratively
              decodable codes with applications to wireless communications systems and
              digital magnetic recording
systems.

This research emphasizes two main ideas
              - irregular codes and the design of codes matched to iterative decoding.  Based
              on these ideas, three specific areas are addressed. They are 1) Design and
              analysis of irregular parallel and serial concatenated codes including
              non-binary codes and irregular turbo trellis coded modulation, 2) A
              comprehensive study of concatenated coding and decoding strategies for
              modulators with memory (such as CPM), their performance analysis for AWGN, flat
              Rayleigh fading and inter-symbol interference channels, 3) Design and analysis
              of codes for digital magnetic recording - particular emphasis is given to the
              design of concatenated codes in the presence of an outer Reed-Solomon code,
              evaluating novel
high rate codes and on low complexity receiver structures
              when the overall desired bit error rates are of the order of 10^{-15}. 


