Title       : CAREER: A Mechatronic Framework for Magnetic Suspension Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0093744

Award Number: 0093744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector M. Gutierrez hgutier@fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Institute of Tech
	      150 West University Blvd
	      Melbourne, FL  329016975    321/674-8000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports the development of
              a mechatronic framework for magnetic suspension technology, which has the
              potential to significantly impact both manufacturing and transportation systems
              by providing an actuation principle with several attractive advantages:
              frictionless interaction of moving parts, high precision positioning at high
              speeds, high resolution and repeatability, and dust-free operation.  These
              systems are virtually maintenance-free because they are not subject to wear,
              are mechanically simple and easy to assemble and manufacture, and can provide
              higher accelerations and velocities than other conventional actuator
              technologies.  Several unresolved issues have relegated magnetic suspension
              technology to a few practical applications.  Magnetic servo levitation (SML),
              the actuation principal based on electromagnetic attractive forces, is
              inherently unstable, highly nonlinear, and difficult to model and control. 
              This project is devoted to provide the theoretical basis for accurate and
              robust control of this actuation principle.  The proposed approach is an
              extension of recent experimental results by the investigator that suggest two
              key elements involved in achieving robust and accurate control of these
              systems: to minimize the use of approximate electromagnetic relationships, and
              the use of a novel nonlinear control algorithm that is robust to model
              uncertainties and does not require the system to be affine in the control
              input.

The technology will be used to develop two applications in areas of
              broad impact: a multi-DOF high-precision positioning machine for semiconductor
              manufacturing, and a design test bench for active control of superconductive
              levitation for transportation systems.  Levitated positioning machinery is
              expected to be the next generation of positioning technology for semiconductor
              manufacturing.  On the other hand, magnetically levitated transportation
              systems are at the core of technology currently under investigation by NASA to
              develop spaceport capabilities for the operation of space shuttles.  The
              proposed work will also contribute to develop a framework for analysis and
              design of a family of nonlinear problems that are nonaffine in the input, such
              as automotive active suspension systems, autonomous underwater vehicles, etc. 
              Magnetic suspension technology integrates knowledge from several areas:
              physics, mechanical design, power electronics, control theory, instrumentation,
              data acquisition and computer programming.  This makes it an ideal ground for a
              novel, interdisciplinary, integrative educational experience for undergraduate
              and graduate students across several fields: mechanical and electrical
              engineering, physics and computer engineering.  The educational plan of this
              grant is centered on providing students increasing degrees of competency in
              knowledge integration by cultivating problem-solving skills in a
              multidisciplinary environment.


