Title       : CAREER: Implantable Wireless Microsystems for Diagnosis and Management of
               Glaucoma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0093604

Award Number: 0093604
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Babak Ziaie ziaie@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent advances in low-power integrated circuits, wireless technology, and
              silicon micromachining have provided strong tools for fabricating miniature
              wireless microsystems for biomedical applications. These microsystems are
              particularly useful in ophthalmology where limited anatomical space requires
              miniature surgical instruments and implants. 

The main research objective of
              this career award is to develop a group of implantable wireless microsystems
              for diagnosis and management of glaucoma using silicon micromachining and
              state-of-the-art wireless powering and readout techniques. The two specifically
              targeted microsystems are: I) a wireless microsystem for long-term (up to one
              year) monitoring of intraocular pressure, and 2) a non-invasively adjustable
              microvalve for the drainage of aqueous humor (aqueous shunt).  Although this
              proposal targets a specific disease, the science to be investigated and the
              technologies to be developed will be beneficial in many other applications
              involving implantable wireless microsystems.

The educational component of
              the project responds to the current crisis faced by many electrical engineering
              departments in attracting undergraduates towards hardware oriented and
              cross-disciplinary fields. Due to its multidisciplinary nature, the research is
              intimately tied to the educational component in order to address this problem.
              The educational plan includes active outreach and mentoring of undergraduate
              electrical engineering students in order to enhance and stimulate their
              interest in multidisciplinary technical careers with particular emphasis on
              microsystem technology and its applications in biomedical engineering. The plan
              includes incorporating research activities into undergraduate courses,
              involving undergraduates in the research, and developing inter-session short
              courses and seminars for sophomores and juniors.  These short courses target
              the widest possible undergraduate audience by requiring the minimum
              prerequisites (physics, chemistry, biology, and math) and are intended to
              emphasize the current multidisciplinary research in biomedical microsystems and
              other related areas.


