Title       : CAREER: A Mixed Mesh and Hybrid Integral Equation Approach for Electromagnetic
               Simulation of Microwave Circuit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2001  
File        : a0093692

Award Number: 0093692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cai-Cheng Lu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0093692
Lu

With the increase of the integration density of
              millimeter-wave/microwave circuits, electromagnetic interactions among circuit
              components and devices become important factors that affect the signal
              integrity and system electromagnetic compatibility (EMC).  There are growing
              demands for numerical methods that will accurately and effectively predict and
              analyze the interactions, and eventually provide means for optimum design and
              prototyping to meet both performance and EMC requirements.  This project
              proposes a mixed mesh, hybrid integral equation approach for the accurate and
              efficient simulation of microwave circuits.  A unique feature of this new model
              is to use mixed triangle-tetrahedron mesh (or quadrangle-hexahedron mesh) to
              discretize the geometry.  This allows the conformal and accurate modeling of
              both the metallic surface and the dielectric regions in a complex structure. 
              The hybrid surface and volume integral equations are formulated and solved
              using the method of moments.  The investigation of system condition reduction
              and convergence sped-up will be an important part of the proposed research in
              order to ensure stable and error tractable solution.  The multilevel fast
              multipole method will be implemented to achieve computational efficiency.  The
              successful implementation of it will bring the full-wave microwave circuit
              simulation to circuit board-level and eventually to system-level.  Moreover, as
              many objects are essentially made up of conductors and dielectrics, the mixed
              mesh and hybrid integral equation approach developed from this research will
              also be suitable for a wide range of other applications such as EMC/EMI
              simulation, radar scattering calculation for material coated targets, and
              predicting the electromagnetic interaction of radio frequency devices and human
              bodies.

The research will be integrated with the PI's academic teaching
              activities through the establishment of a virtual experiment lab for students
              to perform interactive simulation of various electromagnetic scattering and
              radiation problems.  The teaching activities are designed to encourage the
              participation of undergraduate students in engineering design and simulation,
              and will be used as demos to attract the interest of young people (who are
              tomorrow's potential engineers).  The success of this project will lead to a
              new and unique tool for future CAD design and prototyping of high-speed and
              microwave printed circuits.  It will also provide a new opportunity and a
              unique tool for university students to explore and understand the
              characteristics of microwave printed structures.

