Title       : CAREER: Computer Arithmetic Algorithms and Scalable Hardware Designs for
               Cryptographic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0093434

Award Number: 0093434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandre F. Tenca tenca@ece.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Cryptography has gained interest from the industry as a result of the increasing
              electronic commerce market. The secure utilization of electronic devices in
              business transactions frequently involves cryptography in order to protect or
              verify the authenticity of the information being transferred by these devices. 
              For several applications, the hardware implementation should not only be fast,
              but also to have features such as low power, reduced area, and scalability. 
              This project involves the investigation and development of scalable structures
              for arithmetic operations for cryptography.  Scalability is defined here as the
              capability to compute any long-precision result using fixed precision
              arithmetic units. These arithmetic units are adjustable to the available area,
              organized for concurrent execution, and reused as needed to obtain any desired
              precision. This project explores new computer arithmetic algorithms and design
              strategies for basic operations in cryptographic applications, leading to
              reusable, scalable, and efficient implementations. The utilization of design
              alternatives such as digit codes, scheduling techniques (space and time), and
              system organization will be considered in detail. The PI looks into operations
              in Galois Fields GF(p) and GF(2^m). These operations are used in classical
              cryptographic algorithms and the more recent Elliptic Curve cryptography, which
              offers a higher degree of security. 

