Title       : CAREER: Energy-Efficient Architectures and Their Interaction with Software: A
               Java Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0093085

Award Number: 0093085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268642             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijaykrishnan Narayanan vijay@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this career development plan is two-fold. Research in
developing
              fast and accurate high-level energy-estimation tools and their use in designing
              new software and architectural techniques for energy efficient Java execution.
              The PI will also concentrate on formulating and developing an educational plan
              to provide a strong foundation in interaction of hardware and software systems
              and hardware system design for undergraduate and 
graduate students.

The
              proposed research will provide an understanding of how to design
              energy-efficient systems from a holistic viewpoint considering both hardware
              and software components.  In particular, it will provide new insights into
              exploiting the interaction of 
hardware and software optimizations in reducing
              energy consumption. The first part of this research will focus on developing
              high-level energy estimation tools that are essential for designing the
              energy-efficient architectures and energy-conscious software components to
              support Java execution. The second part of this research will focus on
              providing a set of architectural techniques to reduce the energy consumption.
              The final part of this research will provide techniques for designing the
              software components of the Java runtime system to better exploit any
              energy-saving features present in the underlying hardware.


