Title       : CAREER: System-Level Power/Performance Analysis for Embedded Systems Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0093104

Award Number: 0093104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Radu Marculescu radum@ece.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to provide a set of formal and semiformal
              techniques for system-level power/performance analysis that can help the
              designer to select the right platform starting from a set of target
              applications. By platform we mean a family of heterogeneous architectures
              (which consist of both programmable and dedicated components) that satisfy a
              set of architectural constraints imposed to allow re-use of hardware and
              software components. Following the principle of orthogonalization of concerns
              during the design process, this methodology is based on the key idea of making
              a clear distinction between applications and architectures. Our approach to
              system-level analysis has three main objectives: 1) Application and platform
              modeling 2) Performance model evaluation 3) Performance model validation.
              Although the proposed methodology is completely general, our initial focus is
              on portable embedded multimedia systems (e.g., slim hosts like PDAs, network
              computers). For these systems, as opposed to the reactive embedded systems used
              in safety critical applications, the average behavior is far more important
              than the worst-case behavior. 
The proposed methodology complements the
              existing techniques for extreme-case performance analysis by incorporating the
              environment characteristics into system performance evaluation. Being targeted
              at system-level, the results of this analysis are not confined to any
              particular hardware/software implementation. Taken together, our proposed
              techniques will allow media systems designers to explore architectures more
              rapidly, estimate the impact of different design choices more robustly, and use
              large multimedia data benchmarks more effectively.

