Title       : PECASE: Computational Methods for Genome-Wide Prediction of Protein-Protein
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0093399

Award Number: 0093399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mona Singh mona@cs.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1076,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of this research is to develop computational methods for
              predicting protein-protein interactions at a genomic level. Protein-protein
              interactions play a central role in how an organism functions, and
              computational methods for predicting these interactions will be key to
              understanding functional pathways within biological systems. The vast amount of
              biosequence data in a genome makes sophisticated computational analysis a
              necessity. While computational methods have already proven to be a useful first
              step for rapid genome-wide identification of putative protein function and
              structure, research on the problem of computationally determining biologically
              relevant partners for given protein sequences is just beginning. 

This
              project looks at the problem of predicting protein-protein interactions from
              two complementary viewpoints. For both approaches, the constraint of
              genomic-level analysis favors development of fast, informatics-based methods.
              The first part of this proposal focuses on a specific well-characterized
              structural motif that mediates protein-protein interactions: the parallel,
              2-stranded coiled coil. The goal is to develop novel computational techniques
              that can predict whether two coiled-coil proteins interact with each other. The
              second part will extend several existing non-structural whole- and cross-genome
              methodologies that were initially designed for inferring protein function to
              the problem of predicting protein-protein interactions mediated by particular
              protein interaction domains.
 
The educational goals of this project include:
               (1) bioinformatics curriculum development, including a graduate "computing
              certificate" for molecular biology graduate students; (2) development of
              interdisciplinary bioinformatics courses at the introductory level and at the
              graduate research seminar level; and (3) dissemination of instructional
              material via the internet.

