Title       : CAREER: Iterative Decoding Schemes For Channels With Memory: Application To
               Fading Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0093215

Award Number: 0093215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Javier Garcia-Frias jgarcia@eecis.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Error correcting codes (channel codes) are on e of the key elements to optimize
              digital communications systems.  Traditionally, the design of good error
              correcting codes assumes memoryless channels.  In this context, turbo codes and
              the rediscovery of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes represent two of the
              most significant advances in channel coding in recent years:  Iterative
              decoding of these codes makes it possible to achieve performance close to the
              theoretical limits for memoryless channels.  However, in most of the
              applications, the channel is not so simple.  This research focuses on the study
              of iterative decoding for more realistic channels, such as wireless
              communications channels, characterized by having memory.  The objective is to
              achieve reliable communications, close to theoretical limits, for these types
              of channels.  This will have a direct application in the design of realistic
              communications systems (including wireless communications), allowing a
              reduction in the transmitter power requirements for a given quality of service,
              and a better use of the available bandwidth.

In order to achieve the best
              possible performance when the channel has memory, the statistical properties of
              the channel must be exploited in the decoding process.  This will be
              accomplished in a two-fold process:  First, statistical models, such as hidden
              Markov models and stochastic grammars, the iterative decoding schemes will be
              modified to incorporate the statistical models in the decoding of turbo codes,
              LDPC codes, and concatenated space-time codes.  Both steps are completely
              interwined.  The idea is to jointly design the statistical models and the
              decoding modifications, taking the decoding performance for the real channel as
              the real channel as the optimization criterion.  Moreover, when possible, this
              process should work adaptively, with no a priori knowledge of the channel
              required: when the communications system is used in an unknown channel, a
              convenient statistical model of the channel should be obtained jointly with
              decoding (in either a completely blind fashion if possible or by using pilots).
               In every iteration such a model should be used for the decoding and be
              conveniently refined.

