Title       : CAREER: Intelligent Resource Management and Performance Evaluation for Wireless
               Mobile Networks Supporting Integrated Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0093241

Award Number: 0093241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369120             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuguang Fang fang@ece.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Wireless communications systems free users from physically attaching to
              access points, while the Internet provides the universal accessibility to
              information services of many kinds, thus the marriage of the wireless and the
              Internet will be tremendous, making ubiquitous communications possible.
              However, in wireless network segments, resources (frequency, time and code) are
              extremely limited, thus, overdimensioning of such a network is equivalent to
              poor capital investment, while congestion at busy hours could mean lost calls
              and lost revenues. Therefore, the cost-effective dimensioning and management of
              wireless network resources to handle users' demands have to be carefully
              investigated.  Compared to the vast resources of its wired counterpart,
              wireless segments become the bottleneck for integrated systems (wireless
              internet). Thus, intelligent resource management in the wireless mobile
              networks becomes a critical issue.
     This proposal will investigate the
              intelligent resource management and performance evaluation for wireless mobile
              networks. This research is motivated by the following observations: (1) a lot
              of information available in network operations has not been effectively used in
              resource management; (2) co-operative network operations (such as information
              sharing) among the wired communications entities (such as base stations or
              mobile switching centers) can significantly improve the overall network
              performance, incurring signaling traffic over the wired segments is a good
              tradeoff. For example, if we could predict a mobile user's movement based on
              his/her movement history, the network could make appropriate resource
              reservation around the moving trajectory to overcome the potential call drops.
              If traffic information and mobility information are shared among a group of
              neighboring base stations, then potential congestion can be avoided or early
              actions can be taken. If the traffic type of a call connection can be passed to
              a lower layer (say, radio resource layer), then better transmission schemes can
              be designed. Thus, in this proposal the researcher will investigate intelligent
              resource management by accomplishing the following few tasks:
_ Propose a
              Virtual Management Network to coordinate the information exchanges;
_ Develop
              new mobility management schemes using location tracking and location
              prediction; _ Investigate various call admission control and intelligent call
              handling schemes and provide guidelines for choosing the appropriate schemes
              for specific applications;
_ Study the resource reservation schemes in
              combination with mobility prediction;
_ Provide a general framework for
              performance evaluation of wireless mobile networks under various resource
              allocation schemes.
     The significant difference between the proposed work
              and the previous work in the open literature is that the research  considers
              the wireless networks with call connections requiring different amounts of
              resources, and  also considers the mobility factors in its  analysis. This
              research will be important for future telecommunications design, particularly
              for wireless Internet.
     In conjunction with the proposed research, the PI
              will integrate the research on wireless networks and mobile communications into
              teaching. Based on his expertise's in various areas in electrical engineering,
              computer science, systems engineering and mathematics, the PI is planning to
              help build up a strong networking program in the Department of Electrical and
              Computer Engineering at University of Florida. He will strive to bring his
              diversified expertise's, particularly the mathematical thinking process, into
              the classroom, to teach students how and why by going through the creation
              process of "new" concepts or results in combination with associative learning
              and critical reading, to provide students with the new developments in the
              current research fronts and industrial practices and to develop a collaborative
              learning environment. The ultimate goal of his teaching is to help students to
              develop a life-long learning ability. The PI also realizes that the area of the
              wireless networks and mobile communications provides a better place for
              cooperation between electrical engineers and computer scientists, the proposed
              research and educational plan could bring this cooperative mode into the
              classroom.

