Title       : CAREER: Ion-Transport in Beta-Gallia-Rutile Intergrowths: An Investigation of
               Structure-Property Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0093690

Award Number: 0093690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422701             (Estimated)
Investigator: Doreen Edwards dedwards@king.alfred.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alfred U Col of Ceramics
	      2 Pine Street
	      Alfred, NY  148021296    607/871-2716

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0093690	
Edwards

The overarching goal of this Faculty Early CAREER
              Development project is to integrate research on beta-gallia-rutile (BGR)
              intergrowths with undergraduate and graduate education and outreach.   The goal
              of the research project is to develop a fundamental understanding of the ionic
              transport in beta-gallia-rutile intergrowths.  Expressed as Ga4Mn-4O2n-2 (M =
              Ge, Ti, Sn, n>5), the BGR intergrowths possess one-dimensional tunnels, which
              are suitable "hosts" for small-to-medium sized "guest" cations.  Because the
              BGR intergrowths form two homologous series in which the density and spatial
              arrangement of the tunnels can be controlled, the intergrowths provide a unique
              opportunity to systematically investigate ion transport in one-dimensional
              tunneled oxides.  In this work, novel materials based on parent BGR intergrowth
              structures will be synthesized by incorporating univalent cations (Li+, Na+,
              K+,and Ag+) into the one-dimensional tunnels and by replacing host-structure
              cations with various M3+ and M4+ cations to tailor the size and arrangement of
              the tunnels and to facilitate ionic exchange (storage) and ion conduction.  The
              work will define the phase stability of the intergrowths with respect to the
              univalent tunnel cations as well as the trivalent and tetravalent framework
              cations and will correlate structural features such as tunnel size, spatial
              arrangement, and chemistry to the resulting transport behavior.  Both
              polycrystalline and single-crystal materials will be studied.  Phase stability
              and structure will be determined by X-ray diffraction, neutron diffraction, and
              electron microscopy.  The ionic transport behavior will be elucidated using
              electrochemical insertion techniques, AC impedance spectroscopy, and DC
              electrical measurements.  Expected outcomes of the research are 1) an increased
              understanding of phase stability in complex oxide systems, 2) an improved
              understanding of ion transport in one-dimensional oxide systems, and 3) the
              development of new materials that may find applications as solid-electrolytes,
              reversible ion electrodes, ion separators, chemical sensors and catalysts.  The
              educational component of the project involves engaging undergraduate and
              graduate students in challenging research projects, developing a laboratory
              course on electronic materials that incorporates team work activities and
              utilizes open-ended problems, and developing a demonstration module that can be
              incorporated into Alfred University's Summer Institute for Science and
              Engineering High School Juniors.
%%%
Ionic transport is an underlying
              phenomenon in many important devices including fuel cells for energy
              conversion, batteries for energy storage, and sensors for environmental
              monitoring.  Ionic transport involves the movement of mobile cations within
              pathways that may be 1-dimensional tunnels, 2-dimensional layers or a
              3-dimensional network of channels.  Understanding the factors that affect
              cation transport through these pathways is critical to developing new and
              improved materials.  The knowledge gained in the project will advance the
              fundamental understanding of ionic transport, which will ultimately result in
              improvements of existing devices and the development of new materials.  In
              terms of educational benefits, the project will expose high-school students to
              opportunities in science and engineering and will engage future scientists and
              engineers in a challenging research project that will foster creativity and
              innovation.

