Title       : Genetic and Phenotypic Variation in Foraging Behavior of African and European
               Honey Bees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0093410

Award Number: 0093410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408696             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer H. Fewell j.fewell@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon F. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9198,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Genetic and Phenotypic Variation in Foraging Behavior of African and European
              
Honey Bees

Principle Investigators: Jennifer H. Fewell and Jon F.
              Harrison,  Arizona State University

A fundamental question in integrative
              biology is how genetic variation relates to variation in an animal's survival
              and reproductive strategies.  One way to answer this is to determine the
              genetic basis for behavioral differences between animal populations and then
              assess the ecological effects of those differences.  This project examines
              foraging strategy differences between neotropical African-derived (Apis
              mellifera scutellata) and European (Apis mellifera ligustica) honey bees.  It
              addresses to the questions of: (1) how genetic variation between African and
              European workers influences foraging strategy, and (2) how variation in worker
              foraging strategy affects differences in colony growth rates between the two
              subspecies. 
Population-level research suggests that African honey bees
              out-compete European bees primarily through faster rates of colony growth and
              reproduction (swarming).  Because honey bees are social insects, these
              differences in colony strategy are generated by collective differences in the
              behavior of the colony's individual workers.  Prior research by the
              investigators suggests that a major behavioral difference between African and
              European workers is in foraging.  African workers show a higher tendency than
              European workers to collect pollen.  Because pollen is the primary food source
              for developing brood, this difference can have profound effects on colony
              growth.  The first objective of this research is to understand the mechanisms
              producing individual differences in pollen and nectar foraging.  The
              investigators will test the hypothesis that differences in resource choice
              between African and European foragers are driven by differences in their
              sensitivity to stimuli affecting pollen collection.  They will determine
              whether co-fostered African workers respond more readily to stimuli known to
              affect pollen foraging, and examine differences between African and European
              workers in genomic regions (quantitative trait loci or QTL's) known to be
              associated with pollen foraging behavior in European bees.
Preliminary data
              also suggest that African and European workers differ in work effort during
              foraging, and that this variation may be mediated by differences in metabolic
              capacity.  The second objective is to test the hypothesis that variation in
              metabolic rate between African and European honey bees is genetically based,
              and is linked to differences in resource preference and foraging effort.  The
              researchers will compare metabolic rates, foraging load sizes and foraging
              rates of co-fostered African, European and hybrid workers to determine how
              these traits are inherited.  Then, quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping will
              be performed to locate genomic regions influencing variation in flight
              metabolic rates.  These will be compared to known loci affecting body size and
              preference for  pollen versus nectar collection. 
The third objective is to
              determine whether variation in individual foraging behavior affects 
              colony-level growth rates. The investigators will: (a) measure pollen intake
              rates and colony growth rates in African and European hives, and (b)
              experimentally manipulate the genotypes of the foragers in a hive (African
              versus European), to measure the effect of forager genotype on brood
              production.  This research integrates behavior, physiology and genetics to
              generate a more complete understanding of the proximate mechanisms generating
              complex behavioral traits such as foraging.  It also examines the consequences
              of individual behavioral differences on the ecological success of these
              competing subspecies.



