Title       : CAREER: A Comprehensive Experimental and Theoretical Investigation into Membrane
               Fouling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0093617

Award Number: 0093617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy E. Childress amyec@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal number:		CTS- 0093617
Principal investigator:	Amy E.
              Childress
Affiliation:		University of Nevada Reno


CAREER: A Comprehensive
              Experimental and Theoretical Investigation into Membrane Fouling


Project
              Abstract

This investigation takes a comprehensive approach to evaluating
              experimentally and theoretically the effects of both membrane and colloid
              properties on membrane fouling. The overall approach is to couple the extended
              DLVO theory with transport and deposition equations appropriate for crossflow
              membrane filtration. The specific goals are to develop methodology and to
              evaluate several fundamental membrane and colloid characteristics; to develop a
              particle deposition model that incorporates short-range acid-base forces of
              both the membranes and colloids; to perform a systematic experimental
              investigation to evaluate the overall impact of physico-chemical factors on
              membrane fouling; and to compare the theoretical predictions with experimental
              results. Additionally, particle deposition will be directly observed using AFM,
              and the extent of deposition will be related to flux decline using a deposited
              layer resistance model.
Colloidal fouling will be considered within the
              framework of particle deposition, that is, the capture of colloidal particles
              from flowing suspensions by solid surfaces. From a broader perspective, an
              understanding of the principles governing the transport and interaction of
              colloidal particles in flowing suspensions is extremely important to many
              disciplines of science and engineering. Therefore, this research has numerous
              implications for other fields in which particle deposition plays a crucial
              role. Within the framework of membrane processes, this project has direct
              application to reduction of colloidal membrane fouling.  Possible measures 
              include optimization of feed stream pretreatment (to change the colloid
              characteristics), modification of the membrane surface, and selection of the
              most appropriate membrane based on feed stream characteristics. The CAREER
              education plan involves the development of a science and technology outreach
              program for 8th grade girls. The main objective of the program is to encourage
              the understanding that math and science are important and relevant to the
              girls' lives and to actively support the girls in pursuing education and
              employment in these areas.

