Title       : CAREER: An Ecosystems Engineering Approach to Integrating Education and Research
               Using the Adirondack Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0093513

Award Number: 0093513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andria M. Costello costello@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              BES-0093513
Costello
As we begin the 21st century, we do so with the
              realization that the traditional engineering
of previous decades is changing
              at a rapid pace. To keep in line with the advances in technology,
we are
              constantly adapting, improvising, and developing new strategies that enable us
              to
approach engineering research and education as an integrated system in
              touch with the
technological advances around us. The goal of this CAREER
              proposal is to use the
interdisciplinary background of the PI to address the
              multi-faceted needs of today's engineer by
engaging them in research and
              education at the interface of engineering and science.
Work in the PI's lab is
              focused on the application of molecular and microbiological
techniques to the
              study of natural and engineered systems. The PIs  model system is the methane
              oxidizing bacteria, or methanotrophs. Methanotrophs are ubiquitous throughout
              terrestrial and aquatic environments and are important in the global carbon
              cycle, climate change, and the remediation of hazardous wastes. Because of
              this, they provide an interesting framework within which to ask questions that
              integrate science and engineering in both research and education. 
In this
              proposal, the PI has developed a long-term educational plan that coordinates
              directly with her interests in the research of methane oxidizing bacteria. The
              PI will redesign a suite of core classes in the Civil and Environmental
              Engineering department that will focus on educating engineering students in the
              concepts of modern biology by integrating biology into the curricula in the
              context of engineering topics. In addition, she will foster collaborative,
              multi-disciplinary educational and research interactions with engineering and
              science departments at Syracuse University. The effectiveness of these
              undertakings will be measured using a number of
assessment tools and an
              independent advisory board established by the PI.
In addition to educational
              initiatives, this project will enable students to carry out
interdisciplinary
              research characterizing population shifts in methane-oxidizing bacteria
              in
response to soil acidification. A combination of molecular biology and
              environmental
engineering tools will be used to test the hypothesis that
              natural acidic deposition (acid rain)
exerts selective pressure on
              methanotrophic diversity and is a significant factor in controlling
changes in
              the methane oxidation characteristics of natural populations of these
              bacteria.
Specific questions to be answered include 1) What are the dominant
              methanotrophs present in
soils of the Adirondack mountains and 2) How do
              natural methanotroph populations respond to
acidification of their
              environment? Answering these questions will expose students to
              various
theories, techniques, and experiences that span both engineering and
              science disciplines. ***

