Title       : CAREER: Novel Use of Carbon Fibers for Removal of Priority Pollutants from
               Aqueous Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0093600

Award Number: 0093600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tanju Karanfil tkaranf@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Given the increasingly stringent water quality standards and public concern over
              environmental issues, environmental engineers must aggressively pursue
              innovative, selective, and versatile treatment technologies for solving current
              pollution problems and preventing new ones. Carbon fibers (CFs) are, perhaps,
              the most innovative and successful carbon material developed within the past
              forty years. Although their applications in the control of environmental
              pollution are limited, today carbon fibers are used from sporting goods to
              aircraft structures. CFs pose an attractive alternative to traditional granular
              (GAC) and powdered (PAC) activated carbon treatment methods because their
              properties are superior to GACs and PACs. 

Research Objectives. The use of
              CFs in drinking water and industrial wastewater treatment applications offers
              exciting possibilities. Therefore, the primary goal of the research component
              of this CAREER proposal is to systematically investigate the efficacy of using
              carbon fibers for removing priority pollutants from aqueous solutions so that
              efficient treatment systems can be developed for use in environmental
              engineering applications. Specific objectives to address this goal are: 1)
              investigation of the mechanisms of adsorption of small-molecular weight organic
              chemicals and organic macromolecules by carbon fibers in aqueous phase, 2)
              investigation of the mechanisms of competitive adsorption, including preloading
              effects, on carbon fibers, and 3) assessment of the feasibility and efficacy of
              carbon fibers for use in environmental treatment systems.

Teaching
              Objectives. The primary educational goal of this proposal is to develop
              computer animations for teaching fundamentals of physicochemical processes to
              undergraduate and graduate students. Several such products have already been
              developed for basic science courses, however there is practically no material
              for environmental engineering education. Relatively well-known principles of
              physicochemical processes are one of the most suitable areas to describe and
              demonstrate using computer animations and visual-aids. In addition, graduate
              level curses on water treatment design and on surfaces and interfaces in the
              aquatic environments will be developed to meet the needs in the Department of
              Environmental Engineering and Science at Clemson University. The research
              findings will be employed in these courses and they will be incorporated
              directly into the PI's educational activities.

