Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The International Matchmaking Industry: Mail
               Order Bride Migration from the Philippines and Russia to the U.S.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a0093673

Award Number: 0093673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7150               (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Feste kfeste@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the forces that shape international migration in the
              shadow of American immigration law, documenting how and why mail order bride
              migration has emerged as an issue for governments and nongovernmental
              organizations. Three questions will be addressed: Is the international marriage
              market an indicator of 'global feminism'? How have governments of the U.S. and
              the sending countries responded to this migration? What businesses or
              organizations encourage or discourage bride migration?  In examining these
              questions, this project builds on previous migration research in economics,
              politics, foreign relations, law, and feminism. Data will be collected in the
              U.S., Russia, and the Philippines. Interviews with marriage agents, immigration
              officials, and men and women seeking foreign mates will provide information
              about the business, government policies, and perceptions of the process by
              those involved. The findings will have implications for U.S. immigration
              policy, foreign relations between countries involved in this industry, and
              feminist international migration theory.
