Title       : CAREER: Energy Scavenging for MEMS and Engineering Education Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a0093966

Award Number: 0093966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373659             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hy D. Tran tran@me.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS) have grown from scientific speculation
              to
commercial success. Still, a number of technical challenges remain which
              cannot be
addressed by the private sector. One of these challenges is the
              integration of the power
supply into the MEMS device. It is a further
              challenge to build the power source, using
only the processing technology that
              was used to build the micromechanical elements and
the electronic elements of
              the device. We address the technical issue of obtaining energy
from the
              environment to power MEMS devices, rather than powering the device
              through
external batteries or power supplies. Examples from horology provide
              inspiration for
scavenging both mechanical motion and thermal energy. While a
              number of energy
scavenging schemes based on capturing vibration have been
              proposed, we intend to take
advantage of the high potential energy densities
              of thermal systems. We will develop
scaling and design methods for thermally
              scavenged systems, and demonstrate a
mechanical micromachine actuated by
              changes in ambient temperature. This technology
may be used in the future
              development of autonomous microrobots or microsatellites.
A problem facing
              higher education and high technology industry is the dearth of students
and
              graduates. This is an especially acute problem for interdisciplinary fields
              such as
MEMS. Upper-division students require cross-disciplinary education to
              become skilled
contributors to MEMS research, and there are not enough
              upper-division students. We
therefore must attract more students into the
              technical fields. The NSF CAREER
program leverages on existing curriculum
              development efforts by turning curriculum
development into science/engineering
              outreach. Project-based courses will have their
final presentations in
              secondary schools, where high school students will have the
opportunity to
              evaluate engineering projects. Similarly, we will develop sections
              of
project-based engineering courses targeted for science teachers, with the
              objective of
integrating teachers into engineering development teams. New
              courses will be
modularized, so that topics can be offered as short courses or
              tutorials, and published
with distance education technology. NSF funding will
              enable students to actually
fabricate and test the designs their teams have
              designed and simulated through the NNUN
or other multi-user foundries.
The
              research results, and the research program needs, are intertwined with
              the
educational development. Research findings and educational assessments
              will be used to
revise and refine curriculum development and teaching methods.
              Similarly, project ideas
for the courses will be drawn from the research
              problems.
All of these efforts are leveraged through existing programs
              designed for outreach to
disadvantaged and underrepresented groups in the
              sciences at the University of New
Mexico and in New Mexico.


