Title       : CAREER: Development of Computational Methods for the New Generation of Air
               Quality Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0093139

Award Number: 0093139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325732             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrian Sandu asandu@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Air quality computer models are widely used investigation tools in environmental
              research;
many physical and chemical processes are modeled and their
              integrated impacts on atmospheric pollutant
concentrations studied. These
              models are also important tools for regulatory and policy communities, and
are
              used to develop optimal emission control strategies for atmospheric pollutants,
              as required by
the National Ambient Air Quality Standards.

The level of
              confidence in modeling results depends critically on the accuracy of numerical
              methods
employed, as well as on the robustness of the underlying
              implementation. This research will
develop state-of-the-art computational
              methods and software techniques for use in air quality modeling
work on time
              stepping methods. Special purpose algorithms will be developed for simultaneous
              treatment of box model processes, including aerosol dynamics, gas and liquid
              phase chemistry and interphase mass transfer. Higher accuracies and lower
              computational times are targeted.

Particulate matter (aerosol) processes
              have recently became a priority focus area in environmental science.
              Incorporating aerosol processes in the models leads to an order of magnitude
              increase in the overall computational time. The research will extend into the
              area of solving the integro-differential equations that
govern particle
              evolution; specifically, the proposed work will improve the theoretical
              framework and will
build fast and reliable numerical techniques for aerosol
              dynamics-chemistry simulations.

Together with the physical/chemical process
              understanding and numerical algorithm design, software tech-
nology is an
              important component of these models. Another objective of the project is to
              explore software
design techniques and tools that will make the modeling
              software easier to use, to maintain and to develop.
The resulting
              object-oriented version of a generic Eulerian model will illustrate the new
              approach to soft-
ware construction and will constitute an ideal environment
              for developing and testing specialized numerical
methods.

The  educational
              goal is to enhance interdisciplinary education in computationally-oriented
              disciplines.
Since much of the science and technology of the future and many
              of the new industries will cross the
boundaries of traditional disciplines,
              interdisciplinary education becomes increasingly important. Some of
the newest
              high demand areas involve computing and information technology together with
              other fields:
teaching and research will support the development of
              cutting-edge computationally-involved B.S. programs at Michigan Technological
              University, and continue to contribute to the Ph.D. program in Computational
              Science and Engineering.

