Title       : CAREER: Approximability of Combinatorial Optimization Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0093117

Award Number: 0093117
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjeev Khanna sanjeev@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Combinatorial optimization is concerned with finding optimal arrangements from
              within some finite space of arrangements.  The theory of NP-completeness has
              shown that numerous combinatorial optimization problems that arise frequently
              in computer science and other fields are not likely to have polynomial time
              algorithms.  One approach to overcome this fundamental intractability has been
              to shift focus from computing exact solutions to approximate solutions.  This
              CAREER project involves research and teaching efforts aimed at developing our
              understanding of the approximability behavior of combinatorial optimization
              problems.


The research component of this project has two broad directions.
               One direction is to obtain tight bounds on the approximability of some basic
              problems in the areas of graph optimization, network design and routing, and
              scheduling theory.  Some representative examples include the graph k-coloring
              problem and the preemptive weighted flow time problem.  The second direction is
              to build on our understanding of central problems and develop unifying
              frameworks that highlight inherent connections among seemingly unrelated
              techniques and results.  The goal here is to identify minimal characteristics
              that determine the approximability of optimization problems.  The educational
              component of this project will introduce an advanced undergraduate/graduate
              course on Approximability of Combinatorial Optimization Problems.  Such
              problems routinely arise in almost all areas of computer science, including
              databases, networking and systems.  Practitioners and researchers in these
              areas would benefit from learning the various powerful theoretical techniques
              and results for optimization problems.  The PI will also introduce a freshman
              course on Mathematical Thinking and Reasoning to help undergraduate students
              develop their ability to write concise formal proofs

