Title       : Data Embedding, the Method of Types, and Universal Receivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a0093859

Award Number: 0093859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47161              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry D. Gibson gibson@seas.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The field of information hiding includes steganography, where a message is
              concealed in another data stream, and watermarking, where ownership data is
              included in a digital object to be protected. A third field of information
              hiding is the field of data embedding, wherein additional information is
              incorporated in the transmitted data stream by using a key and distorting
              (slightly) the original object. The embedded information cannot be
              reconstructed without the key. We propose an entirely new approach to data
              embedding based upon the method of types and universal receiver design. In our
              approach, a new data sequence is embedded in the original data stream using the
              method of types, and the embedded data is extracted using a type-based
              universal receiver. The choice of type and rate for the embedded data is based
              upon an analysis of portions of the original data stream. The universal
              receiver learns the type from the received data alone, and hence, there is no
              side information as in previous data embedding techniques. The embedding
              process and the receiver are both data adaptive, so the original data stream
              can be reconstructed without error.

We investigate the fundamental limits of
              this approach to data embedding by analyzing the characteristics of the
              original data stream that facilitate data embedding, by studying which
              techniques allow the highest data rates to be embedded, and by examining the
              tradeoffs between embedded data rate and errors in the embedded data. This
              approach to data embedding offers the possibility of expanding the delivered
              data rate of many existing telecommunications links, both wired and wireless,
              without changing allocated bandwidths.

