Title       : CAREER: Biochemical, Molecular and Physiological Analysis of Plant Ribosome
               Inactivating Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0093014

Award Number: 0093014
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge Vivanco jvivanco@colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1228,9109,9177,9178,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Throughout his career at Colorado State University (CSU), Dr. Vivanco will
              integrate plant biology education and research to the mutual benefit of both
              endeavors and will further the land-grant mission of CSU with community
              outreach activities.  The long-term research goal of Dr. Vivanco's program is
              to understand the biology of plant Ribosome-Inactivating Proteins (RIP's). 
              This knowledge can be used to develop strategies to increase broad-spectrum
              pathogen resistance in crops such as potato.  Such strategies include enhanced
              breeding programs that promote RIP incorporation, the use of chemical or
              biological elicitors of RIP expression, and transgenic technology.  Although
              much work has been done to dissect the enzymatic and antiviral mechanisms of
              RIP's, relatively little is known about the antifungal activity and biology of
              these proteins in plants.  Root-specific RIP's from Mirabilis expansa will be
              used to study these reputed  properties.  RIP's may function in processes
              associated with disease resistance and tolerance, such as  cell-specific
              hypersensitive responses and pathogen-induced cell death.  Furthermore, these
              proteins  are likely to be involved at many stages of plant growth and
              development, and thus their role in the underground organ will be studied. 
              Because of the molecular and genomic technologies available for model plants
              such as tobacco, the isolation of RIP genes in these plants  will provide the
              tools to determine the specific roles of RIP's in the disease resistance
              cascade and to identify novel physiological functions for these proteins. 
              Finally, the enzymatic activity of certain RIP's will be targeted against
              viroids to provide novel control strategies. 

In addition to studying RIP's
              in plants, Dr. Vivanco will introduce  innovative courses and education
              techniques into the classroom and will continue to  integrate undergraduates
              into his program.  Through this project he will also work to increase the
              number of underrepresented minorities working in plant biology and to educate
              public school students and teachers about the wonders of plants.  



