Title       : Computer and Engineering Technology Scholars Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2001  
File        : a0093024

Award Number: 0093024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pearley Cunningham pcunning@ccac.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brenda Trettel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CC Allegheny Co Col Off
	      800 Allegheny Ave
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152331804    412/323-2323

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Computer and Engineering Technology (CET) Scholars Program is designed to
              provide scholarships to 50 students studying in the areas of Computer
              Information Technology, Computer-Aided Drafting and Design, Microcomputer
              Electronics, Electronics Engineering Technology and Robotics and Automated
              Systems Technology. These majors are all considered advanced technology careers
              in the state of Pennsylvania. In addition to excellent career opportunities in
              the region for graduates, these programs offer transferability into
              baccalaureate programs at local four-year colleges. Working through the
              Affirmative Action Office of the college, multiple sources are used to contact
              interested young people, especially women and minorities. High school
              counselors, scout troops, church youth groups, a web site, and school and group
              presentations are some of the methods used for recruitment. Factors used by the
              scholarship selection committee are group diversity, financial need, grade
              point average (2.8 or higher for selection), letters of recommendation
              describing career potential, and commitment to career advancement. Working with
              the Financial Aid Office to build a complete package, the CET Scholars are
              awarded up to $2,500 per year toward their school expenses. Regardless of
              major, all CET Scholars complete a common one-year core of Technical
              Mathematics and Technical Physics designed specifically to enhance the use of
              these topics by the technology majors, encourage collaborative work, and to
              stress mastery of conceptual topics. A unique feature of the program is that
              all CET Scholars complete an external Work Keys Assessment Process. This
              assessment certifies, to the student, the employer, the school and the funding
              agencies, the quality of the education and training received. National Work Key
              Assessment Profiles are available for the careers being targeted by this
              project.
