Title       : CAREER: Flexible Strategies for Internet Content Distribution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0093296

Award Number: 0093296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482467             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Byers byers@cs.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The emergence of new technologies for content distribution including content
              delivery networks (CDNs, end system multicast, distributed content exchange and
              application-level anycast are fundamentally changing the relationships between
              consumers and producers of digital content.  Whereas traditional approaches to
              content delivery are predicated on point-to-point connections from a client to
              a single origin server, these new mechanisms for content distribution
              fundamentally undermine the assumptions inherent in that model.  For example,
              CDNs redirect clients to a number of equivalent replica servers, while end
              system multicast goes further and blurs the distinction between client and
              server by requiring that every participant who wishes to access content serve
              content as well.  To illustrate this point, consider the access graph plotting
              the flow of TCP connections serving a popular document through the network at
              an instant in time.  Until very recently, this graph could easily be
              characterized as forming a hub-and-spoke topology with the hub at the origin
              server; now its complex structure is little known except perhaps to network
              engineers within the CDNs themselves.
   Broadly, the researcher's  interests
              lie in characterizing the impact that new and increasingly distributed content
              delivery mechanisms will have on network traffic, resource management and the
              design of network protocols.  In the research component of the researcher's
              career development program, he focuses  on strategies for addressing the
              challenges and opportunities that distributed content delivery mechanisms will
              place on reliable transport protocols.  In particular, the complex one-to-many
              and many-to-many relationships between consumers and producers of digital
              content will place strain on transport protocols such as TCP, as those
              protocols are not designed to accomodate the fluid interactions which will take
              place when users have a multiplicity of service options.  The researcher argues
              for lightweight reliable transport services designed for maximum flexibility
              which can accomodate connection preemption, connection suspension, connection
              migration and connection aggregation.  While these considerations are
              fundamental , they have not been carefully studied in the context of TCP
              because of daunting technical hurdles, complexity, and absence of a driving
              need.  The researcher brings new techniques to bear on the problem, as the
              proposed work leverages his  experience with fast forward error correcting
              coding techniques which he has  applied in the domain of  reliable multicast
              [11] and downloading digital content from multiple mirror sites in parallel
              [10].  In some of the settings  considered, such as dynamic server selection
              and redirection, the flexibility which the proposed techniques afford can be
              considered to be a performance optimization, but in other settings, such as
              providing reliability for end system multicast, the researcher argues that the
              flexible services proposed are essential to delivering high performance.
  
              The proposed educational aspect of the researcher's career development program
              focuses on enhancing the undergraduate and graduate student experience in his
              department and building a stronger basis for industrial and inter-institutional
              networking research collaborations in the Boston area.  Proposed activities
              center around ongoing projects to promote undergraduate involvement in
              networking research; to enhance the department's networking curriculum; and to
              encourage students to participate in the computer science community outside of
              the university, whether by volunteering at a community outreach program or by
              becoming involved in local organizations of computer scientists.  An exciting
              initiative which the researcher is e actively involved in and which will help
              achieve these goals is the institution of a center for networking research at
              Boston University.

