Title       : CAREER: Long-Run Development and the Legacy of Spanish Colonialism in Latin
               America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a0093754

Award Number: 0093754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292750             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Mahoney James_Mahoney@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              James Mahoney
00093754


This CAREER research project explores the
              relationship between Spanish colonialism and long-run development in Latin
              American. The project falls with the comparative-historical research tradition.
               Comparative-historical analysis is particularly well studied for addressing
              broad questions of national development in which macro processes and temporal
              sequences are central to the explanation.  

 Historical data from 15 Latin
              American countries will be used to investigate the intriguing negative
              correlation between Spanish colonial penetration in the eighteenth century and
              levels of economic, social, and political development in the twentieth century.
               Those regions of the Spanish colonial empire that were the most heavily
              penetrated during the colonial period, such as Mexico, Peru, Bolivia, and
              Guatemala are hypothesized to have emerged as the least developed countries of
              Latin American in the 20th century.  In contrast, those regions that were the
              least penetrated by the Spanish, such as Argentina, Uruguay, Chile, and Costa
              Rica, are hypothesized t have become the most developed countries of Latin
              American during the 20th century.  This relationship will be testing by using
              existing quantitative data sources to measure level of colonial penetration and
              level of development for the different countries of Latin America.  Measures of
              colonial penetration include statistics on trade, population, bullion
              production, budgets and salary.  Measures of development include statistics on
              gross domestic product per capita, infant mortality rate, life expectancy at
              birth, and democracy.  Extensive readings on the historiography of late
              colonial Latin America will also be completed. 

The education component of
              the proposal consists of providing research opportunities for students as
              research assistants; creating a mentor program which links undergraduate with
              graduate students; and developing a new seminar course on "Colonial Legacies"
              and integrating sections of the project into a current course on methodology
              and development.  

