Title       : CAREER: Collaborative Representations: Supporting Online Knowledge-building
               Discourse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a0093505

Award Number: 0093505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402755             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel D. Suthers suthers@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The present widespread interest in the use of computers for online learning at
              all levels from primary school to university and adult  education presents an
              unprecedented opportunity for leveraging the computational medium's strengths
              for learning. Along with this opportunity comes profound responsibility to
              adopt these technologies in ways specifically proven to support learning.
              Research on learning shows that social processes such as collaboration and
              mentoring play an important role.  Likewise, many disciplines make use of rich
              forms of visual representations, and research has shown that proper use of
              visual representations can impact on learning.  Yet, existing software for
              online learning provides only primitive support for manipulation of
              representations other than text, and there is a lack of research on how
              representational tools and online discussion tools may be constructively
              combined. 

The Collaborative Representations project is exploring ways to
              design interactive software in which learners can easily collaborate online
              while learning with rich representations.  The project is also studying how the
              representations themselves may be designed to guide learners into
              knowledge-building discourse.  Software for online learning is being developed
              in collaboration with teachers and scientists to help ensure suitability for
              instructional objectives.  Controlled experiments are being undertaken to
              refine the software design and to assess the effects of the representations on
              discourse processes and on learning outcomes.  Instructional and assessment
              strategies are being developed in the context of authentic research projects
              involving students, teachers and scientists, and will be disseminated to
              teachers through professional development activities. Continued work in this
              area will contribute to a scientifically tested theory of representationally
              rich collaborative learning, and inform the design of the next generation of
              software and associated instructional and assessment strategies for online
              learning.  This work is being undertaken with the assistance of graduate
              students who are receiving training in methodologies for the design and
              evaluation of educational technologies. 
Additionally, new courses are being
              proposed for our degree program, courses specifically designed to expose future
              information technology workers to the importance of addressing the human
              dimension of information systems, particularly in educational and training
              applications. 



