Title       : CAREER: Finite-Field Wavelets for Cryptography and Error Control Coding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0093229

Award Number: 0093229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Faramarz Fekri fekri@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Finite-Field Wavelets for Cryptography and Error-Control Coding
Faramarz
              Fekri
  
Today's success is increasingly dependent on being able to access,
              share and use information whenever and wherever needed.  The widespread
              availability and transmission of such information demands new approaches to
              cryptography and error-control coding.  Notions of complexity, scalability, and
              adaptability are becoming critical challenges for error-control coding and data
              security.  This research explores wavelet transform over finite fields and
              their applications to convolutional coding and data security.  It investigates
              a rich set of signal processing techniques that can be exploited for the
              construction of new coding and security schemes.  The research is not
              evolutionary.  It defines a new research area on the boundary of three very
              large research fields; namely digital signal processing, communications, and
              computer science.  It impacts 1. basic science, 2. technology and products, and
              3. education and learning.  
This research explores the intersection of
              finite-field wavelet transforms, error-control coding and data encryption.  The
              primary focus of this research is to advance the study of wavelets and filter
              banks over finite fields and their applications to error -control coding and
              data security.  It develops the theory of wavelet transforms over finite fields
              which provides a general wavelet decomposition of sequences defined over finite
              fields.  This is an approach that has a rich history in signal processing for
              the representation of real-valued signals, but it has been lacking in the
              finite-field case.  In particular, the research explores multiresolution
              wavelets and overcomplete filter banks over finite fields.  Along with wavelet
              theory on finite fields, this work investigates the first application of the
              finite-field wavelet theory to new types of time varying convolutional codes
              that have unusual trellis structures with reduced complexity.  Using
              multiresolution decomposition of wavelets, the researchers intend to construct
              rate-compatible wavelet convolutional codes for handheld devices to support
              flexible data rates (voice, fax, video,...).  To address security issues with
              handheld devices, this research exploits the finite-field wavelet as a unifying
              framework for effective joint design of data encryption and error control
              coding.  In this framework, the public and secret keys of the user determine
              the wavelet system and the security is tied to the length of the wavelet basis
              function.  The goal of the research is centered around the development of
              innovative coding/security protocols for handheld
              devices.


















