Title       : CAREER: Shape Capture and Modeling for Wrist Dynamics and Ancient Pottery
               Analysis using Manifold Surfaces and Signed-Distance Volume Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0093238

Award Number: 0093238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323873             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Laidlaw dhl@cs.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will conduct research into shape modeling and its applications
              coupled with the development of a methodology for teaching the skills needed
              for successful multi-disciplinary research projects. The education plan is
              integrated with the research effort, which includes development of
              computational tools for capturing geometry, representing it within the
              computer, and using those representations for specific applications in
              archaeology and biological modeling.

The education plan consists of a
              course, Interdisciplinary Scientific Visualization, and a research group. Both
              welcome undergraduate and graduate students alike. The class mimics the
              research process, from choosing a project to presenting research results.
              Projects must include participants from multiple disciplines. During the
              semester students write a proposal, review proposals by others, work together
              on a project, write it up as a research abstract, review abstracts by others,
              and present their results. As the course progresses, lectures, readings, and
              discussion help to teach the art and craft behind each of those steps. The
              research group is derived from three research groups the PI participated in
              during during education: a primarily undergraduate group at Brown, a primarily
              graduate group at Caltech, and a second Caltech group that is primarily
              postdocs. The group combines aspects of all three to provide an environment
              that it is believed will be conducive to learning how to do multi-disciplinary
              research at many levels.

The research is multi-disciplinary and fits well
              into the research group. Computational tools for capturing geometric shapes,
              representing them, and calculating with them will be developed and applied to
              problems from two disciplines: assembly of ancient pottery sherds in
              archaeology and modeling of wrist motion in orthopaedics and bioengineering. In
              both cases, shape will be captured from sampled volumetric CT medical imaging
              data. It will be represented implicitly using sampled signed-distance volumes
              and explicitly using manifold surfaces. The two representations compliment one
              another, together offering the strengths of both. For the archaeology
              application, we will develop a software architecture for decoupling the process
              of reasoning about artifact shapes from the understanding of their geometry. A
              probabilistic interface will separate the two parts. For the biological
              modeling application, we will develop models for bones, ligaments, and
              cartilage that will predict motion. We will validate the model with motion that
              we have already acquired and then use it to examine motion in patients with
              deficits that have thus far eluded an understanding.

The impact of this
              research will be in both application areas and the computational domain. If we
              are successful, pottery assembly, a process that is estimated to take over 50%
              of the time an excavation team spends outside of excavating, will be automated.
              We anticipate that this speedup will enable significant new archaeological
              results to emerge. A better understanding of the biomechanics of the arm and
              wrist and the abnormal conditions that can affect them could impact many
              Americans. This understanding will likely have applications in biology,
              bioengineering, medical applications, animation, and robotics. The numerical
              methods we will develop for simulating joints are likely to apply to
              simulations of other biological systems. Because the algorithms and tools for
              geometric modeling will be applied to two specific problems, they are likely to
              be more widely applicable.

Perhaps the most significant impact will be not
              in the scientific results, but in a better understanding of what makes
              multi-disciplinary research projects succeed or fail and in the new scientists
              that will emerge from Brown.
