Title       : SGER: The Psychophysiology of Emotion Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0093679

Award Number: 0093679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99499              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Gross james@psych.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Gabrieli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Self-regulation is the cornerstone of adaptive behavior, and nowhere is the
              capacity for self-regulation more critical than when it comes to emotions.
              Emotion regulation provides the basis for success at work and in interpersonal
              relations. Sustained attention at work requires that people put out of mind
              emotional impulses, and good interpersonal relations require that people
              judiciously monitor which emotions they express and how they express them. In
              the past two decades, emotion researchers have begun to rigorously examine
              emotion regulatory processes. However, further theoretical and empirical
              progress requires a deeper understanding of the neural substrates of emotion
              regulation. In this two-study exploratory project, state-of-the-art autonomic
              and central monitoring procedures will be used to examine the up- and
              down-regulation of approach and withdrawal tendencies, which together represent
              the basic elements of motivated behavior. These studies have two specific aims:
              (1) To determine the autonomic, behavioral, and subjective correlates of the
              regulation of approach- and withdrawal-related impulses; specifically, hunger
              and disgust. (2) To determine the neural correlates of self-regulation of
              approach and withdrawal, using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) and
              simultaneous autonomic physiological recording. The first study will address
              Specific Aim 1 by recording autonomic, subjective, and behavioral responses
              from experimental participants who are regulating disgust and/or hunger under a
              variety of stimulus presentation conditions. The second study will address
              Specific Aim 2 by recording brain activity, autonomic physiology, and
              subjective experience in participants who are regulating their experience of
              disgust- and hunger-related stimuli selected on the basis of the results of
              Study 1.


