Title       : CAREER: Power Electronics Circuits for Renewable and Distributed Energy Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0093884

Award Number: 0093884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon M. Tolbert tolbert@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0093884
Tolbert

Electric power production in the 21st Century will see
              dramatic changes in both the physical infrastructure and the control and
              information infrastructure.  A shift will take place from a relatively few
              large, concentrated generation centers and the transmission of electricity over
              mostly a high voltage ac grid to a more diverse and dispersed generation
              infrastructure that also has a higher percentage of dc transmission lines. 
              This change in the physical infrastructure combined with a more deregulated
              electric power industry will result in more parties generating power - or
              distributed generation.

The advent of high power electronic modules has also
              encouraged the use of more dc transmission and made the prospects of
              interfacing dc power sources such as fuel cells and photovoltaics with an ac
              power system more easily attainable.  A modular, scalable power electronics
              technology that is ideal for these types of utility applications is the
              transformerless multilevel converter.  The use of a multilevel converter to
              control the frequency, voltage output, and real and reactive power flow at a
              dc/ac interface provides significant opportunities in the control of
              distributed power systems and/or as an enabling technology for dc energy
              sources such as photovoltaics, fuel cells, and rectified wind generation.

In
              power engineering, traditional educational curriculum for both undergraduate
              and graduate students has courses in two distinct areas: power systems and
              power electronics.  However, power electronics are increasingly being
              integrated into power systems as interfaces with distributed generation sources
              and for such applications as high voltage dc transmission, active power
              filters, static var compensation, and large medium voltage motor drives. 
              Research and education in power engineering needs an integrated approach in the
              study of power systems and power electronics by considering the interactions
              that these two technologies have on each other and how power quality and
              reliability can be maintained and even improved in the uncertain future of
              distributed generation.

This proposal calls for new research into the use of
              multilevel inverters in a distributed generation environment as an enabling
              technology to more quickly bring about the use of renewable or other efficient
              energy sources and as a technology that promotes ancillary services such as
              voltage support, harmonic mitigation, and power factor correction.

In
              addition, an integrated power systems and power electronics curriculum at the
              undergraduate and graduate level will be developed as part of this proposal. 
              Proven effective teaching techniques such as active learning and cooperative
              learning will be used so that students can gain a deeper understanding and
              better mastery of power engineering concepts.  These teaching techniques will
              be used to provide students with a richer learning environment and to help
              integrate research into undergraduate and graduate classes.  University of
              Tennessee undergraduate and graduate students will be encouraged to participate
              in national power engineering competitions and to work with researchers at
              nearby Oak Ridge National Laboratory to gain a higher-level understanding of
              the issues in the field of power engineering.




