Title       : CAREER: Examining the mutual construction of learning and teaching in university
               mathematics classrooms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0093292

Award Number: 0093292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan Ferrini-Mundy jferrini@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen D. King  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To investigate the teaching undergraduate mathematics that strives to allow
              students to develop personally meaningful understandings of the mathematics in
              typical undergraduate curricula through a case study of one teacher; and 

To
              develop a professional development program for graduate teaching assistants
              from a theoretically based perspective.  In addition, this teaching assistant
              certification program will be a site for research in teacher development
              through a teacher development experiment. 

In particular, the work on this
              project is toward developing models of teaching at the undergraduate level that
              both extend and inform what is known about teaching at the K-12 level. These
              models then form a basis for implementing professional development programs
              that can affect reform at the undergraduate level, leading to a cohesive K-16
              mathematics education program.

The first phase of the project, underway in
              the 2001-2002 academic year is an intensive case study of one mathematics
              faculty member, teaching calculus, noted for innovative instruction that leads
              to meaningful mathematical participation among his students.  The case study
              involves daily interviews with the instructor on his plans and the results of
              his interactions with the students in class, which are also videotaped and
              observed.  The focus of the analysis on this teacher looks at: ways in which
              this teacher uses his content knowledge in practice; ways in which he
              incorporates technology into teaching calculus, and the ways in which he deals
              with the dilemmas of teaching in the university setting.  In addition, analysis
              of student work provides insight on the possible impact that instruction has on
              student learning.

The second phase of the project is the developmental
              research on graduate teaching assistant professional development.  Using a
              Teacher Development Experiment [TDE] (Simon, 1999) model and emergent and
              situative theoretical perspectives, the research and development focuses on
              developing and testing instructional tasks used with graduate teaching
              assistants in a university-sponsored Teaching Assistant Certification
              Program.

The results of this research lead to both a better understanding by
              the field of the processes involved in teaching at the university level, in
              understanding the professional growth as teaching assistants of future faculty,
              and in materials to use to foster growth of future faculty.

