Title       : CAREER: Development of Strain-Engineered AlGalnN Heterostructures for Electronic
               Device Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0093742

Award Number: 0093742
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Redwing jmr31@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

 


The focus of this CAREER project is to study and exploit
              polarization-induced electric fields in AlGaInN-based heterostructures for the
              development of strain-engineered electronic devices. These devices offer the
              potential to further expand the performance range of GaN-based electronics to
              higher frequency and power. Metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) will be
              used for epitaxial growth of group III-nitrides in this program. An in-situ
              optical technique will be developed to probe the evolution and magnitude of
              thin film stress and strain during heterostructure growth. Alternative nitrogen
              sources for MOVPE growth will be investigated as a potential route to improving
              the quality of indium-containing alloys. The techniques and tools will be used
              to fabricate strain-engineered AlGaN/InGaN/AlGaInN high electron mobility
              transistor structures. Post-growth characterization (x-ray diffraction,
              transmission electron microscopy, photoluminescence, Hall measurements) will be
              combined with real time stress measurements to study stress relaxation and its
              impact on the microstructural and electrical properties of the
              heterostructures. Device fabrication and testing will be carried out in
              collaboration with government and industrial device development groups to
              provide a pathway for rapid evaluation and transfer of this technology into
              device and systems applications. 

The educational goals of the project are
              closely integrated to the research. A virtual MOVPE laboratory will be
              developed and used in course assignments to provide a novel learning tool that
              connects material properties with processing conditions in an intimate and
              interactive fashion.  Additional educational activities include undergraduate
              and graduate curriculum development, undergraduate research opportunities, and
              outreach to young women.  

