Title       : CAREER: Self-organizing Algorithm and Protocol Design for Infrastructureless
               Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0093484

Award Number: 0093484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Songwu Lu slu@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Emerging infrastratureless wireless networking technologies such as MANET
              [1], sensor networks [31],
and bluetooth [2] will seek to support advanced
              applications such as smart environment, "zero conf"
teleconferencing setups,
              collaborative learning, wireless access to Web services, and emergency
              rescure
operations. This class of applications is mission critical, and the
              network has to address a number of critical
issues in order to cope with the
              anticipated design requirements of such applications. In an
infrastructureless
              wireless network, no underlying infrastructure, such as cellular layout and
              central control units e.g. base stations, is available for networking support.
              A large number of networking devices are allowed to communicate with one
              another over the shared wireless medium in an ad hoc manner. Some
unique
              design challenges posed by such networks include fully distributed and
              localized design, sustained
quality of service (QoS), efficient network
              resource utilization, unconstrained scalability and robust system
performance.
              State-of-the-art solutions are inadequate to address these issues and meet the
              applications'
requirements. A fundamental problem is that an
              infrastructureless wireless network is a large-scale
distributed system that
              may consist of a very large number of wireless networking components
              (e.g.
thousands, even millions in a sensor network), which have limited power
              and computing resources and are
prone to channel errors and failures.
              Therefore, any feasible system solution must be fully distributed
              and
localized, scalable, and robust. In some sense, the microscopic behavior
              of each individual node may not be
very critical, but network nodes must
              collectively achieve the desired global macroscopic property.
     In this
              project, we propose a novel self-organizing protocol and algorithm design
              approach for such
networks, in order to meet the challenges posed by
              applications as well as the network itself. In a self-organizing design
              approach, local decision makers self-organize themselves and coordinate among
              one
another, in order to collectively achieve the desired global property. We
              apply our proposed design
methodology in two largely unaddressed problem
              domains: fair packet scheduling in multihop wireless
networks, and robust
              report forwarding in sensor networks. Toward this end, we present four
              self-organizing packet-scheduling algorithms and a novel report forwarding
              protocol that we have developed
recently [22, 24, 35, 36, 46, 47]. The key
              innovations of this work are:
      A model-referenced self-organizing
              algorithm and protocol design approach.
      A suite of self-organizing
              packet scheduling algorithms for infrastructureless wireless networks
              that
provide QoS performance bounds in terms of fairness, throughput and
              delay, maximize channel spatial
reuse, and arbitrate the conflict between
              achieving fairness and maximizing channel utilization.
      A novel
              self-organizing data forwarding protocol that allows for unconstrained
              scalability, supports
robust message delivery along the optimal forwarding
              band, and ensures efficient power consumption
in the context of sensor
              networks.
     The expected research results from this project include a
              formal investigation of self-organizing design
approach, and a detailed
              design, analysis, and evaluation of the self-organizing algorithms and
              protocols for
packet scheduling and report forwarding. The resulting software
              will be freely available to the research
community. The education plan in this
              proposal includes offering a new graduate course, reinventing an
undergraduate
              networking course, recruiting more students into undergraduate research
              programs, and
setting up an undergraduate networking laboratory.
