Title       : CAREER: Empirical Studies of Dynamics in Industrial Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0093967

Award Number: 0093967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319786             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aviv Nevo nevo@econ.Berkeley.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
     This proposal outlines an empirical research and teaching agenda for
              analyzing the economics of
several dynamic phenomena, relevant to the study
              of Industrial Organization.  The three research
projects and educational
              activities studies are intended to improve our understanding of the
              specific
industries involved and, more broadly, to help assess the relevance
              of a number of economic theories.
The first two projects construct and
              estimate a dynamic model of consumer choice in order to study the
effects of
              temporary prices reductions ("sales") and coupons, respectively. The third
              model studies
brand introduction using a multi-agent model of industry
              dynamics.  The educational component of this
project proposes several
              activities that connect to the research projects.
     The first project
              focuses on temporal price reductions, so called "sales", which are a
              common
practice in many industries.  There are several potential explanations
              of sales, but here the focus is on
intertemporal price discrimination.  More
              specifically, the PI models the consumer's dynamic problem
when she has an
              expected stream of future demands, is able to store a consumption good, at a
              cost,
and faces price movements.   In this model, the consumer will purchase
              the product either because she
wants to consume in the current period or
              because she believes the difference between the current price
and the
              expected future price is lower than the cost of storing the inventory.  To the
              extent that the latter
effect is important, it has implications for the use
              of demand elasticities, computed from a static demand
model, in merger
              analysis, valuation of new goods, as well as other policy relevant issues.  The
              PI  uses
data on the purchases of 1,000 households of 24 products over 104
              weeks, in order to examine
correlations implied by the model and to estimate
              the model directly.
     The focus of the second project is coupons, which
              economists generally consider as a textbook
example of a price discrimination
              tool.  In a recent paper Nevo and Wolfram (1999) suggest that in
order to
              fully understand the economics of coupons, a model richer than the standard
              static monopoly
theory is needed.  They also find some evidence that the
              patterns of couponing are consistent with: (1)
models of price discrimination
              in oligopoly settings, which suggest that coupons are mainly used to
induce
              switching from competing brands, and (2) the use of coupons to promote
              repurchase.  In order
to examine these issues further, the PI constructs a
              dynamic model of consumer choice allowing for
brand loyalty.  The model is
              estimated using a combination of the coupon data used in Nevo and
Wolfram
              (1999) and the household purchase data described in the first project.
    
              The third project focuses on firm dynamics.  In previous work the PI studied
              price competition
and mergers in the ready-to-eat cereal industry (Nevo,
              2000a, b) using  static models of competition,
taking as given the brands
              offered by the firms.  However, brand introduction is an important
              dimension
in this industry, as well as in other industries.  In this project
              the PI analyzes a multi-agent dynamic
model, in which firms can introduce new
              brands, discontinue old brands and impact the perceived
quality of their
              existing brands by investing. The investment, which can be thought of as
              advertising,
yields a random outcome.  The PI examines the Markov Perfect
              equilibrium of the model.  The
predictions of the model, under different
              assumptions, can be compared to actual brand introduction in
order to better
              understand the brand introduction process.  Furthermore, the model can be used
              to
simulate the industry structure under different scenarios.  The latter is
              particularly important to anti-trust
policy in an era when innovation, rather
              than price fixing, seems to be the focus.
     In terms of education, the PI 
              develops a graduate curriculum and student workshop, both of
which will train
              students in the above methods, and more broadly assist them in writing a thesis
              in
industrial organization. Finally, the proposal demonstrates how the
              proposed research can also feed into
teaching and advising at the
              undergraduate level.
