Title       : CAREER: Resource Management in Mobile ad hoc Networks - the Spatial Dimension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0093411

Award Number: 0093411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravi Prakash ravip@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposed research is to develop a comprehensive 
understanding
              of the spatial aspect of distributed computing in 
mobile systems.
              Traditionally, events in a distributed computation 
are ordered by time.
              Scalar and vector clocks are used to represent 
logical time and causal
              dependencies. However, the mobility of nodes 
injects a new spatial dimension
              into the problem. 

The physical and network distances between nodes in a
              mobile
network are not correlated. Moreover, some wireless links in a mobile
              
network may be unidirectional. Hence, unlike physical distance, the 
network
              distance between nodes is not a symmetric relation. Finally, 
if requests of
              two mobile nodes are being prioritized on the basis of 
their respective
              distances from a third (resource) node, their relative 
priority can change
              with time. This is in contrast to the immutable 
relative ordering of events
              based on time. Hence, if distance is one of 
the criteria for ordering
              requests, existing solutions for problems 
like mutual exclusion (using
              logical clocks) cannot be efficiently used 
for resource allocation in mobile
              computing. 

We will develop a new formal representation of the
              spatial-temporal
relationship between events in mobile computing. Space-time
              vectors are 
a step in this direction. A theory for a possibly immutable
              ordering 
of events based on their spatial-temporal coordinates will be
              developed. 
Such an ordering of requests could be used for resource deadlock
              free, 
starvation free and fair resource management. New protocols will be
              
developed at the MAC sub-layer enabling nodes to communicate using
              
unidirectional wireless links. We will develop new routing protocols that
              
utilize this MAC sub-layer protocol, and can correctly route packets
in a
              wireless mobile network with a combination of unidirectional and
bidirectional
              links.

Subsequently, the performance of these solutions will be
              evaluated
through simulation experiments and prototyping. Graduate and
              undergraduate 
students will actively participate in every stage of the
              project. 

