Title       : Analysis of Regulatory Mechanism Controlling Tryptophan Metabolism in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0093023

Award Number: 0093023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $797057             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Yanofsky yanofsky@cmgm.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1112,1154,1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0093023  Charles Yanofsky
This research will focus on three principle
              objectives.  The first objective is to characterize the YczA regulatory protein
              of Bacillus subtilis and determine how it inactivates the TRAP regulatory
              protein.  The TRAP protein regulates transcription of six of the tryptophan
              biosynthetic genes, it regulates the seventh trp gene translationally.  The
              YczA protein is produced by the yczA-ycbK operon, an operon of previously
              unknown function.  This operon is regulated by transcription attenuation; it is
              transcriptionally activated in response to the accumulation of uncharged
              tRNATrp. The second objective is to continue studies on the detailed features
              of the mechanism of transcription attenuation used by E. coli and other
              bacterial species to regulate expression of the degradative tryptophanase(tna)
              operon. Tryptophan addition to E. coli cultures induces expression of the tna
              operon. Induction leads to inhibition of cleavage of a leader peptidyl-tRNA and
              this inhibition stalls the translating ribosome. The stalled ribosome prevents
              Rho mediated transcription termination in the leader region of the tna operon.
              The PI's laboratory has successfully reproduced the regulatory features for
              this operon in vitro and now plan to examine in detail exactly how
              peptidyl-tRNA cleavage is blocked. The third objective is to use DNA microarray
              analyses with the entire genome of Bacillus subtilis to determine which genes
              are selectively transcriptionally activated and transcriptionally inhibited in
              response to changes in tryptophan metabolism, as the PI recently did with the
              genome of E. coli.  These findings should allow the comparison of expression of
              the genes of tryptophan metabolism in two microorganisms that are preferred
              subjects for experimental analysis. 
