Title       : CAREER: Murine Gammaherpesvirus 68 Persistence and Interaction With Host
               Chemokine Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a0093347

Award Number: 0093347
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $683350             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel M. Duboise duboise@maine.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1136,1187,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              CAREER Award: Murine gammaherpesvirus 68 persistence and interaction with
              host
chemokine networks.
The evolutionary interactions of viruses and their
              hosts reflect diverse adaptive strategies.
Herpesviruses exemplify a
              co-evolutionary strategy in which host innate and adaptive immune defenses and
              cellular signalling are balanced by virus induced modulations that typically
              result in an altered homeostasis facilitating permanent association of the
              virus and the multicellular host.  While this balance is maintained, there is
              usually little cost in fitness for the host. The large DNA genomes of
              herpesviruses encode numerous accessory genes unnecessary for viral replication
              but critically involved in virus persistence through modulation of host
              responses.  Gammaherpesviruses, which are capable of persistence in lymphoid
              cells, contain a particularly impressive variety of genes apparently acquired
              through molecular piracy of host genes relevant to immune recognition and
              response, cell cycle control, complement-mediated killing, and apoptotic
              responses. Prominent within the genetic repertoire of gamma-2-herpesviruses (or
              rhadinoviruses) are genes encoding products that interact with host chemokine
              networks which are critical in regulation of cell traffic under both
              homeostatic and inflammatory conditions.  Conserved within several rhadinovirus
              genomes is a G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) gene encoding a putative
              CXC-chemokine receptor homolog most closely related to CXCR2. Studies of
              gammaherpesvirus latency and persistence together with functional analysis of
              the viral CXC chemokine receptor encoded by ORF74 of murine gammaherpesvirus 68
              (MHV-68) will be pursued in these studies with extensive student participation.
               Interaction of MHV-68 with murine hosts is highly accessible to investigation
              using
powerful genetic tools making this system ideally suited for advancing
              understanding of
gammaherpesvirus biology including mechanisms of
              gammaherpesvirus latency and persistence.
The MHV-68 genome has been fully
              sequenced and can be manipulated using conventional in vitro recombination
              methods. Availability of genetically defined mouse strains (including
              transgenic strains and those with specific gene knockouts) affords unparalleled
              opportunities to query the nature of the virus-host association using
              manipulations of both virus and host genetics.  These investigations of MHV-68
              persistence and interaction with host chemokine networks will exploit the
              advantages of this virus-host system.  The intriguing nature of known
              gammaherpesvirus-host interactions, the elegance of
appropriate experimental
              methods including those that are standard to molecular biology, and the
              abundance of unanswered questions together provide a research framework that is
              well suited for integration into educational activities involving graduate
              students, undergraduates, and pre-college students and their teachers. Studies
              of cloned MHV-68 genes using common molecular biological methods will continue
              to provide an inquiry-based context for introductory and advanced molecular
              biology laboratory courses. Drawing upon the extensive experience of the
              principal investigator in construction of recombinant rhadinoviruses for study
              of gene function within the viral context, graduate student projects will
              include construction of MHV-68 recombinants useful for understanding virus-host
              interactions. Both graduate and undergraduate students will perform studies of
              MHV-68 gene function in vitro using cloned viral gene expression constructs.
              Ongoing interactions with regional high school students and their
              teachers
will provide opportunities for selected students to participate in
              small, well defined laboratory research projects utilizing basic molecular
              biological methods.

