Title       : CAREER: Genomic Analyses of Streptomyces Bacteria Producing Engineered Natural
               Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0093900

Award Number: 0093900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James M. Lee                            
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Camilla M. Kao cammy@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The PI's research objectives are to define new strategies for improving the
              production properties of Streptomyces coelicolor in a rational and efficient
              manner. The PI's work will be one of the first attempts in an academic setting
              to conduct genomic analyses of natural product production in Streptomyces. Her
              laboratory is uniquely positioned to carry out such studies, since she has
              direct experience in both genomics and Streptomyces natural products research.
              The PI plans to establish DNA microarray technology in-house, which will be a
              fundamental component of her research program. The PI's initial experiments
              with the S. coelicolor production system will provide a comprehensive set of
              genomic data from which new hypotheses about natural product generation can be
              formulated. These exploratory studies should then suggest how genes and
              cellular pathways might be engineered to improve the properties of the
              production strains, and will be followed by experiments that test and further
              build on these hypotheses.
The PI's research will contribute to various
              educational efforts in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Stanford
              University. The graduate students conducting these studies will gain expertise
              in genomic methods, and will be able to seed DNA microarray technology in other
              research settings in their post-graduate careers. In addition, the PI plans to
              incorporate DNA microarray technology into the undergraduate chemical
              engineering laboratory course, so that their undergraduate students also gain
              exposure to these new genomic methods. Finally, she will establish the
              technology as a resource for interdisciplinary research between biological and
              non-biological research groups in the department. Thus the presence of DNA
              microarray technology should foster a wide range of interdisciplinary
              activities, spanning both research and education objectives, in the Department
              of Chemical Engineering at Stanford.


