Title       : CAREER: Growth and form in biological systems: a micromechanical approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a0093658

Award Number: 0093658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Powers thomas_powers@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9183,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              

0093658
Powers
The proposed research and educational program under a
              CAREER award consists of using the
techniques and ideas of fundamental
              engineering science to study problems of biological growth, shape, and
              movement.

The research will focus on the mechanics of biological filaments,
              ranging in scale from DNA to multicellular fibers.  In particular, the
              investigator will study the formation and growth of supercoiling colonies of
              bacteria, the motility of cells, and the mechanics of DNA transcription.  These
              problems require the development of mechanical theories in new directions, such
              as coupling of growth with elasticity and chirality for understanding the
              writhing instability of bacterial fibers.  The work will be largely theoretical
              at first, but an essential component is the development of a micromanipulation
              laboratory to characterize the material properties of the growing fibers and to
              test the theory.  

The research will be integrated with curriculum
              development at Brown University in the newly established biomedical engineering
              program, and also in efforts to meet the emerging need for training biology
              students in methods of quantitative reasoning.  Some of the proposed
              experiments, such as twirling flexible macroscopic helices in glycerol to model
              bacterial flagella, lie within the grasp of talented undergraduates and thus
              blend naturally into the educational program of bringing the methods of
              engineering to biology.  Three new courses are planned.  The first is an
              undergraduate course which focuses on the mechanics of cells, muscle, and other
              tissue.  The second course, also at the undergraduate level, develops the
              continuum mechanics of fluids and solids within the context of biomedical
              engineering. Finally, the third course is a graduate course which introduces
              students in the physical sciences and engineering to aspects of molecular and
              cell biology with a focus on the mechanics of molecular motors,
              single
biopolymers such as DNA, and cell membranes.
***

