Title       : CAREER: Innovative Soil Remediation Methodologies - CAREER Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0093752

Award Number: 0093752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Akram N. Alshawabkeh aalsha@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This action is taken within the NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
              Program NSF 00-89, to support a research/education career plan in
              geoenvironmental engineering, with emphasis on innovative soil remediation. 
              The research component investigates the use of electroosmosis for transport of
              oxygen (produced by electrolysis) into fine-grained soils in order to stimulate
              in situ bioremediation of trapped organic contaminants.  The educational
              component integrates the technical tasks of the project into the broader
              aspects of teaching in geoenvironmental engineering so as to reach students at
              different levels.

Oxygen delivery is generally the limiting factor for in
              situ bioremediation due to low soil permeabilities and preferential flow paths.
               The use of electric currents is being investigated to overcome oxygen
              injection problems.  Application of a direct current (dc) results in controlled
              oxygen production by water electrolysis at the anode.  Electroosmotic flow then
              delivers oxygenated water into contaminated silt and clay layers to stimulate
              bioremediation of trapped organic contaminants.  This process is complex and
              involves as-yet-undetermined hydrogeological, electrochemical and
              biogeochemical interactions, such as microbial behavior under electric fields. 
              The research focuses on (a) rates of oxygen production and transport in
              fine-grained soils by dc electric fields, (b) impact of electric fields on
              microbial growth and transport in porous media, (c) stimulating in situ
              degradation of organic contaminants in fine-grained soils by electrochemical
              production/transport of oxygen, and (d) enhancing degradation in heterogeneous
              soils.

The goal of the education component is to incorporate the findings of
              this project in a new undergraduate geoenvironmental engineering course being
              developed by the Principal Investigator.  Undergraduate students will
              participate in the research through the Northeastern University Cooperative
              (Co-op) education program.  The PI will also reach out to high school students
              by developing an educational CD-ROM that will (a) demonstrate the link between
              the basic sciences and engineering applications (geotechnical and environmental
              engineering in particular) and (b) attempt to promote civil and environmental
              engineering as exciting fields of study and practice.  The PI will also partner
              with CONNECTIONS, a NSF funded project that is designed to help women
              transition into careers in science, engineering, and math (SEM).  The PI will
              provide opportunities for high school girls, girl scouts and undergraduate
              women, sponsored by CONNECTIONS, to learn about geotechnical and environmental
              engineering, evaluate the educational CD-ROM, and participate in the research
              and educational tasks of this project.  Graduate students will participate in
              the research and gain an excellent experience in cutting-edge,
              practice-oriented geoenvironmental research.  A final goal is to further the
              PI's development as an educator by adopting innovative teaching and assessment
              techniques.  A WEB site will be developed and continuously updated to present
              the research and educational components of this project.

