Title       : CAREER: Control with Limited Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0093950

Award Number: 0093950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicola Elia nelia@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research focuses on understanding the interaction between control
              and information, and applying the findings to the problems of control over
              communication networks, dynamic vision, and autonomous vehicles.

These
              applications have in common the constraint that there
is a cost associated
              with information, which, due to finite  resources, limits the available
              information for control. 

These applications are examples of hybrid
              systems.
Understanding how the limited information affects the performance
              achievable by control systems is a primary goal of this research. If we can
              learn how to systematically quantize the information without loosing stability
              or performance of the closed loop system, we can devise new methods of
              analysis, control, and design of hybrid systems, and directly impact many
              application fields.

These new problems require a multidisciplinary approach
              that relies on the rich experience in control of uncertain systems, adopts the
              new advances in optimization methods, and merges them with information theory
              concepts.

Preliminary research based on this approach has led to new system
              theory results for stability and performance guarantee with quantized state
              information for linear systems. These results are very promising and indicate
              that vast advances can be made by this study.

The mix of motivating
              applications and new theoretical problems offers a unique educational
              opportunity to the students that will be involved in the program.
The
              multidisciplinary nature of the research program will provide material and
              motivation for two courses that will be developed. The first one, intended for
              undergraduates, concentrates on system design, particularly on the integration
              of control, communication, and microprocessors systems.
The second one focuses
              on optimization methods for system design, analysis, and control, and presents
              optimization theory and computational methods as unifying tools across
              Electrical Engineering disciplines.




