Title       : CAREER: Very Low-Field Hyperpolarized Noble Gas Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0093448

Award Number: 0093448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell Albert malbert@bwh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham & Womens Hosp Inc
	      75 Francis Street
	      Boston, MA  021156195    617/525-3160

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0093448
Albert
A very low-field (VLF) MRI system employing the signal from
              hyperpolarized 3He and 129Xe  will be developed in order to investigate the
              human lung, and to explore the potential for a low-cost, portable research and
              diagnostic tool for the detection and staging of pulmonary diseases. The vastly
              enhanced signal from such hyperpolarized species is strong enough to permit
              high speed imaging of the gas-space they occupy, makes them intriguing MR
              probes. The field has developed considerably in the past five years, since the
              PI and collaborators invented  hyperpolarized noble gas MRI by acquiring MR
              images of a mouse lung that had been inflated with hyperpolarized 129Xe.  Of
              special importance is the high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) achievable in
              hyperpolarized noble gas MRI, at very low-field (VLF).  VLF MRI becomes
              feasible since the level of polarization of the nuclei is set by the
              hyperpolarization process, and is independent of the static magnetic field. 
              VLF noble gas MRI may lead to inexpensive, portable imaging systems. The
              development of a VLF MRI system is proposed using a custom-made resistive
              magnet of 100-200 Gauss. Gradient, shim, and RF coils will be developed and
              interfaced to a commercial low frequency MRI console. A spatial resolution on
              the order of 0.1 mm is planned over a field of view of 30 cm DSV, the typical
              size of human lungs.   Preliminary human lung imaging studies will be
              conducted. A long term objective is the development of a low-cost portable unit
              that can be used for lung screening in a variety of clinics, physician's
              offices and nursing homes, and perhaps even for space-based pulmonary function
              research in microgravity environments.

The education component of our
              proposed program contains four primary elements: (i) the development of an
              outreach program to precollege students and a teacher training program; (ii)
              the development of course lectures at the Center for Engineering in Medicine at
              Harvard Medical School on the principles and use of imaging modalities in
              biomedicine and tissue engineering; (iii) the training of graduate and
              undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows as researchers; and (iv) the
              development of a teaching module on how basic principles of physics are applied
              to lasers and magnetic resonance, and can yield serendipitous applications to
              biology. Secondary educational activities include participation in seminar and
              lecture series in the MR Division at BWH, contributions to education and
              training infrastructure, and the establishment of industrial internships and
              partnerships. The development of an outreach program in biomedical engineering
              to precollege students and a teacher training program, supported by the Howard
              Hughes Medical Institute, is designed to make science and science activities
              more accessible to the young people who will become future scientists. Through
              these efforts, teachers and students alike are encouraged to participate in
              hands-on training and to share what they learn with others. In a collaboration
              with Boston University, a new graduate course on special topics in
              bio-photonics is being created, as part of their NSF-CRCD program, which will
              develop lectures on optical pumping for hyperpolarized xenon and helium MRI.
              Included among researchers and students in our program's projects are
              under-represented groups and women pursuing advanced degrees in science and
              engineering.

