Title       : CAREER: EleXIR: A Top-Down Approach to Research and Learning in Efficient
               Hierarchical Electromagnetic Simulation Methods for Complex Structures and
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0093102

Award Number: 0093102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vikram Jandhyala jandhyala@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0093102
Jandhyala

Computational electromagnetics (CEM) is a diverse field
              that sees several new applications each year.  Owing to advances in
              computational algorithms and hardware, it has become feasible to analyze
              progressively more complex electromagnetic (EM) problems.  Indeed, the
              development of future generations of computers will itself be heavily dependent
              on the availability of efficient, integrated CEM tools for chips and
              interconnects.

With the enhanced global emphasis on high-speed systems of
              unparalleled complexity, it is evident that EM effects are becoming
              increasingly dominant.  Wireless networks are expanding at a dramatic rate in
              the United States and in several parts of the world.  High-speed
              systems-on-chip are now the focal points in myriad commercial, defense, and
              research areas.  Several critical current and future domains with unprecedented
              potential including the next-generation internet, battlefield communications
              and intelligence, and large-scale distributed computing do or will rely on
              complex wireless networks and systems-on-chip.  These areas will have a massive
              impact on the increasingly information-based economy and defense of the United
              States, and on the global high-technology economy of the future.

The design
              and development needs of these complex systems and structures have led to a
              critical requirement for accurate, hierarchical EM analyses.  These simulations
              are necessitated in order to develop new designs and paradigms, and to save on
              the exorbitant costs and time requirements of iterated physical prototyping and
              testing.  The sheer complexity of the simulations is such that the possibility
              of achieving even moderately accurate results with reasonable computing
              resources and time did not exist until recently.

While evolutionary advances
              in CEM are omnipresent, the Electromagnetic-Simulation:  Instruction and
              Research (EleXIR) approach in this proposal presents paradigm-shifting,
              physics-based, revolutionary CEM methodologies that exhibit the potential to
              render feasible, over the next few years, the accurate, efficient, and
              integrated EM simulation of large-scale structures and systems.  These
              approaches will lead to the development of advanced tools with the ability to
              perform rigorous and automated three-dimensional full-wave EM simulation with
              the ease and transparency of present-day circuit-level modeling.  The resulting
              advances will have a strong potential to affect several simulation aspects of
              present and future EM applications, including wireless-based network and
              system-on-chip issues, such as:

                Propagation through random
              media and scattering from rough surfaces
	Signal integrity analysis for
              high-speed radio-frequency circuits and systems-on-chip
	Computation of radar
              cross sections of complex targets
	Design and analysis of novel antenna
              arrays
	Analysis of modem electromechanical, optical, and quantum
              devices

These applications, while not being exhaustive, are extensive and
              varied.  To address these, a unified class-oriented approach is proposed that
              relies on physics-based, redundancy-extracting approaches to hierarchical
              integral-equation modeling of EM problems.  A combination of efficient integral
              equation formulations, fast algorithms tuned to the physics of specific classes
              of problems, and hierarchical and reduced-order modeling schemes, is the
              paradigm presented here for the development of revolutionary new CEM tools for
              several system-on-chip and wireless-related EM applications over the next few
              years.  Along with the advances in such techniques comes the necessity and
              challenge of creating a pool of talent with the critical mass necessary for
              sustainable research and development in these high-technology areas, which will
              be addressed through new integrated curricula incorporating new CEM methods in
              a top-down manner in areas of interest i.e. classical EM, high-speed circuits,
              wireless communications, and devices.  These crucial requirements in research,
              instruction, and technology-transfer that are of strategic importance to the
              United States and to global economics form the focus of the EleXIR approach
              proposed here.

The general goals of EleXIR include the development,
              teaching, and technology transfer of seamless topdown approaches to modem CEM
              in high-technology areas where it is necessitated, or will be necessitated in
              the near future, including wireless and high-speed circuit
              applications.
***




