Title       : CAREER: Robust Nonlinear Control: Problems and Challenges from Communication
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0093176

Award Number: 0093176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhong-Ping Jiang zjiang@control.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              It is widely recognized that linear control laws are inadequate to account
              for
severe nonlinearities and uncertainties that many physical systems
              possess.
Two examples of such systems, that will be studied in this
              project,
are underactuated mechanical systems and communication networks.
The
              issue of designing performance-aimed nonlinear controllers
with robustness to
              significant uncertainties has drawn attention of
many researchers in the last
              20 years.
Phase I of this project will continue the study of nonlinear systems
              with
dynamic uncertainties, initiated in our earlier work, and provide
              further
insights into the inherent limitations on achievable
              performance
caused by (input) dynamic uncertainties.
Despite many elegant
              results in the recent literature of nonlinear control,
their direct
              application to decentralized nonlinear systems with complex
interconnecting
              structures seems to be limited from a practical point of view. 
On the basis
              of the new framework of nonlinear ISS (input-to-state stability) 
small-gain
              theorems, we will develop nonlinear feedback design tools for 
important
              classes of decentralized nonlinear systems
with applications to communication
              networks.

Phase II of this project is to address some interesting
              nonlinear
control problems in communication networks. The study of hard
              saturation
nonlinearities and time-varying uncertain propagation delays in
              such systems
will generate new decentralized/nonlinear control problems as
              applications
for the basic research in Phase I.
We expect that our
              contributions from the nonlinear control perspective
will enhance the NSF's
              existing investment in this active application area.


The educational
              element of this CAREER development plan is closely linked to
the research
              work. We will enhance the current control curriculum at Polytechnic
by
              incorporating ``nonlinear'' thinking into the classical feedback control
              
courses where ``linear'' methods are now the focal point, and by developing
              
Web-based educational tools and tutorials.
The specific goals of the
              educational plan include:
(1) developing a new graduate course {\em Nonlinear
              Systems Theory}
to report on recent developments in nonlinear systems and
              control;
(2) setting up a Laboratory for Robust Nonlinear Control for research
              and 
education,
which strengthens the Department's activities in
              control;
(3) promoting hands-on experiments and involving undergraduate
              students in 
research-oriented and application-driven projects; and
(4)
              developing interactions with practicing engineers for technology transfer 
and
              dissemination of new theory through seminars, workshops and continuing
              
education programs.





