Title       : CAREER: Genetic Diagnostics at Surfaces - Designing a Biological Polyelectrolyte
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0093758

Award Number: 0093758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rastislav Levicky RL268@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is a fundamental investigation of biological
              polyelectrolyte brushes and their interaction with polyelectrolytes in
              solution.  In addition, the research aims to build an important bridge between
              biotechnology and the field of polymer science, which is increasingly
              contributing vital insights to biological systems.  A huge past research effort
              has investigated synthetic polymer brushes, consisting of arrays of polymers
              tethered by one end to a surface.  When these polymers are charged
              (polyelectrolyte brushes) many basic questions remain unanswered: theory has
              predicted a complex diagram of states but relatively little experiment exists. 
              The research proposed here advances fundamental understanding of
              polyelectrolyte brushes by focusing on brushes of the single most important
              charged biological polymer, DNA.  Experimental investigations of DNA brushes
              placed in contact with free DNA solutions will be carried out, with emphasis on
              measuring equilibrium and kinetic aspects of the penetration of the free DNA
              into the brush and its attachment ("hybridization") to complementary regions of
              the tethered DNA.  Theory will be simultaneously developed to approach a
              comprehensive, molecular-based understanding of the mechanisms involved.  If
              successful, this work will: (i) advance basic understanding of polyelectrolyte
              brushes, (ii) reveal to what extent theoretical frameworks developed for
              synthetic polyelectrolyte brushes may be carried over to this biopolymer
              system, (iii) establish how equilibrium and kinetics of the hybridization
              process reflect internal organization of the brush, and (iv) result in a
              systematic understanding of the mechanisms involved in the functioning of
              modern medical and biological technologies such as DNA microarrays.  The
              primary experimental tool will be confocal fluorescence microscopy, with
              modulated ellipsometry, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and X-ray
              reflectivity serving as key secondary characterization tools.
%%%
DNA brushes
              are at the heart of a biotechnology of enormous importance: the processing of
              genetic information for disease studies and medical diagnosis by use of DNA
              chips and microarrays.  Since these methods work on the principle of
              hybridization between surface-tethered and free nucleic acids, the planned
              research provides the fundamental guidance needed to reduce the current
              empiricism in their use and optimization.  The research program also closely
              integrates with multiple educational initiatives, including: (1) stimulating
              intellectual growth by providing research opportunities for students from high
              school through graduate levels, (2) forging links with the broader educational
              community through development of a series of experimental units for high school
              science courses that demonstrate scientific and engineering principles using
              common "supermarket" materials, and (3) developing new pedagogical structure
              for the core undergraduate laboratory that will teach students to learn through
              research-type, objective-driven projects.  Successful accomplishment of the
              research and educational goals of the proposed plan is supported through
              strategic partnerships, which include George Washington High School, an urban
              school in the Manhattan School District, and industrial and institutional
              research collaborations.

