Title       : CAREER: Optical Spectroscopy and Imaging of Tissues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0093840

Award Number: 0093840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergio Fantini sergio.fantini@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0093840
Fantini
This project combines (1) a research plan aimed at the
              development of novel improved techniques for optical spectroscopy and imaging
              of biological tissues, and (2) a multidisciplinary educational plan that
              includes hands-on experience and active learning approaches.  The objective of
              this project is to synergistically develop the research and educational
              components in a mutually beneficial way. 

The research component of this
              project consists of the development of new improved methods and instrumentation
              for biomedical applications of near-infrared spectroscopy and imaging.  The
              research field devoted to the optical study of tissues has recently lead to a
              number of clinical pilot studies in areas such as optical mammography, optical
              imaging of the brain, tissue oximetry, and diagnosis of vascular diseases. 
              This project aims at further advancing the field by developing novel
              experimental and instrumental approaches aimed at (1) improving the spatial
              resolution of diffuse optical imaging, and (2) performing accurate and
              quantitative tissue spectroscopy over a wide spectral region covering the
              visible and near-infrared.  Our long-term goal is to exploit these new
              developments towards novel and more powerful applications of optical
              spectroscopy and imaging for the biomedical field.  One initial application,
              namely the spectral characterization of tumors in an animal model in vivo, is
              planned during the course of this five-year project.
     
The proposed
              research plan is complemented by the educational component of this project,
              which consists of: (1) the development of a new course on the principles of
              medical imaging; (2) the design and implementation of new teaching laboratory
              experiments for two courses on medical optics; (3) the development of
              short-term research projects suitable for undergraduate summer internships; and
              (4) the implementation of active and collaborative learning approaches.  With
              regards to the multi-disciplinary nature of this project, our vision is that
              engineers who have a good scientific knowledge of the targeted application will
              be most effective at devising innovative instruments to advance the field. 
              Conversely, clinicians who understand the technical capabilities and
              limitations of the instrumentation they use, will be in a better position to
              excel.


