Title       : CAREER: The Mechanisms of Cognitive Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0093757

Award Number: 0093757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381427             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Quartz steve@hss.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Steven Quartz 
BCS:0093757
The Mechanisms of Cognitive Development

This
              integrated research and education CAREER development program centers on a basic
              question: How do human cognitive skills emerge from the developing brain? In
              recent years, developmental cognitive neuroscience has begun to construct
              integrative frameworks that bring together neurobiology and psychology to begin
              to address this basic question. The addition of computational modeling has
              facilitated this integrative framework by offering promising tools to
              characterize the dynamics of development. This career development program will
              build on these advances in developmental cognitive neuroscience. Over
              five-years, it will integrate psychology, neurobiology, computational modeling,
              and robotics to create a neurocomputational framework for investigating human
              cognitive development. Specifically, this project has two major research
              components:

Constructive learning: An Investigation of the interplay between
              learning and neural development: Human cognitive development rests on a complex
              interaction between biological mechanisms and processes of learning. This
              research component will construct a computational framework to investigate how
              learning guides the construction of the brain circuits underlying human
              cognitive function. With this framework, it will be possible to address such
              critical questions as: What are the neural substrates of cognitive development,
              what processes regulate their development, and how does change at the neural
              level correspond to change at the cognitive and behavioral level? To
              investigate these issues, this framework will be applied to a variety of
              cognitive developmental phenomena, including Piagetian developmental tasks, the
              development of executive function, and outstanding issues in developmental
              plasticity.
 
Active development: A computational investigation of midbrain
              dopamine systems in the development of executive function: Converging evidence
              suggests that midbrain dopamine systems constitute a behavioral system that
              fuels the child's active exploration, a critical but poorly understood
              component of development. This research will apply a computational model of
              midbrain dopamine projections to the development of human executive function,
              which underlies flexible behavior. Specifically, this project will construct a
              computational framework to investigate the crucial but poorly understood
              developmental links between dopaminergic systems and prefrontal cortex in the
              emergence of working memory, behavioral inhibition, and executive
              function.

This research will develop alongside both an undergraduate and
              graduate educational program that will include the creation of a new graduate
              program in Cognition in the Computational and Neural Systems Program at the
              California Institute of Technology. Caltech has recently made a strong
              commitment to fostering interdisciplinary research and education in the
              cognitive and behavioral sciences, making it an ideal environment in which to
              pursue this career development plan.

