Title       : CAREER: Semiconducting Delafossite Structures for Transparent Conducting Coating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0093616

Award Number: 0093616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440353             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Cann batio3@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project systematically explores the electrical and optical
              properties of cation-substituted delafossite structures. The electrical and
              optical properties of AgInO2 can be attributed to certain unique features of
              the delafossite structure; it consists of a two-dimensional array of monovalent
              A-atoms (Cu, Ag, Pd, or Pt) sandwiched between layers of B 3+ O6 octahedra. It
              is the linearly coordinated O-A-O structure in these materials that is the key
              to their conduction mechanism. The experimental objective of this project is to
              determine crystal chemical relationships that influence orbital overlap between
              metallic A-atoms and the crystal field splitting of 3d or 4d states. With
              cationic substitutions on the A- and B-sites, it may be possible to manipulate
              the A-A and O-A-O distances in the delafossite structure. It is expected that
              these modifications to the structure will be manifested in variations in the
              conductivity, mobility, band gap, and optical transmission in the visible
              spectrum. 
The research themes will be related to the K-12 classroom with the
              help of a collaborating K-12 science teacher. The collaborator will work with
              the research group during the summer, thereby, receiving practical experience
              in materials science. He or she will use this knowledge in the classroom in the
              following school semester. In addition, a summer science program will be
              initiated at a local residential facility for children with emotional and
              behavioral disorders. A combination of hands-on experiments with materials,
              one-on-one instruction, and an internet-based scanning electron microscope
              (SEM) will be used to capture the children's attention and stimulate their
              interest in science.
%%% The project addresses fundamental research issues in
              a topical area of materials science having high technological relevance. The
              scope of the project will expose students to challenges in materials synthesis,
              processing, and characterization. An important feature of the project is the
              strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and education.
              
***  

