Title       : PECASE: Elucidation of Reaction Mechanisms and Evaluation of Photoactivated
               Periodate as an Advanced Oxidation Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  2002   
File        : a0093783

Award Number: 0093783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Weavers weavers.l@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Toxic contaminants continue to persist in the environment, threatening the
              health of humans and ecosystems. For example, the United States has a stock
              pile of 30,600 tons of chemical warfare agents (NRC, 1996). These chemical
              agents are extremely hazardous and the Army is under law to dispose of the
              stockpile by 2007. However, the baseline technology, incineration, faces
              considerable organized opposition due to air pollution concerns forcing the
              Army to look at alternative technologies.  Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs)
              show considerable promise as a potential solution to these problems because,
              similar to incineration, pollutants are destroyed eliminating future risk, yet
              no air pollution is formed. However, development of AOPs that are less costly
              and more effective for the degradation of pollutants at relatively high aqueous
              concentrations is needed.  

In this project, photoactivated periodate will
              be explored generally as a potential AOP and particularly for the destruction
              of chemical warfare agents. This study will investigate the kinetics and
              mechanism of destruction of a range of pollutants with differing expected
              reactivities with radicals formed by photoactivated periodate. Detailed studies
              of the organic decomposition products and inorganic iodine stable and transient
              intermediates formed will be used to gain insight into the pathways of
              degradation. 

For the education component of this proposal, the PI plans to
              stimulate learning by emphasizing the bridges between research and teaching and
              incorporating real world case studies into courses.  Mentoring school aged and
              pre-freshman female students is another important component to be cultivated by
              involvement in summer workshops at OSU. The Women In Engineering Summer
              Workshop brings 50 pre-freshmen women to campus in the summer to orient them to
              engineering principles and the different disciplines of engineering. Hosted for
              a day of environmental engineering, they are guided in an experiment to
              determine nitrate and phosphate removal by wetlands. With funds from this
              proposal, the PI will develop a similar week-long workshop for eighth-grade
              girls. Undergraduate students and faculty will be recruited to participate in
              guiding girls while they explore various facets of engineering. Both mentoring
              activities are expected to increase enrollment and retention of women in
              engineering.

