Title       : Intrinsic Defects in Wide Bandgap Semiconductors: Study by Magnetic Resonance
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0093784

Award Number: 0093784
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299997             (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Watkins gdw0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0093784
Watkins

The program is an experimental study of the intrinsic
              defects (lattice vacancies and host interstitial atoms) in wide bandgap
              semiconductors using magnetic resonance techniques. The primary emphasis is on
              GaN, but other wide bandgap semiconductors of current interest (AlN, ZnO, SiC,
              diamond, etc.) may also be studied. The broad purpose of the program is to
              identify the intrinsic defects, and to probe their electronic and lattice
              structures, their diffusional properties, and the nature of their interactions
              with other defects in the material. The experimental techniques include
              electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and electron-nuclear double resonance
              (ENDOR), detected primarily by optical methods (ODEPR and ODENDOR), but also by
              conventional EPR methods, where appropriate. The experimental approach is to
              produce the intrinsic defects by 2.5 MeV electron irradiation for study by the
              magnetic resonance techniques. These studies include irradiation in situ at 4.2
              K in a special facility at Lehigh, unique in the world, which allows ODEPR
              study of the pristine vacancies and interstitials which are produced, prior to
              warm-up. Subsequent annealing allows the determination of the kinetics of the
              migration of each and the nature of its resulting interaction with impurities
              and other defects as it becomes trapped by them. Room temperature irradiation
              is also utilized to study the intrinsic defects that are stable at this
              temperature, as well as the various defects produced by trapping of the
              intrinsic defects which are mobile at lower temperatures. 

Lattice vacancies
              (missing atoms) and interstitials (extra atoms) are always present in an
              otherwise perfect crystalline semiconductor. Labeled "intrinsic defects", they
              therefore play a vital role in all of the myriad processing steps involved in
              modern semiconductor device manufacture, as well as in determining the
              technologically important properties of the final device. Essentially nothing
              is presently known concerning the properties of these important defects in the
              currently widely studied "wide bandgap" semiconducting materials, such as
              gallium nitride, which promise advances for optical applications into the
              visible and ultraviolet spectral regions, as well as for microelectronic
              applications at elevated temperatures. The broad purpose of the present program
              is to determine these properties for the first time. The experimental approach
              is to produce the defects by high-energy electron irradiation, where a lattice
              atom is directly knocked out of its lattice site when the electron has a near
              collision with its nucleus. The irradiation is done at a low enough temperature
              to freeze the resulting interstitial and vacancy into the lattice for direct
              spectroscopic study. The spectroscopic methods employed involve the various
              magnetic resonance ones, which are uniquely capable of unambiguously
              identifying the defects, and probing the properties of interest -- their
              electronic and lattice structures, their migrational properties in the lattice,
              and the nature of their interactions with other defects present in the
              material.
