Title       : CAREER: Quickstep: An Architecture-Conscious Main Memory DBMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0093059

Award Number: 0093059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349172             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jignesh M. Patel jignesh@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With the trend toward denser and cheaper memory, database servers in the near
              future will have large main memory configurations and a significant number of
              datasets will reside in main memory. In this configuration, the performance of
              the database system is limited by how fast the memory subsystem can feed
              instructions and data to the processor. Traditional data storage and query
              processing techniques are optimized to minimize access to disks and do not
              effectively utilize the processor caches, resulting in poor query performance.
              The goal of this research project is to investigate, and experimentally
              evaluate, data storage and query processing techniques that can effectively
              utilize the processor caches. The approach consists of novel data storage
              techniques that can incrementally and transparently adapt the layout of data to
              better utilize the processor caches, cache-conscious indexing techniques for
              both traditional alphanumeric data and richer data types such as spatial data,
              and cache-conscious query evaluation and scheduling techniques. A prototype
              database system, called Quickstep, is being developed to experimentally
              evaluate the proposed techniques. The results of this project will produce
              techniques for efficient query evaluation in environments where the data is
              mostly resident in main-memory, with possible application in high-performance
              database servers powering Internet sites and future network routers that will
              require query processing for providing application-specific routing services.
              The education component of this project aims to introduce material in the
              graduate-level database course to expose students to the emerging confluence of
              databases and architectural technologies. The systems-building effort of this
              project provides an environment for training both undergraduate and graduate
              students in database implementation and performance evaluation techniques. 
