Title       : CAREER: Affinity and Scheduling for the Computational Grid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0093300

Award Number: 0093300
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2009    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $423192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer M. Schopf jms@cs.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The design and implementation of a national computing systems grid has become
              a
reachable goal for both computer and computational scientists. In order to
              better use this
suite of resources, consisting of geographically disperse
              machines, instruments, and data
storage, better scheduling and resource
              management techniques are needed.

This project  concentrates on the issue of
              matching the requirements of an application
to the capabilities of a resource
              or set of resources on the grid. This is often referred 
to as determining the
              affinity of an application for a resource. The research will formalize
the
              folklore currently used in order to increase the accessibility of the grid to
              those
application scientists that have less experience than current users.
              Work will
continue in the development of  a language specification to describe
              both applications
and resources as needed today, but with the extensibility
              needed for future applications as
well. This will then be used as an indexing
              structure into a case-based reasoning expert
system.

This project also has
              an extended educational portion to it. As a part of the effort to
expand
              Northwestern's Computer Science education in the systems area and a
              cross-school
initiative, we plan to offer a course in experimental systems
              using ideas in parallel
distributed scheduling as the basis for a larger view
              into practical systems,
experimentation, and teamwork. This project-oriented
              class will be focused around
teaching students about current parallel
              distributed scheduling efforts and applications.

In addition, a new seminar
              series will be started  featuring women researchers in
computer science to
              help encourage female students to continue with careers in computer
science.
