Title       : CAREER: Roles of Rheology, Chemical & Mechanical Filtration, and Applied
               Gradient on Injectability of Cement Grouts, Morphology of Grouted Soil, and
               Improvement in Soil Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0093962

Award Number: 0093962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lois Schwarz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Soil improvement is a central issue to many of today's projects where land is
              scarce, good quality materials are in short supply, and developed sites are
              often congested or contaminated.  Among the many in situ techniques available
              to improve soils, permeation grouting is historically the most commonly used in
              geotechnical engineering.  Traditionally, applications of permeation grouting
              involve (a) reducing or controlling seepage through geologic formations and
              structures and (b) strengthening soil.  More recently, the injection of
              cementitious grouts into soil is used to construct in situ barriers to contain
              contaminated leachate and to encapsulate hazardous waste.

	Research will
              focus on cement grouts (both Portland cement-based and slag cement-based
              varieties of primarily microfine cement and to a lesser extent ordinary cement)
              because they are perhaps the most widely used due to their economic
              feasibility, permanence, and inert characteristics.  The problem is that often
              cement grout cannot be successfully injected, although the grout exhibits
              appropriate rheological properties and sufficiently small particles by
              traditional filter criteria.  Consequently, the issue is why the grout was
              unable to be injected as predicted.  One of the primary thrusts of the research
              is to distinguish the effects of mechanical filtration, chemical filtration,
              rheology, and applied gradient on the injectability of cement grout.  These
              factors are interrelated (some very strongly) and governed by a number of
              variables.  An extensive series of parametric and phenomenological studies at
              both the microscopic and macroscopic level are undertaken to accomplish this
              objective.  Essential concepts from the fields of cement chemistry and
              transport processes will be synthesized to better understand and interrelate
              the early age microstructure of a cement grout to its injectability and
              deposition in the voids of a soil.

	Emphasis is placed on the role of
              applied gradients on the flocculation behavior of the grout and the resulting
              morphology of the grout/soil matrix.  Cement grouts that exhibit significantly
              different chemical and rheological behavior will be injected into
              one-dimensional and three-dimensional sand-filled "columns".  During the
              injection process, pressures will be monitored, grout samples will be collected
              from various sampling locations along the length of the column, and effluents
              will be collected.  Immediately subsequent to grouting, the cement content of
              the grouted soils will be assessed to quantify the mass of cement particles
              deposited in the soil matrix.  The improvement in the engineering properties of
              permeability and strength will be determined for hardened grouted soil samples.
               The pore morphology of the grouted soil will be studied to correlate the
              microstructural behavior of a grout in response to pressure gradients applied
              during the injection process with the macrostructural behavior of soil
              improvement.  Microscopy of both wet grout and hardened grouted soils will be
              conducted.

	The morphology of the grouted pores will strongly govern the
              resulting permeability of the soil and the extent or degree of improvement will
              be influenced by (a) the presence of preferential flow paths, (b) pore
              interconnectivity, (c) pore size and distribution, and (d) interfacial pores
              that may be attributed to the wettability of different pore fluids and ion
              concentrations relative to the grout.  Possible ways to improve injectability
              such as by mix additives, mixing sequence, preconditioning the soil, or
              injecting under deaired conditions will be explored.  The results from the
              variety of injection experiments will be used in the development of models to
              reasonably predict injectability and the extent of permeation grouting by
              knowledge of both the grout and soil properties.


