Title       : CAREER: Switching and Logic in Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0093762

Award Number: 0093762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joao P. Hespanha   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0093762
Hespanha

In this proposal we delineate a five year-research and
              education plan in the area of Automatic Control.  The overall objective of this
              plan is to build the foundation for a career devoted to scientific research and
              its integration in the educational program at the University of Southern
              California.
Our research and education efforts will be focused in the area of
              hybrid control systems, i.e., systems that combine continuous dynamics with
              discrete logic.  We are particularly interested in supervisory control
              algorithms that utilize discrete logic for the purpose of online learning and
              adaptation.  The use of logic in this context was proposed in the control
              literature more than fifteen years ago.  Most of the early work was of a
              theoretical nature, motivated by the desire to construct universal  controllers
              capable of stabilizing very large classes of systems.  The universality of
              these controllers was achieved at the expense of very poor performance and the
              resulting algorithms could not be used in most practical applications.  Since
              then a great deal of progress has been made in this area and now supervisory
              control is actually proposed as a technique to attain very high performance and
              robustness to sudden changes in the process or the control objectives.
The
              scientific goal of our research is to develop a framework to expedite the
              analysis and design of learning algorithms that utilize switching and logic. 
              Towards this end we will isolate the fundamental issues that arise in the
              design of supervisory control algorithms and explore them in a systematic
              fashion.  We show in this proposal that although many of the algorithms
              proposed in the literature originate from fundamentally different approaches,
              they share key structures and exhibit several common properties.  A common
              framework will provide a better understanding of their key features and
              limitations.  We isolate here two  specific topics that we judge crucial for
              the wide establishment of supervisory control:
1. Extend the domain of
              application of these algorithms to the control of complex nonlinear systems. 
              In particular, when only output-feedback is available and/or when there is
              significant measurement noise and unmodeled dynamics.
2. Develop theoretical
              tools to optimize the performance of these systems.  Here, performance should
              be understood both in a transient and in an asymptotic sense.

