Title       : CAREER: Key Management for Secure Dynamic Group Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0093187

Award Number: 0093187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $484408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Radha Poovendran radha@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Many emerging Internet and broadband wireless network services such as
              real-time stock quotes and information services, pay per view, and dynamic
              coalition for collaborations are based on group communications.  Innovative new
              networking specifications such as Bluetooth (1999), WAP (1998), and SWAP (1998)
              allow multiple devices with different capabilities to form groups and take
              advantage of each other's capabilities.  Emerging from these innovations is the
              potential for developing group communication at the level of embedded systems,
              which has enormous ramifications both academically and commercially.           
                  The most relevant enabling network technology for group communications is
              the multicast which supports the requirements of the service providers as well
              as the end users.  However, research into secure multicast communications has
              been emerging only recently.  The extensive efforst addressing reliable data
              delivery, guaranteed quality of service provision, congestion control and
              resource allocation for conventional and multi-rate multicast indicate the
              importance of multicast for Internet applications.  However, the adaptation of
              multicast communications into commercial and selective applications depends on
              the ability to secure the multicast communications so that only the intended
              receivers have access to the data.  Due to the untrusted nature of the network
              medium used for multicast communications, securing multicast communications
              requires cryptographic methods.  In particular, generating, storing,
              distributing, deleting and updating of the cryptographic keys used for secure
              group communications from the core of the key management problem.           
              This career proposal contains the following three components:                  
                                                                    Key Distribution:
              Research into new key distribution schemes that will be significant
              improvements over the currently available methods and will be efficient with
              respect to user and/or sender key storage, and rekeying messages whil
              preventing user collusion with the focus of this effort.  PI previously
              answered a conjecture related to the optimality of a key distribution scheme
              and demonstrated security flaw of a "secure" multicast key distribution scheme.
                                                                                             
                                                       Group Key Generation: Group key
              generation schemes allow a set of members to jointly generate cryptographic
              keys.  Permitting group membership changes, preventing illegal collaboration
              among members trying to steal secrets or bias the final joint key are some of
              the features that need to be considered in designing new group key generation
              schemes.  The proposed work will be based on the current work of PI  in the
              area of distributed key generation.  The past work has resulted in a pending
              national and international patent and is currently being commercialized by a
              collaboration with Lockheed Martin Global Telecommunications under Maryland
              Industrial partnership program.  (Dr. Roger Mancuso, CTO, LMCO)        
              Education: PI will develop and introduce two new undergraduate courses at
              University of Washington Seattle and an advanced network security laboratory
              that will house the course related projects and basic research.  Since there is
              a strong presence of Information Technology companies in Seattle, the
              university-industry collaboration will help to provide strong research and
              educational background to UW students and lead to higher return on investment
              to the academia, industry and the NSF.  PI has been in contact with the
              research and development groups of security at Microsoft to establish close
              ties.  (Dr. Sekar Chandrasekaran, Lead NT security manager, MSFT)
