Title       : Large-Scale Experimental Test of Recruitment Limitation in Marine Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a0093976

Award Number: 0093976
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Hixon hixonm@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will test the recruitment limitation hypothesis in unprecedented
              detail and at both large spatial scales (reefs 100's of meters in diameter) and
              large temporal scales (an entire generation). Preliminary work has shown that
              the bicolor damselfish (Stegastes partitus, Pomacentridae), having a generation
              time of about 3 years, is a superb species for this test, and that the
              Caribbean Marine Research Center at Lee Stocking Island, Bahamas, is an ideal
              study area. The recruitment limitation hypothesis will be tested in two ways:
              (1) by long-term monitoring of demographic rates at four large reefs that
              naturally undergo vastly different rates of larval settlement, and (2) by
              experimental manipulations of rates of larval settlement to these sites. Sites
              with low settlement-either natural or experimentally induced-should corroborate
              the hypothesis, as suggested by baseline demographic monitoring over the past 2
              years. Detailed demographic data will be used to construct empirically based
              size-structured open-population models. Elasticity analysis of these models
              will determine the relative importance of different demographic rates in
              driving changes in local population size.

The combined
              observational-experimental and empirical-theoretical approach of this study
              will provide a novel large-scale test of the recruitment limitation hypothesis
              for marine fish. Additionally, this project may provide insight on the effects
              of human-induced global climate change on coral reefs. Baseline demographic
              monitoring has detected a region-wide 3-year decline in bicolor damselfish
              populations correlated with the bleaching and death of the corals they inhabit.
              This project will determine whether this population decline is a long-term,
              multi-generation trend.

