Title       : CAREER: High-Performance Algorithms for Scientific Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0093039

Award Number: 0093039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385641             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Bader dbader@eece.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Parallel computing has long offered the promise of very high performance, but it
              has delivered
only in a narrow range of applications. Exploiting parallelism
              at the level of large distributed-memory
systems is hampered by the cost of
              message-passing, while shared-memory systems remain mostly
small-scale. With
              the advent of symmetric multiprocessors (SMPs), however, shared-memory on
              a
modest scale  is becoming an available commodity. High-performance gigabit
              networks  allow scalable applications to run on large clusters of SMPs. Over
              the next five to ten years, clusters of SMPs will likely be the predominant
              architecture for scalable high-performance computing; however, little work has
              been done to date to support effective parallel computing on these SMP
              clusters.

Preliminary work we have conducted indicates that it is possible
              to improve upon current programming
methods for SMP clusters. In this career
              award the goal is to develop, implement, assess, and
refine algorithms for SMP
              clusters for irregular (e.g., string-, tree-, and graph-based) computations
              that
will deliver significant speedups on typical configurations of SMP
              clusters and scale gracefully with
the number of processors. The research will
              investigate new algorithms and a library of basic routines to
support
              irregular computations, mostly tree- and graph- based, along with new insights
              on how to leverage
the theoretical research in PRAM algorithms. Science-driven
              problems in genomics,bioinformatics, and computational ecology will provide the
              focus for this research.

The education component of this project includes
              mentoring high school and minority students, diseminating research results
              through talks and papers, and presenting tutorials at key conferences
              and
workshops. Prior mentoring has produced several individual and group teams
              that have won first place in both local and national competitions and 
              mentoring will continue activities with minority groups, such as the National
              Society of Black Engineers and Native American Pueblo student groups.


