Title       : CAREER: Fate and Transport of Organic Pollutants in Lakes and Fresh Water
               Estuaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0093191

Award Number: 0093191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianne C. Nyman nymanm@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Valuable predictions of hydrophobic organic compound fate and transport in lakes
              and fresh water estuary systems can be obtained by using this unique proposed
              collaborative research and teaching approach of combining fate processes (e.g.,
              biodegradation, photodegradation, and sorption/desorption processes) with an
              appropriate hydrodynamic model. By identifying and understanding components
              that contribute to the fate processes, and by developing ways to identify these
              components in natural waters, more efficient remediation assessment of the
              contaminated environment is possible. Understanding how hydrophobic organic
              compounds influence the contaminated environment is critical to 1) assessing
              fate processes; 2) developing accurate models; 3) developing accurate
              analytical methods; and 4) predicting remediation alternatives when
              contamination does occur.  The environmentally-relevant hydrophobic organic
              compound, benzidine, will be used as a model system to provide new insight into
              the fate and transport of hydrophobic organic compounds in general.  Like many
              hydrophobic organic compounds, benzidine partitions preferentially to
              (sediment) particles in lake systems. As such, its behavior in these systems is
              significally affected by the movement of sediments (e.g., hydrodynamics of the
              lake). 

The basic knowledge obtained is likely to be of long-lasting value.
              The general long-term
implications include advancement in the design of new
              transport models that take into account fate processes, as well as prediction
              of hydrophobic organic compound movement via point-source release and
              implications thereafter.  Therefore, this could be used as a tool for the
              prediction of the effects of remediation alternatives on the ecosystem which
              surround the area of contaminated sediment. In addition, the economic benefits
              of predicting remediation alternatives will include increasing the ability to
              predict contaminant accumulation spots, better and more accurate monitoring of
              the accumulation of hydrophobic organic compounds in lakes, and lastly being
              able to target more accurately the costly sediment remediation procedures
              within the lake area.   

The PI will train undergraduate and graduate
              students from several different disciplines (e.g., environmental engineering,
              chemical engineering, chemistry, earth and environmental sciences, and biology)
              to this interdisciplinary research.  She has volunteered to organize and advise
              Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute's new, dual-organization student chapter of
              the Air and Waste Management/Water Environment Federation (A&WMA/WEF).
              Additionally, high school students will be exposed to environmental engineering
              and especially women and minority students in high schools will be mentored to
              encourage careers in environmental engineering and to improve the enrollment of
              traditionally underrepresented groups in engineering fields.  

