Title       : CAREER: Connecting Bulk Properties to Nanoscale Structure: Combined Studies of
               Structural and Transport Properties of Strongly Correlated Oxide Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2002     
File        : a0093143

Award Number: 0093143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valery Kiryukhin vkir@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project at Rutgers
              University is to investigate the effects of intrinsic nanoscale inhomogeneities
              on the bulk properties of several important oxide systems.  These
              inhomogeneities appear to play a crucial role in the technologically important
              properties of these materials, such as superconductivity, magnetoresistance,
              and ferroelectricity.  For this purpose, x-ray and neutron scattering
              techniques will be combined with bulk-property measurements.  State of the art
              scattering techniques, such as resonant x-ray scattering, will be utilized to
              study the domain structure of the multiphase states, charge and orbital
              ordering in these states, and the nature of the structural, charge- and orbital
              fluctuations in the states not exhibiting phase separation.  In many cases,
              simultaneous scattering experiments and in-situ transport measurements will be
              carried out to characterize metastable states and time- and history-dependent
              effects.  The knowledge gained as the result of this project is expected to
              facilitate the understanding of correlated oxide materials, as well as to aid
              in the design of novel materials with technologically useful properties.  This
              project also contains an integrated educational part.  In particular,
              development of the modern science course for non-science majors and the
              utilization of feedback techniques in student education will be
              implemented.
%%%
As the advancement of technology pushes the characteristic
              device size beyond 100 nm (one hundred-thousandth of an inch), microscopic
              inhomogeneities begin to play a crucial role in a number of technologically
              important materials that include silicon-based structures used in computer
              chips, magnetic memory media, and ferro- and piezoelectrics. Many of these
              materials belong to the family of the so-called transition-metal oxides with
              strong correlation effects. The
goal of this Faculty Early Career Development
              (CAREER) project at Rutgers University is to investigate the microscopic
              inhomogeneities and their connection to the physical properties of these
              materials. For this purpose, state of the art experimental techniques,
              including x-ray and
neutron scattering combined with other experimental
              techniques will be used. The research will be carried out at the leading
              national research laboratories, as well as at Rutgers University. The knowledge
              gained as the result of this project is expected to facilitate our
              understanding of the materials used in modern technology, as well as to aid in
              the design of novel materials with technologically useful properties. This
              project also contains an integrated educational part. In particular,
              development of the modern science course for non-science majors and the
              utilization of feedback techniques in student education will be
              implemented.
***


