Title       : CAREER: Direct visualization of the structure and dynamics of complex fluids
               during flow by confocal and epifluorescence microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0093076

Award Number: 0093076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Solomon mjsolo@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0093076
M. Solomon, University of Michigan


Studies of the
              structure and dynamics of complex fluids, particularly in the presence of flow,
              address fundamental questions of engineering science in fluid physics, rheology
              and colloidal science.  Direct visualization techniques of confocal laser
              scanning microscopy and epifluorescence microscopy promises new development in
              these areas by capturing actual pictures of colloidal particle positions and
              displacements in three and two dimensions, respectively.  We propose an
              integrated program of research and education with the research aim of using
              these methods to directly observe complex fluid structure and dynamics during
              flow.  The materials studied will be colloidal particulate gels and associative
              polymer solutions containing colloidal particles.  The work will impact the
              areas of ceramics, paints, inks, digital storage media and DNA sequencing.  In
              addition, our recent scattering and rheological studies of these materials have
              identified research questions in which direct visualization methods generate
              opportunity for unprecedented discovery.

The research plan involves the use
              of a specially designed and constructed shear cell that will be mounted on a
              confocal laser scanning microscope and an epifluorescence microscope. 
              Experiments will encompass transient and steady shear flow in both linear and
              non-linear regimes.  Associated polymers and fluorescent colloids necessary for
              the work will be synthesized in house by previously tested methods.  Training
              for two graduate students, and research opportunities for a number of
              undergraduates, will be provided.

The research efforts will also
              synergistically promote parallel efforts in education and outreach.  An
              undergraduate elective in polymers will be redesigned to teach the skills
              necessary to manipulate polymeric complex fluids at the molecular level.  A
              research project requiring original analysis will be instituted that will
              reinforce this new educational material.  A graduate course in complex fluids
              will be incrementally revised to include new results of direct visualization
              methods, as they become available, thereby providing a conduit between the
              research program and graduate education.  In an outreach project, hands-on
              complex fluid projects will be developed for a program in which middle school
              students from groups traditionally underrepresented in engineering come to the
              department for tutoring and instruction.

