Title       : CAREER: Functional Bases for the Trade-Off Between Growth and Survival of Tree
               Seedlings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a0093303

Award Number: 0093303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386487             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kaoru Kitajima Kitajima@botany.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9169,9177,9178,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
How limited resources are allocated to different functions has strong
              consequences to growth rates and survival of organisms at both individual and
              population levels.  Fast growth is inherently incompatible with high survival
              potential, a trade-off strongly suggested in recent studies of regeneration of
              trees in tropical and temperate forests. Shade tolerant species recruit
              saplings through maintenance of slow-growing seedlings that tolerate various
              biotic and abiotic stresses in the understory. In contrast, light-gap dependent
              species colonize with abundant and well-dispersed seeds and fast-growing
              seedlings having low tolerance of biotic and abiotic stress. The simplest yet
              most general hypothesis for such a trade-off relationship is that species
              allocating more resources to storage and defense survive better, but exhibit
              slower growth (at least in a short term). In plants, higher allocation of
              carbon (i.e., photosynthetically captured energy) to construction of new leaves
              leads to a compound return of carbon income and fast growth rates. However,
              this allocation pattern must come at the cost of relatively less carbon
              allocated to storage (i.e., energy savings as non-structural carbohydrates) and
              defense (e.g., tough support tissue, and chemical toxins that resist against
              herbivory and disease). Consequently, species that employ allocation strategies
              for fast growth should suffer from high mortality rates because these species
              are more vulnerable to herbivory, pathogen attack and physical disturbance.
              Kitajima will test this overall hypothesis through a series of comparative
              studies of carbon storage and carbon-based defenses in seedlings of tropical
              tree species in Panama. Seven family pairs of species exhibiting contrasting
              growth rates and survival will be raised under standardized conditions in a
              greenhouse for comparison of allocation to energy storage in stems and roots,
              and carbon-based defenses (lignin and other phenolic compounds).  In a second
              experiment, this researcher will test the ecological role of storage allocation
              in the field by examining growth and survival of seedlings of species
              displaying contrasting degrees of storage allocation as they respond to shading
              and simulated herbivory treatments.  In the third study, patterns of allocation
              to storage and defense will be examined to elucidate their relationship to
              longer-term growth and survival in naturally recruited seedlings in the forest
              understory. Whole-plant carbon budgets (total gross and net carbon gain,
              proportion of carbon gain to respiration, tissue construction, storage, and
              root exudate) will be quantified for two species of plants in the wild-coffee
              genus (Psychotria) in the final study. This research will be integrated with
              educational activities. The philosophical implications of the physiological
              constraints in ecological interactions go beyond purely biological
              interactions. Ecological models based on allocation-based trade-offs are
              important in training not only those students anticipating professional careers
              as ecologists, but also for those students pursuing studies in non-scientific
              disciplines that affect the societal responses to ecological and environmental
              issues. Allocation trade-offs, thus, will be emphasized in Kitajima's teaching
              in both undergraduate- and graduate-level courses. Her research and teaching
              will be most directly integrated in the course "Summer Research Experience in
              Tropical Ecology," in which undergraduate students will have an outstanding
              educational experience as hands-on participants in this research in Panama. 

