Title       : CAREER: Synthesis, Processing and Characterization of Novel Electronic Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0093611

Award Number: 0093611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin A. Wolden cwolden@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0093611									                   Colin A. Wolden
Abstract

This career
              project features a combination of materials discovery, undergraduate research
              experience, and curriculum development organized around the common theme of
              electronic materials.  Electronic oxides are distinguished from common ceramics
              by their unique ability to conduct charge.  Transparent conducting oxides
              (TCOs) are key components in nearly all display and photovoltaic devices.  A
              second class of oxides conduct and react with ions, a process called
              intercalation, which is central to electrochromic windows and rechargeable
              batteries.  As technologies reliant on these materials continue to advance, it
              has become clear that oxide quality is beginning to limit final device
              performance.  This career project will be directed at the synthesis,
              processing, and characterization of novel oxides using plasma-enhanced chemical
              vapor deposition (PECVD).  Optical interrogation of the plasma and fundamental
              evaluation of the films' electrical, optical, and structural characteristics
              will guide the experimental effort.  Concurrent measurements will be used to
              develop processing-structure-property relationships.  Expanded research
              opportunities for undergraduates and continued enhancement of our electronic
              materials curriculum will advance educational goals.

Electronic oxides have
              been synthesized to date primarily by physical vapor deposition (PVD)
              techniques.  PECVD offers significant advantages over PVD with respect to the
              development of new compounds, effective doping, and the production of
              functionally graded materials.  The most interesting TCOs are either alloys
              (indium tin oxide, ITO) or doped materials ZnO:AL, SnO2:F), and their
              conductivity is invariably n-type.  Our efforts will be directed at the
              discovery and characterization new n-type alloys with improved properties, as
              well as the synthesis of p-type TCOs.  The development of p-type oxides will
              enable the formation of transparent p-n diodes and the advent of oxide-based
              electronics.  The large bandgap and chemical stability of oxides make them
              attractive candidates for high temperature/harsh environment applications.  Low
              resistivity p-type TCOs will be pursued through the use of co-doping, a kinetic
              process in which a donor atom (e.g. Ga) and two acceptor atoms (e.g. N) are
              simultaneously incorporated into the film.

A second aspect of this career
              project will involve the use of undergraduate researchers to study the
              synthesis of oxides that are ion conductors.  Tungsten oxide (WO3) is leading
              electrochromic material whose transparency is reversibly altered by reactions
              with small ions (H+, Li+).  Device performance is often limited by cation
              transport through the film, which in turn depends strongly on film
              stoichiometry and microstructure.  The physical properties and the transient
              electrochromic response of PECVD tungsten oxide will be investigated as a
              function of plasma operating conditions.

The final phase of this career
              project is directed at the continued development of the electronic materials
              curriculum at CSM.  The PI has created, with NSF-ILI support, a new laboratory
              course in silicon processing.  The interdisciplinary lab, which features
              cooperative learning and curiosity-driven experiments, was successfully offered
              last year to 20 seniors from four departments.  The PI will continue the
              expansion of this laboratory, creating a more advanced course for graduate
              students.  Finally, computational tools will be incorporated into the
              undergraduate curriculum in order to promote higher order thinking skills.

