Title       : CAREER: Thermal Management of Nanoelectronic Devices and Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  2001   
File        : a0093959

Award Number: 0093959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander A. Balandin alexb@ee.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As the device size continues to shrink and integration density continues to
              increase, the size and spatial confinement effects on heat removal become
              increasingly important. A rapid emergence of nanotechnology as a nation's
              high-priority field and renewed interest to thermoelectrics add significance to
              the research on thermal management of nanoelectronic devices and circuits
              proposed in this NSF-CAREER project. Beside its fundamental science value,
              investigation of phonon transport at nanoscale is crucial for future progress
              in electronic and optoelectronic device technologies. 

The goals of this
              project are (i) comprehensive investigation of heat conduction in nanoscale
              semiconductor structures, devices and circuits; (ii) derivation of new thermal
              management rules applicable to scaled-down devices; (iii) fundamental study of
              the effects of phonon confinement and boundary scattering on phonon
              propagation; and (iv) improvement of reliability of nanoelectronic devices and
              circuits.

The proposed education plan aims at jump-starting a new
              engineering specialization - Devices and Circuits with emphasis on
              nanotechnology and nanodevices. It will be accomplished by active course
              development, increase of the laboratory component of the curriculum, and
              student involvement in research. The cross-disciplinary nature of the project
              will allow students to gain a variety of skills required in a contemporary
              high-tech job market.

Investigation of thermal management of nanodevices
              will be carried out in a newly established Nanoelectronic Materials and Device
              Laboratory. The outcome of this research will add to the core knowledge of
              nanostructures, phonon transport, and quantum confinement. It will lay down the
              foundation of the novel enabling technology utilizing active phonon
              engineering. 

