Title       : CAREER: Investigation of Laser-Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy for Analysis of
               Airborne Particulate Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0093853

Award Number: 0093853
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Buckley buckley@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Recent and pending Federal air pollution regulations for particulate matter (PM)
              require the development of continuous emissions monitors to measure the size
              and composition of airborne particles. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy
              (LIBS) is a promising method for real-time measurement of joint size and
              composition of primarily inorganic airborne aerosol particles in the size range
              100 nm - 10 nm. These nanoparticles have been shown to be linked to a series of
              significant health effects, including decreased lung function, increased
              incidence of asthma, alterations in lung tissue and structure, increased
              hospital admissions, and premature death. In LIBS, a high-energy pulsed laser
              is utilized to create a spark, or breakdown, in the sample media.  Recent field
              trials of this technique on incinerators and thermal treatment units show that
              LIBS measurements follow trends of emissions well and can capture transient
              events that are not observed by extractive, integrating type samplers. Due to
              the possibility of joint particle composition and sizing, LIBS also is
              attractive forsource apportionment, that is, determination of the source of
              particular particles in an airshed by compositional fingerprinting. 

The
              primary objectives of the proposal are:
1) to understand the joint influences
              of the particle matrix, of the gas matrix, and of plasma size and temperature
              on the LIBS measurement,
2) to determine the upper and lower size limits for
              particle measurements using LIBS, and  the variation in optimal laser power,
              optimum spark size and temperature, and optimum detector gate delay and width
              for various particle sizes,
3) to model the particle / plasma interaction for
              typical particle compositions, as enabled by the previous two objectives,
4)
              to perform real-time, accurate, full-spectrum LIBS measurements of ambient
              aerosol, as enabled by the previous three objectives.

The career development
              plan includes a strong educational component involving both high school
              students, high school teachers, and college students. It is suggested that some
              of the attrition among promising young science students is due to a perceived
              lack of connection between current scientific problems and the basic science
              classes that dominate high school / early college years. The proposed
              educational plan involves the creation of interactive, web-based teaching tools
              that use illustrations from familiar atmospheric phenomena such as
              photochemical smog, the ozone hole, acid rain, and migration of airborne
              aerosol particles to teach basic science concepts linked to real problems.
              Undergraduate engineering and science students from the University of Maryland
              with an interest in teaching would be recruited to assist AP Chemistry and AP
              Environmental Science teachers from local high schools in curriculum
              development and computer/web programming to develop interactive learning
              modules for the AP classes. It is hoped that these efforts promote promising
              high school students to remain motivated to study science, while some college
              students with a teaching aptitude may have a rewarding experience that
              stimulates interest in science education. We plan to tie the education plan
              with the research plan by bringing the LIBS unit to schools to make ambient
              aerosol measurements as part of an aerosol curriculum module in the 4th and 5th
              years of the project.

