Title       : CAREER: Development of a Split-Beam Method for Improved Laser Machining of
               Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2001   
File        : a0093903

Award Number: 0093903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert E. Segall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research efforts
              focusing on numerically modeling the relationships between the thermal
              transients caused by single- and dual-laser machining and the complex stresses
              that ultimately lead to premature fractures.  A probabilistic fracture model
              will be integrated with the stress calculations to help quantify the time and
              location of fracture as the laser progresses along the cutting path.  The
              resulting models will then be used with laser machining experiments to develop
              and optimize a process of simultaneously scoring the surface to help control
              the path and quality of the final fracture.  Another intriguing method that
              will be studied involves the use of the dual-laser to "actively stress" the
              fracture prone region into a state of thermoelastic compression to lower the
              probability of premature fracture.  

The research program will also have a
              strong educational component that will provide high school and undergraduate
              students with hands-on research experience through focused outreach efforts. 
              All of the research and the evolving laser manufacturing methodology will be
              integrated with the curricula at three Washington State University campuses
              using the Washington Higher Education Telecommunications System (WHETS) and
              video.  As a result, the new methodologies will be able to reach a wide variety
              of individuals by using a blend of kinesthetic and visual methods that include
              numerous hands-on experiences combined with live and video demonstrations.  The
              overall goals of the project are to develop more efficient laser machining
              techniques for ceramics while at the same time helping to create and foster a
              positive image of engineering and manufacturing. 

