Title       : CAREER: Development of Millimeter-Wave Polymer-Based Multi-layer Integration:
               Organic Micromachining Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0093525

Award Number: 0093525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anh-Vu Pham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0093525
Pham

The next generation of electronic integration will require a
              technology that can combine solid-state integrated circuits (IC), functional
              microelectromechanical devices (MEMS), passive components, and sensors into a
              package.  The demand for this multiple device integration poses substantial
              challenges at microwave and millimeter wave frequencies.  Furthermore, a major
              factor that must be addressed for millimeter wave applications is the
              development of integration techniques to miniaturize electronic
              components.
The author proposes to develop an organic micromachining technique
              which provides revolutionary concepts to address the need for future millimeter
              wave integration (28-40 GHz).  The organic micromachining technology will
              provide a platform for integrating solid-state ICs, functional MEMS devices,
              passive components, and sensors into a system on a package.  The compatibility
              of this technology with multilayer polymer thin-films is key to integrate
              ultra-light weight, small size and portable components.  The major tasks of the
              proposed research include (1) Development of micromachined, 3-dimensional
              (3-D), polymer-based transmission lines to achieve ultralow loss, (2)
              Development of micromachined vertical interconnects to transport signals in 3-D
              multi-layer structures, and (3) Integration of multiple device technologies
              into the organic micromachining platform to develop future communication
              systems at millimeter wave frequencies.  This integration scheme represents a
              packaging paradigm known as a system-on-a-package (SOP).  The proposed tasks
              involve collaborative efforts with industry and national research centers
              including General Electric (GE CRD), Agilent Technologies, the National Science
              Foundation (NSF) Center for Advanced Engineering Fibers and Films at Clemson
              University, and the NSF Packaging Research Center at Georgia Tech.  These
              collaborative efforts provide infrastructure and skills to study multiple
              aspects of the organic micromachining technology.

The results of this
              research will lead to innovations and fundamental understanding of the next
              generation micromachining technology developed in a multilayer organic
              platform.  Based on this effort, significant impact is expected upon the
              development of future communication systems by providing a means to combine
              unique functionalities of heterogeneous components.  These systems will be able
              to sense, compute, and communicate through a wireless sensor network. 
              Furthermore, this organic micromachining system, which is processed with
              conventional spin-coating and optical lithography to achieve high resolution
              and high aspect ratio, can be applied to the development of functional MEMS
              devices (switches, resonators, and tunable filters) and their integration with
              conventional solid-state ICs.

The PI's teaching plan addresses the education
              from grade school to graduate studies.  He has begun and will continue to
              develop a research program to assist students in transitioning from high school
              to college and from college to graduate studies.  He would like to extend the
              opportunity to the disabled and under represented students who may have been
              traditionally left out of college and graduate studies.  He has strong
              interests in developing R-F/Wireless design and laboratory courses integrating
              into the department's on-going wireless program at Clemson University.  He will
              incorporate a web-based technology to broadcast interactive laboratory
              experiments to outreach high school students and college freshmen.

