Title       : CAREER: Orientational Dynamics in Flows of Thermotropic Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0093880

Award Number: 0093880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick T. Mather mather@mail.ims.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0093880
P. Mather, University of Connecticut


This proposal
              presents new experimental approaches, combined with carefully prepared model
              polymers, whose aim is to definitively answer outstanding questions of
              orientational stability for flows of thermotropic polymers. A third-generation
              controlled environment microheometer will be designed and assembled to allow
              direct measurements of both first normal stress differences and various
              measures of local and global orientation (birefringence, UV dichroism, IR
              dichroism, and wide-angle x-ray scattering) for the series of model materials
              is proposed. By examining the influence of TLCP chain flexibility on the linear
              Leslie-Ericksen tumbling parameter, and the evolution of microscopic
              (orientational defects) and macroscopic (birefringence) orientations in shear
              transients, we will significantly improve the understanding of TLCP dynamics,
              enabling both quantitative comparison with present polydomain models and
              further molecular modeling developments.

An education plan is proposed to
              combine outreach to local teachers in Connecticut with the development of a new
              undergraduate chemical engineering elective, "Our World of Complex Fluids." In
              particular, the planned outreach efforts will feature the development of a
              pilot summer internship program for high school teachers. Polymer Links, in
              which high school teachers are teamed with chemical engineering faculty to
              conduct hands-on science projects (4-6 weeks) designed specifically to develop
              laboratory experiments in polymers and other complex fluids for use in the high
              school classroom. The complementary undergraduate course will first introduce
              students to a wide range of industrially relevant complex fluids, including
              foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, and plastics along with biological fluids,
              including synovial fluid and cartilage. Then, this elective will expose
              students to underlying physical properties, microstructures, and quantitative
              descriptions of substances ranging from polymeric fluids to colloidal
              suspensions and from surfactant solutions to glasses.

