Title       : CAREER: Stabilization of Earth Slopes Using Reticulated In-situ Reinforcement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  2002    
File        : a0093164

Award Number: 0093164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J E. Loehr eloehr@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Maintenance and stabilization of surficial slope failures represent a
              tremendous, but often overlooked, economic and manpower burden for many
              infrastructure maintenance organizations (Transportation Research Board, 1996).
               Because of the benign appearance of most shallow slope failures, little
              research has been performed to determine the true life-cycle and overall
              organizational costs of maintaining these slides and how these slopes can be
              most effectively maintained.  Maintenance and repair measures are currently
              selected more on the basis of tradition than for technical or economic reasons.
               As a result, repair methods tend to be quick fixes rather than long-term
              solutions with slope maintenance efforts tending to be repetitive occurrences
              at many sites.  
A relatively new technique that shows great promise for cost
              effective maintenance and repair of surficial slope failures is the use of
              small diameter, in-situ reinforcement similar to soil nails and micropiles. 
              These techniques have been successfully used for stabilization of slopes both
              in the U.S. and abroad.  However, the current level of knowledge of how loads
              are transferred in these systems, how closely spaced members interact, and how
              these systems can be optimized is rather limited (Bruce and Juran, 1997). 
              Designs for stabilization of slopes with these techniques, therefore, remain
              very conservative, even to the extent of eliminating the techniques from
              consideration in many cases based on excessive cost.  This is particularly true
              in applying in-situ reinforcing systems to stabilization of surficial slides
              since the overall costs that can normally be justified for repair of surficial
              slides are low.  However, there are currently a number of novel installation
              methods and reinforcing materials that offer significant promise for use in
              stabilizing surficial slides.  Consensus among designers and researchers alike
              is that significant fundamental research is needed to develop a better
              understanding of these systems so that more cost-effective designs and new
              innovative installation methods and materials can be technically and
              economically justified.
An integrated suite of eight research and educational
              tasks will be undertaken to expand the state of knowledge in the area of slope
              stabilization using small diameter in-situ reinforcement and to improve
              surficial slide maintenance and repair operations.  A large-scale tilt
              apparatus will be developed, constructed, and calibrated, and a series of tests
              will be performed with this device to evaluate the effectiveness of several
              alternative in-situ reinforcement strategies and materials for stabilization of
              surficial slope failures.  Testing activities will be facilitated by numerical
              modeling efforts, which in turn will lead to development of a procedure for
              predicting the performance of reticulated reinforcement for slope
              stabilization.  While focused on surficial slope failures, the results of this
              work will also provide direct and immediate benefits for application to larger
              slides as well.  A reliability based decision-making framework will also be
              developed to assist maintenance personnel and infrastructure managers in making
              decisions regarding repair of earth slopes.  
Three integrated educational
              tasks will be undertaken to facilitate understanding of slope stabilization and
              repair problems, to introduce young persons in the exciting field of
              geotechnical engineering, and to disseminate and publicize the results of this
              project.  A series of classroom scale physical models demonstrating key slope
              stability and soil-structure interaction concepts will be developed for use in
              college level undergraduate and graduate courses as well as for demonstration
              to K-12 students.  An interactive, internet-based course module on
              soil-structure interaction in slope reinforcement applications will also be
              developed based on the results of the research to complement the physical
              models and provide for widespread dissemination of the research results.  In
              addition, the large-scale tilt apparatus developed for this project will be
              utilized for predictive design exercises and a design contest for students
              across the country.  Use of the apparatus in this way will serve to demonstrate
              numerous fundamental slope stability and reinforcement concepts to a broad
              audience and is expected to enhance the visibility of the geotechnical
              engineering profession.

