Title       : Dissertation Research: Genetic Basis of Flowering Date in Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1991   
File        : a9016146

Award Number: 9016146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Mitchell-Olds tmo@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa A. Dorn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Life history characters such as fecundity and age at first                     
              reproduction, are closely related to the ultimate survival and                 
              reproductive ability of plants.  Life history traits are directly              
              affected by artificial and natural selection and are therefore of              
              particular concern for both plants breeders and evolutionary                   
              biologists alike.  The expression of these traits is thought to                
              be the result of many genes of small effect (quantitative trait                
              loci or QTLs).  Predictions about the rate and direction of                    
              evolutionary change depend on the number of segregating QTLs and               
              the magnitude of their effects.  The actual number of QTLs                     
              involved in quantitative variation, and the importance and                     
              prevalence of QTLs of large effect is still virtually unknown.                 
                                                                                             
              Methods based on statistical theory have been used to estimate                 
              the minimum number of QTLs influencing a trait, and the relative               
              magnitude of their effects, but these methods lack precision.  In              
              contrast, techniques of molecular biology and classical                        
              quantitative genetics provide a powerful means of estimating the               
              minimum number of QTLs and their relative effects.                             
                                                                                             
              This study will use genetic markers in Arabidopsis thaliana to                 
              answer the following questions: 1) How many QTLs control the                   
              timing of flowering? 2) Are there genes of large effect?  3) Do                
              interactions between flowering time and other characters                       
              important to plant survival prevent genes of large effect from                 
              being important in the evolution of flowering time?  Arabidopsis               
              is the ideal organism for this study because the existing map is               
              extraordinarily complete.  The existence of naturally occurring                
              inbred lines greatly simplifies statistical analyses.  These                   
              techniques have been used with success in marker-aided selection               
              programs for economically important traits in a few crop plants.               
              They are powerful tools in genetic improvement programs, as well               
              as for addressing fundamental evolutionary and genetic questions.              
              However, these techniques have not been applied to natural plant               
              populations.  This work will provide some of the first data on                 
              the number of genes and the magnitude of genetic effects within                
              species.
