Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Molecular Biology of Marine Invertebrate
               Development/April,1991/Honolulu, Hawaii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1991     
File        : a9016850

Award Number: 9016850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12834              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred H. Wilt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for the participation of eight US                  
              scientists in a joint US-Japan seminar on "Molecular Biology                   
              of Marine Invertebrate Development". In the last 15 years,                     
              primarily through advances in the field of molecular biology,                  
              considerable progress has been made in our basic understanding                 
              of the major issues involved in development. The study of                      
              marine invertebrate embryos has played an important role in                    
              this progress by providing a good model for analyzing the                      
              fundamental problems of development.  For example, sperm-egg                   
              interactions in general and fertilization in particular have                   
              always been areas where marine invertebrate research has lead                  
              the way. Another area of immense importance is how genes                       
              preside over the complex process of morphogenesis, and the                     
              accessibility of marine embryos makes them a particularly                      
              favorable material for the study of this process. Development-                 
              al biology of marine invertebrates has been a traditionally                    
              active field of research in both the US and Japan since the                    
              beginning of this century and this seminar should therefore                    
              provide an excellent forum for researchers in the two                          
              countries to compare results and discuss future research in                    
              this area.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The seminar is to be held on April 3-6 1991 at the Kewalo                      
              Marine Laboratory of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu,                       
              Hawaii.  The co-organizers are Professor Fred H Wilt,                          
              Molecular cell biology unit, University of California,                         
              Berkeley, and Professor Hiraku Shimada, Department of Zoology,                 
              Hiroshima University, Japan.  Specific topics to be discussed                  
              at the seminar will concentrate on cell-cell interactions                      
              including (1) the biology of cell-environmental interactions;                  
              (2) the molecular biology of morphogenesis; and (3) specific                   
              gene expression.  The seminar is especially timely as the                      
              last seminar in this topic, between these two countries, was                   
              held ten years ago and enormous advances have been achieved                    
              since that time.  It is expected that ongoing collaborative                    
              projects and exchanges of scientists will occur as a result                    
              of this seminar.
