Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: A Union of Quantal and Semiclassical Methods
               for Molecular Collisions Using Generalized Quantum Defect Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1991      
File        : a9016606

Award Number: 9016606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10540              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick H. Mies   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NTIS/Ctr Atomic Mole Opti
	      
	      Gaithersburg, MD  20899    /   -

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1952,
Abstract    :
              This award will facilitate cooperation between Dr. Frederick                   
              H. Mies, Molecular Physics Division, Center for Atomic,                        
              Molecular, and Optical Physics, National Institute of                          
              Standards and Technology (NIST), and Professor Hiroki                          
              Nakamura, Department of Theoretical Studies, Institute for                     
              Molecular Science (IMS), Okazaki, and members of their research                
              groups.  Collaboration between these two research groups                       
              provides a unique opportunity to exploit two complementary                     
              skills in molecular scattering theory.  The NIST group                         
              generally employs the fully quantal close-coupled approach to                  
              calculate inelastic and photodissociation cross-sections.                      
              The IMS group has devoted its research to the complementary                    
              semiclassical description of such processes.  The objective                    
              of this collaborative project is to borrow the best features                   
              of each method to obtain a more complete description of                        
              molecular dynamics and spectroscopy.  The two groups have                      
              already begun an extensive collaboration at this common                        
              interface of the two methods with extremely encouraging                        
              preliminary results.  During this project, the scientists                      
              will visit each other's two laboratories to transfer computer                  
              codes, compare results, and analyze the data.                                  
                                                                                             
              This collaborative project has two major goals.  First, the                    
              scientists will explore the limits of the quantal and                          
              semiclassical methods with numerically tractable examples.                     
              Second, they will use this experience to develop hybrid                        
              techniques and new approximations that enjoy the benefits of                   
              both methods.  The goal is to use semiclassical theory to                      
              provide the necessary MQDT (multichannel quantum defect                        
              theory) parameters to treat the dynamics and photodissociation                 
              of triatomic systems.  The focus will be the photodissociation                 
              of strongly bound triatomics, using atmospheric molecules as                   
              candidates for study.
