Title       : Stereoselectivity in Electron Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1992  
File        : a9016682

Award Number: 9016682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243400             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Graham Lappin Alexander.G.Lappin.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and                            
              Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,                    
              Lappin will continue his studies of chiral induction in                        
              electron transfer reactions between metal ion complexes. This                  
              is a relatively new field that has become an international                     
              endeavor and is attracting increasing attention from the                       
              chemical community.  While it is a very basic research area,                   
              potential applications of the results in the design and                        
              manufacture of pharmaceuticals are possible.                                   
                                                                                             
              The principal goal of the project will be the provision of                     
              further details on the origins and interpretation of                           
              stereoselectivity.  The relationship between chiral induction                  
              in outer-sphere reactions and chiral recognition in ion pairs                  
              formed as intermediates along the reaction coordinate will be                  
              explored.  Besides kinetic studies and product analysis, the                   
              work will use NMR methods to investigate weak interactions                     
              between ions in solution to obtain structural information.  A                  
              second aspect involves ligands of biological importance - amino                
              acids and oligopeptides - and will focus on the additive                       
              effects of chiral substituents on ligand structure.                            
              Experiments with cyclodextrins will be initiated.  The final                   
              portion of the work will exploit recent success in the                         
              detection of stereoselectivity in inner-sphere reactions.
