Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeology of Hawaiian Ceremonial Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1990      
File        : a9016645

Award Number: 9016645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1991     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Kolb  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Timothy Earle, Professor of                         
              Anthropology at the University of California, Los Angeles, Mr.                 
              Michael Kolb will collect data for his doctoral dissertation                   
              thesis.  In a first stage of this process, Mr. Kolb has collected              
              excavation and survey data on "heiau", impressive prehistoric                  
              stone structures located on the island of Maui, Hawaii.  Heiau                 
              were the scene of religious and political ceremonies which                     
              integrated ancient Hawaiian life and were important indicators of              
              a community's political and economic role through time.  Although              
              these structures have been known to exist for many years, very                 
              little archaeological work has been done on them, and they are                 
              not well dated.  During his excavation of seven of these                       
              structures, Mr. Kolb collected charcoal as well as volcanic                    
              glass.  Both are amenable to absolute dating, the first by                     
              radiocarbon determination, the second by measurement of the                    
              hydration rim which develops over time.                                        
                                                                                             
              Prehistorically, Hawaii achieved a chiefly level of society, and               
              islands such as Maui were divided into a number of independent                 
              competing polities.  Each centered on a heiau.  Therefore, by                  
              understanding the construction sequence of individual structures               
              and determining its size and number of man-hours involved in                   
              building each, it is possible to reconstruct, in general outline,              
              the political prehistory of the island.  To accomplish this,                   
              however, very careful age determinations are necessary and to                  
              this end samples will be radiocarbon and obsidian hydration                    
              dated.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will increase              
              our understanding of how complex chiefly level societies emerge                
              and interact with each other.  It will provide much needed                     
              information on Hawaiian prehistory and will assist in the                      
              training of an extremely promising young scientist.
