Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Application of Neogene Molluscs and Ostracodes
               to Paleoclimatology of the Pacific, Atlantic and Arctic Oceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1993       
File        : a9016589

Award Number: 9016589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Hazel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Cronin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louie Marincovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for a two year cooperative                         
              research project between a group from the Department of                        
              Geology and Geophysics, Louisiana State University, Baton                      
              Rouge, led by Professor Joseph E Hazel, and a group from the                   
              Institute of Geosciences, Shizuoka University, Japan, led by                   
              Professor Noriyuki Ikeya.  The objectives of the project are                   
              to conduct taxonomic and zoogeographic studies of temperature-                 
              sensitive circumpolar ostracode and molluscan clades for                       
              application to the study of Pilocene climatic changes.                         
              Paleontologic analysis of climatically sensitive organisms is                  
              a valuable tool for quantitative study of paleoclimatic                        
              change.  This project will investigate molluscs and ostracodes                 
              from middle and high latitude regions of Japan, Alaska, and                    
              eastern North America during the Pilocene, when a global                       
              climatic change occurred about 3.0 million years ago.                          
              Taxonomic and zoogeographic study of diagnostic species will                   
              be applied to shallow marine paleoclimatology of the North                     
              Pacific, Atlantic and Arctic Oceans before, during and after                   
              this climatic deterioration began.  Molluscs and ostracodes                    
              have potential for reconstructing marine environments in                       
              general and are of particular value in cold shallow marine                     
              realms where plantik organisms are rare or absent.  There                      
              application to paleoclimatology has been limited however by                    
              inadequate taxonomic, ecologic and zoographic study of                         
              circumpolar Arctic/Subarctic species.  This project aims to                    
              overcome these limitations, and make molluscs and ostracodes                   
              more applicable to shallow marine paleoclimatology.                            
                                                                                             
              Both the US and the Japanese researchers involved in the                       
              project have good track records in their fields, particularly                  
              in the areas of ostracode taxonomy and the paleoclimatic                       
              inferences that can be drawn from changes in assemblages                       
              through time.   This project should hopefully lead to a                        
              better understanding of climatic history in high latitudes,                    
              which should lead to a better understanding of climatic                        
              processes in general.
