Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Solid-State Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1993   
File        : a9016821

Award Number: 9016821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17556              (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Hendrickson dhendrickson@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1964,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for a continuing cooperative                       
              research project on solid-state dynamics, between Professor                    
              David N Hendrickson, Department of Chemistry, University of                    
              California, San Diego, and Professor Michio Sorai, Chemical                    
              Thermodynamics Laboratory, Osaka University, Japan.    The                     
              onset of dynamics associated with ligands, counterions and                     
              even solvate molecules in crystals can dramatically affect                     
              several phenomena involving transition metal complexes in                      
              solid state.  Intramolecular electron transfer in mixed-                       
              valence complexes, spin-state interconversion in spin-                         
              crossover-complexes, and thermochroism in copper and nickel                    
              complexes are current phenomena being studied.  In all these                   
              phenomena, intermolecular interactions in the solid state are                  
              important in controlling the events.  A study of the onset of                  
              the dynamics involved in these phase transitions will help                     
              considerably to elucidate the factors controlling these                        
              phenomena.  Heat capacity measurements and a variety of                        
              spectroscopic techniques are being employed to delineate the                   
              macroscopic and microscopic details involved in the above                      
              phenomena.  Thermodynamic studies serve as a powerful tool to                  
              elucidate energetic and entropic aspects of a phenomenon,                      
              from which one can gain better evidence as to whether a phase                  
              transition exists or not.  Moreover based on the transition                    
              entropy, it is possible to discover the microscopic processes                  
              involved in a phase transition that spectroscopic and                          
              structural studies fail to detect.  On the other hand,                         
              spectroscopies and X-ray diffraction provide us with very                      
              detailed microscopic information at the atomic or electronic                   
              level. The aim of this proposal is to bring together these                     
              techniques in order to study the mechanisms of those phase                     
              transitions in which electrons play, either directly or                        
              indirectly, important roles.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The skills of the two research groups involved in this                         
              project are both comprehensive and complementary; the                          
              Japanese group having considerable expertise in macroscopic                    
              calorimetric studies and the US group having similar expertise                 
              in microscopic spectroscopies and structural studies.                          
              Because of their very different backgrounds Professors                         
              Hendrickson and Sorai will bring quite different perspectives                  
              to developing a model for a given order-disorder transition.                   
              If successful, this project should make a considerable                         
              contribution to this complex area.
