Title       : Organization of Arabinose Transport Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1995  
File        : a9016747

Award Number: 9016747
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Hogg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This goal of the research program proposes to define and                       
              understand the role of each of the three components (araF, araG,               
              and araH) of the high-affinity L-arabinose transport system and                
              the manner in which they interact to effect the efficient                      
              accumulation of L-arabinose from the environment for metabolic                 
              utilization.  Residues on the cleft surface of the arabinose                   
              binding protein ( product of araF) that engage in interactions at              
              the membrane complex as identified by saturation mutagenesis will              
              be individually modified by site directed mutagenesis to                       
              establish the chemical requirements of that interaction.  The                  
              organization of the components of the membrane complex (araG and               
              araH) will be determined by selective modification of residues                 
              exposed to the inner outer surfaces of the cytoplasmic membrane                
              using vesicles prepared in the correct and inverted orientation.               
              Radiolabelled modified proteins will be visualized by SDS PAGE                 
              and radioautography.  Information obtained from the biochemical                
              modification experiments will be correlated with the properties                
              of TnphoA insertions to establish the orientation of the                       
              individual components in the membrane environment.  The role of                
              the araG protein will be pursued by UV crosslinking of                         
              radiolabelled nucleotides into one or both of the putative ATP                 
              binding sites and the site(s) of preference identified.                        
                                                                                             
              Binding protein transport systems provide an ideal model to                    
              consider the manner by which cells communicate with the                        
              environment outside the cytoplasmic membrane, how surface                      
              receptors are organized, how cells generate pores in lipid                     
              membranes to accomodate transit of hydrophilic molecules, how                  
              cells direct proteins to specific locations in the cell, in the                
              membrane, or outside the cell, how cells utilize energy to effect              
              substrate accumulation.  Further consideration of such systems                 
              can only add to our understanding of cellular processes.
