Title       : U.S.- France Joint Workshop on Adsorption Processes for Gas Separation, Orsay,
               France, September 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1991     
File        : a9016134

Award Number: 9016134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12679              (Estimated)
Investigator: M.Douglas LeVan MDL@VIRGINIA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1414,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a joint US-France seminar on the                       
              topic of "Adsorption Processes for Gas Separation". The                        
              organizers of the seminar are:  Dr. Douglas Levan, Department                  
              of Chemical Engineering, University of Virginia, and Dr. F.                    
              Meunier, Laboratoire d'Informatique pour la Mecanique et les                   
              Sciences de l'Ingenieur, Orsay, France.                                        
                                                                                             
              Adsorption processes are important in several applications                     
              for gas separation. Pressure swing adsorption (PSA) has many                   
              small and large scale applications, including air separation,                  
              carbon-dioxide/methane separation, hydrogen production,                        
              hydrocarbon separation and gas drying.  PSA is also expected                   
              to play an increasing role in anti-pollution projects, such as                 
              the recovery of pollutants from industrial effluents.                          
              Research on PSA and the development of PSA is very active in                   
              both the US and France. The laboratories of the French                         
              National Center for Scientific Research are strongly involved                  
              in the field of adsorptive gas separation and French industry                  
              is present in the whole chain of scientific and engineering                    
              functions (adsorbent preparation, process design and process                   
              operation). The joint workshop will bring together experts                     
              for an intensive four day workshop on gas separation by                        
              adsorption with specific focus on the most recent trends in                    
              PSA research and processes. Topics to be discussed are:  1)                    
              the materials aspect of adsorbent design  2) methods for the                   
              prediction of mass transfer rates of mixtures in adsorbents,                   
              3) the exact role of modeling and numerical simulation in the                  
              conception of new processes, and 4) the reliability of                         
              predictive models.  The results of this workshop should make                   
              a valuable contribution to future directions in adsorption                     
              process research.
