Title       : Dissertation Research: The Role of Riparian Forests in Regulating Nitrogen Flux
               between Ground Water and Surface in Third Order Stream Valleys of Oregon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1991   
File        : a9016186

Award Number: 9016186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16410              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick J. Swanson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven M. Wondzell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Nearly all nutrients lost from forested ecosystems pass through                
              riparian zones where they may be accumulated or lost to downstream             
              transport.  However, the function of riparian forests in regulating            
              exchanges of nutrients between ground-water and streams is poorly              
              understood.  This research will examine the role of riparian                   
              forests in regulating nitrogen flux between hillslope forests,                 
              riparian forests and streams using a nitrogen budget approach.                 
              Data required will be (1) direction and rate of ground-water flow              
              and (2) concentrations of dissolved organic and inorganic nitrogen             
              in ground-water.                                                               
                                                                                             
              A study site located on a wide valley floor along a third-order                
              stream in H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest will be used for this               
              project.  MODFLOW, a finite-difference ground-water flow model will            
              be paramaterized with data from a network of piezometers and used              
              to simulate flow paths of water; a tracer study will be used to                
              validate model predictions.  Water samples will be collected from              
              transects of wells and analyzed for concentrations of dissolved                
              nitrogen.  These data will be used to calculate changes in                     
              dissolved nitrogen concentrations along ground-water flow paths in             
              the shallow aquifer beneath the riparian forest and calculate a                
              budget of nitrogen flux, via ground-water flow, between the                    
              riparian forest and stream ecosystems.                                         
                                                                                             
              The research program at H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest is                    
              recognized at national and international levels as a leader in                 
              forest ecosystem research.  Institutional support for this research            
              is exceptional.
