Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Geomagnetic Paleointen- sities and Secular
               Variation from Dated Holocene/Late Pleistocene Lavas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1991        
File        : a9016187

Award Number: 9016187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaul Levi slevi@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0510802   Rock Properties-Mineral                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1574,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in geophysics                   
              between Dr. Shaul Levi, University of Oregon and Dr.                           
              Norbert Bonhommet, University of Paris VI, France.  These                      
              investigators have for the last few years cooperated in                        
              joint paleomagnetic research on dated Holocene/late                            
              Pleistocene lavas in the Massif Central, France.  The                          
              primary objective of the research has been to obtain a                         
              complete vector characterization of the geomagnetic field                      
              for periods prior to the availability of archeomagnetic                        
              data by measuring paleointensities and paleodirections of                      
              the dated units.  In this project, the investigators will                      
              continue this research and expand it to other geographical                     
              areas, such as, for example, La Reunion.                                       
                                                                                             
              High resolution description of the geomagnetic field                           
              requires accurate and well dated magnetic measurements.                        
              Knowledge of the geomagnetic field for times prior to                          
              direct observatory measurements comes from the study of                        
              remanent magnetism recorded in suitable dated rocks and                        
              archeological samples.  In this project, the investigators                     
              propose to take advantage of the small but growing number                      
              of dated Holocene/late Pleistocene lavas to study the                          
              geomagnetic field well beyond the available archeomagnetic                     
              data.  The major effort in this study will be to determine                     
              the paleointensities of the dated lavas of the Chaine des                      
              Puys and the Isle of Ischia.  The results of this research                     
              will contribute to a better understanding and description                      
              of the complete geomagnetic vector for the Holocene/late                       
              Pleistocene period.
