Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: The Evolution of Hot Composite Nuclei with
               Energy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1991  
File        : a9016107

Award Number: 9016107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10075              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Alexander jalexander@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1230,
Abstract    :
              This award will support collaborative research in intermediate                 
              energy nuclear physics between Dr. John Alexander, State                       
              University of New York at Stony Brook and Dr. Serge Kox,                       
              Institute for Nuclear Science, Grenoble, France.  The                          
              objective of the project is to investigate the evolution of                    
              hot composite nuclei with energy.                                              
                                                                                             
              The properties of hot atomic nuclei are of great interest, in                  
              order to understand fusion and fission processes in stars, in                  
              the creation of heavy elements, and in the search for the                      
              possibility of phase transitions in nuclear matter.  Heavy                     
              ion accelerators make it possible to study many combinations                   
              of target-projectile pairs over a very wide energy span.   In                  
              this project, the investigators will carry out a series of                     
              experiments, using the SARA facility at Grenoble (8-27                         
              MeV/nucleon) along with the detector arrays EMRIC and AMPHORA                  
              constructed at the Institute for Nuclear Physics.  For the                     
              interpretation and analysis of results, reaction model                         
              computer codes have been written at Stony Brook that address                   
              the specific and detailed information that can be obtained                     
              from the EMRIC and AMPHORA arrays.  The small angle particle-                  
              particle correlation data from EMRIC will probe the reaction                   
              dynamics by sensing the time intervals between emissions of                    
              particle pairs.  Data from the large-acceptance (82%) AMPHORA                  
              array will provide event by event portraits of the set of                      
              charged particles in individual evaporation cascades. In this                  
              joint effort, the US scientists will benefit significantly                     
              from the use of state of the art French facilities not                         
              routinely available in the US, as well as the opportunity to                   
              work with a group of physicists who are at the frontier of                     
              heavy-ion reaction measurements. The French side will clearly                  
              benefit from the expertise and computer codes developed in                     
              recent years by the Stony Brook group.  The results of this                    
              project may yield important new insight into the collective                    
              properties of highly excited nuclei.
