Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Structural and Dynamical Studies of Living
               Polymers by Neutron Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1995    
File        : a9016061

Award Number: 9016061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra C. Greer sg28@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1958,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in experimental                 
              physical chemistry between Dr. Sandra Greer, University of                     
              Maryland, and the following French scientists:   Professor                     
              Pierre Pfeuty, Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, University                 
              of Paris-Sud, and Drs. R. Bellissent and F. Boue, Laboratoire                  
              Leon Brillouin, Grenoble, France.  The objective of the                        
              proposed research is to carry out structural and dynamical                     
              studies of living polymers by neutron scattering.                              
                                                                                             
              Living polymers are organic polymers which remain in dynamical                 
              chemical equilibrium with their monomers.  The monomers come                   
              and go from the active polymers.  The conversion of monomers                   
              to polymers depends on temperature, commencing only below a                    
              certain "ceiling temperature". Below the ceiling temperature,                  
              the mole fraction and the average chain length of the                          
              polymers increase as the temperature is decreased.  The                        
              investigators propose to study the static and dynamic                          
              properties of these polymers by neutron scattering.  Dr.                       
              Greer and her research group have expertise in the preparation                 
              of samples of living polymers which will remain "alive"                        
              indefinitely.  Dr. Pfeuty is an expert on the statistical                      
              mechanics of living polymers, while the investigators at the                   
              Laboratoire Leon Brillouin have extensive experience in                        
              neutron scattering and polymer research.  In this project,                     
              samples will be prepared at the University of Maryland and                     
              transported to the nuclear reactors at Saclay and Grenoble.                    
              Low angle neutron scattering from living polystyrene in                        
              deuterated cyclohexane to be carried out at Saclay will                        
              provide the investigators with information on the structure                    
              of the polymer chains near the polymerization and near the                     
              tricritical point, and on the rate of relaxation to the                        
              equilibrium chain distribution. Studies with the spin echo                     
              neutron spectrometer at Grenoble will provide information on                   
              the dynamics of the chain motions.  The proposed experiments                   
              cannot presently be carried out in the US, because of a lack                   
              of high-flux small angle neutron scattering facilities.
