Title       : Intermolecular Bonding and Microphase Separation in Multiblock Copolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1991  
File        : a9016959

Award Number: 9016959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart L. Cooper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The three general directions of study are aimed at gaining a                   
              quantitative understanding of phase separation in multiblock                   
              polymers.  The first direction intends to address the microphase               
              separation transition (MST) in polyurethane systems using small-               
              angle x-ray scattering (SAXS), differential scanning calorimetry               
              (DSC), and melt rheometry.  Simplified polyurethane systems will be            
              studied which minimize complications due to hard segment                       
              crystallization and thermal degradation.  The second direction                 
              addresses the problem of crystallization in multiblock polymers.               
              A study of the relationship between crystallization and the MST is             
              proposed using a polyurethane system whose MST may be altered                  
              relative to the hard segment melting point.  A SAXS study of                   
              crystallization and annnealing processes in poly(ether-ester)                  
              copolymers is also proposed, emphasizing changes in hard domain                
              morphology occuring during recrystallization after melting.                    
              Complementary to these studies is work aimed at understanding the              
              role of polymerization conditions on spherulitic texture                       
              development.  The third, and final direction of study is the use of            
              solid-state NMR techniques to characterize polyurethane morphology.            
              Model hard segment compounds will be investigated using cross                  
              polarization/magic-angle spinning techniques with C-13 as the probe            
              nucleus.  This work will be complemented with proton NMR studies in            
              order to gain an understanding of site-specific mobilities in the              
              hard domains.  This work will be extended to polyether-polyurethane            
              copolymers with an aim toward characterization of the interfacial              
              regions.
