Title       : Reactive Radionuclides in the Eastern North Atlantic, Joint Global Ocean Flux
               Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1991     
File        : a9016494

Award Number: 9016494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286914             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Bacon mbacon@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ken O. Buesseler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh D. Livingston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal requests renewed funding for a study of spatial                  
              variations in the distributions and particulate fluxes of a suite              
              of naturally occurring radioactive nuclides, which was initiated               
              as part of the North Atlantic Bloom Experiment of the Joint                    
              Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS).  The radionuclides that are                   
              being measured serve as ocean tracers that can yield fundamental               
              information about the rates of biogeochemical processes that                   
              govern the scavenging of reactive chemical species and the fate                
              of biogenic particles in the oceanic water column.  The study is               
              designed to test the hypothesis that the uptake and release of                 
              soluble chemical species by particulate matter and the formation               
              and destruction of particle aggregates in the oceanic water                    
              column occur at rates that vary both spatially and temporally in               
              response to variations in the rate of plankton production at the               
              sea surface and the flux of organic matter leaving the surface                 
              layer.  The data will be interpreted within the context of                     
              biological rate measurements and other data that are being                     
              collected within the international JGOFS program and will be used              
              to test biogeochemical models.  This study is expected to                      
              contribute to a better understanding of particle fluxes and                    
              dynamics in the ocean, issues that are of broad concern to marine              
              chemistry, biology and geology.
