Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Fundamental Aspects of the Physicsof the Lightning
               Discharge/November 1991/Toyota City, Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1993   
File        : a9016872

Award Number: 9016872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15720              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. P. Krider   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0511600   Weather Modification Research           
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1522,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support the participation of five US scientists                
              in a joint US-Japan seminar on "Fundamental Aspects of the                     
              Physics of the Lightning Discharge".  Research in this area                    
              is important particularly because of the adverse effects of                    
              lightning on the general population.  Much has been learned                    
              in recent years about lightning discharge, particularly on                     
              the understanding of the generation mechanism of lightning,                    
              the discharge process, the control and prediction of lightning                 
              and protection for lightning hazards.  Scientists at NASA                      
              have now perfected the technique of triggering lightning                       
              using small rockets trailing copper wire and the Japanese                      
              have been experimenting with similar techniques.  Further                      
              research is still needed and any new understandings will have                  
              benefits for the whole of society.  Japan and the US are two                   
              of the leading countries in lightning research and therefore                   
              a joint seminar in this area would be both scientifically                      
              productive and timely.                                                         
                                                                                             
              The seminar will be held November 17 - 21 in Toyota City,                      
              Japan. The co-organizers are Professor E Philip Krider,                        
              Director of the Institute of Atmospheric Physics, University                   
              of Arizona, and Dr. Minoru Nakano, Department of Information                   
              and Computer Engineering, Toyota College of Technology,                        
              Toyota, Japan.  Specific topics to be discussed include (1)                    
              the mechanism of lightning discharge; (2) the similarities                     
              and differences between natural lightning, Triggered lightning                 
              and long gap discharges; (3) techniques to trigger lightning                   
              by rocket; and (4) the development of novel techniques for                     
              the prediction and protection of lightning.  There has been                    
              little exchange or collaboration between the US and Japan in                   
              this area in the past and this seminar should therefore be a                   
              step towards bridging the gap between the two communities.                     
              It is probable that some collaborative projects and exchanges                  
              of scientists will result.
