Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Theory and Computer Simulation of Water and
               Aqueous Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1991        
File        : a9016701

Award Number: 9016701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Gubbins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paulette Clancy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1414,
Abstract    :
              This award will facilitate continued cooperation between                       
              chemical engineers at Cornell University and Kyoto University.                 
              The project is part of a larger project in the field of                        
              molecular thermodynamics that includes research on fluids by                   
              means of the methods of statistical mechanics and computer                     
              simulation.  In previous research conducted by the two                         
              groups, the effect of molecular association on the properties                  
              of associating fluids has been studied by simulation for                       
              simple and realistic potential models.  This project will                      
              focus on studies of water and aqueous mixtures.  In particular,                
              the scientists will carry out investigations on theoretical                    
              and simulation studies of water-methanol mixtures; molecular                   
              dynamics simulations of the behavior of water in microporous                   
              materials, including carbons, silicas, and clays; and                          
              simulations of rapid cooling in polyol-water mixtures.  The                    
              Cornell group, led by Professor Keith E. Gubbins and Professor                 
              Paulette Clancy, will provide expertise in the theoretical                     
              methods and simulation techniques for studying micropores and                  
              rapid cooling.  The Japanese group, under the leadership of                    
              Professor Koichiro Nakanishi, has complementary expertise in                   
              developing intermolecular potential models for these systems                   
              and in molecular dynamics techniques applied to aqueous                        
              mixtures.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The long term aim of the research project is to understand                     
              fluids and fluid mixtures of associating molecules (involving                  
              H-bonds, charge-transfer complexes, etc.) in detail at the                     
              molecular level.  The approach has been based on the use of                    
              fundamental statistical, mechanical, mean-field and perturba-                  
              tion theories, as well as Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics                   
              computer simulations.  The simulations are used to test the                    
              theoretical predictions for a well-defined potential model,                    
              and also to investigate phenomena that are difficult or                        
              impossible to study by experiment.
