Title       : The Extent and Cause of Earthquake Strong Ground Motion Variations Measured by
               SMART-2 Accelerograph Array in Taiwan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1991   
File        : a9016813

Award Number: 9016813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Bolt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This action is for support of a new                                            
              earthquake accelerograph array at Hualien,                                     
              Taiwan.  This accelerograph (strong ground                                     
              motion recording) array is referred to as                                      
              SMART-2, an acronym for Strong Motion Array                                    
              in Taiwan,                                                                     
              support for the existing SMART-1                                               
              accelerograph array at Lotung, Taiwan.  It is                                  
              also a continuation of a collaboration with                                    
              the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the                                      
              Electric Power Research Institute in the U.S.                                  
              and the Institute of Earth Sciences, Academia                                  
              Sinica in Taiwan.  In this collaboration, the                                  
              U.S. institutions were initially the major                                     
              supporters, but this has progressively                                         
              changed until now the major support for this                                   
              project is provided by the Academia Sinica.                                    
                                                                                             
              SMART-1 has logged a large number of                                           
              earthquake strong ground motion records,                                       
              which have been used extensively by                                            
              researchers and practitioners in the United                                    
              States.  SMART-2 is on harder soil, which is                                   
              more typical of the foundation material on                                     
              which most major structures are erected; thus                                  
              it promises to provide strong motion records                                   
              of even greater value to engineers.  As                                        
              operation of SMART-1 will continue, it is                                      
              expected that SMART-1 and SMART-2 will record                                  
              the same earthquakes, yielding valuable                                        
              information on the propagation of earthquake                                   
              motions, especially those motions close to                                     
              the epicenter.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The Institute of Earth Sciences is                                             
              responsible for purchasing and installing the                                  
              digital recorders, preparation of the                                          
              instrument sites,providing staff for the                                       
              SMART-2 operations, and for developing the                                     
              algorithms used tom process the strong motion                                  
              records.  The NSF is responsible for (1)                                       
              helping establish the dissemination and basic                                  
              processing of seismic motions recorded by                                      
              SMART-2, (2) assisting in the integration of                                   
              SMART-2 data with that from the smaller scale                                  
              three-dimensional array operated by utility                                    
              engineering groups for studies of soil-                                        
              structure interaction; and (3) the initiation                                  
              of basic research into the variation of                                        
              strong ground motion and other ground motion                                   
              problems treated first at SMART-1 on "soft"                                    
              soil.
