Title       : US-Commonwealth of Independent States Cooperative Research on Regulation of
               Microtubule Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1992        
File        : a9016667

Award Number: 9016667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc W. Kirschner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1134      FUNCTINL ORGANIZATN & DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The unusual polymerization behavior of microtubules known as                   
              dynamic instability is thought to play an important role in                    
              morphogenesis.  The means by which this behavior is regulated in               
              vivo is very poorly understood.  Experiments are proposed to look              
              at global regulation of microtubule stability in cells, and in                 
              particular to look at the effect of partial ATP depletion and                  
              microinjection of specific kinases and phosphatases.  Additional               
              proteins that show phosphorylation-dependent or ATP-dependent                  
              binding to microtubules in vitro will be sought, and the                       
              relationship of microtubule stability as measured by nocodazole                
              sensitivity (the basis for almost all previous analyses), and                  
              stability, as measured by the incorporation of biotin-labelled                 
              tubulin, will be explored.  Further studies are planned to                     
              determine whether stable microtubules in vivo are capped at their              
              ends or inhibited from depolymerization by binding of proteins                 
              along the length of the polymer.  The detailed mechanisms by which             
              microtubule associated proteins and microtubule motor proteins                 
              contribute to microtubule stability will be explored by                        
              transfection and biotin-tubulin injection.  In these experiments               
              a study of the structure of specific microtubule-associated                    
              proteins will be combined with in vivo studies of physiological                
              regulation of microtubules in the hope of understanding how the                
              morphogenesis of microtubule arrays is generated.                              
                                                                                             
              "Microtubules" are sub-microscopic structures, small tubes, within             
              cells that serve as a component of the internal "skeleton" that                
              determines a cell's shape.  Microtubules also serve as tracks,                 
              along which other sub-cellular structures move.  Microtubules are              
              unstable structures that polymerize or depolymerize in response to             
              changing physiological conditions within the cell.  This US-USSR               
              cooperative research involves two of the world's leading                       
              experts on microtubule structure and function in a study of the                
              mechanisms that control microtubule stability.  The results of this            
              collaborative research should provide important new information                
              concerning the biochemical factors that determine where, within                
              cells, microtubules form, how many form, and what determines their             
              length.  This knowledge will be an important contribution to our               
              fundamental understanding of how cells function.
