Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Hydrodynamics of Fluid Particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1995        
File        : a9016321

Award Number: 9016321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12450              (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. Homsy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Stefan G. Shaqfeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1443,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              George Homsy, Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford                     
              University and Dr. Elisabeth Guazelli, Ecole Superieure de                     
              Physique et Chimie Industrielles, Paris, France.  The objective                
              of the project is to investigate the hydrodynamics of fluid                    
              particle systems.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The investigators will study hydrodynamic effects in                           
              suspensions and fluidized beds.  The behavior of such                          
              dispersed multiphase systems is important in a number of                       
              fields of science and technology.  These include applications                  
              in handling and processing materials such as:  1)  composites                  
              and emulsions, 2) chemical processing of fluids, as in                         
              fluidized bed reactors, 3) environmental fluid mechanics,                      
              such as sediment and nutrient transport in natural flows and                   
              4) separation technologies, such as flotation, sedimentation                   
              and clarification.  Despite intensive study of these fields                    
              over the last several decades, there are many fundamental                      
              aspects of the mechanical behavior of such systems that                        
              remain poorly understood, in particular, the interactions                      
              between the particles making up the dispersed phase. In this                   
              project, the investigators propose to carry out:  1)                           
              theoretical and numerical studies of hydrodynamic                              
              interactions between particles in suspension, and 2)                           
              experimental studies of the behavior of sedimenting suspen-                    
              sions, fluidized beds, and so-called "ferro fluids", i.e.                      
              suspensions of magnetic Brownian particles.  The primary                       
              focus of the French group will be the experimental studies,                    
              while that of the US will be theoretical and numerical                         
              modeling. The project will benefit from the availability of                    
              special NMR facilities for flow visualization in the French                    
              laboratory.
