Title       : A Model International Engineering Exchange Program: MSU/RWTH-Aachen, and
               Kaiserslautern
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9016477

Award Number: 9016477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles A. Garris                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244145             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. McGrath mcgrath@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Lloyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig W. Somerton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Amritlal M. Dhanak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Foss  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1414,5936,5980,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project supports a three year program. This program may                   
              serve as a model for future programs to be considered by the                   
              National Science Foundation (NSF).  This project includes a of                 
              undergraduate and graduate level international engineering                     
              exchange and research program between the Mechanical                           
              Engineering and Chemical Engineering Departments at Michigan                   
              State University (MSU) and the technical universities                          
              (Rheinisch Westfalische Hochschule (RWTH) in Aachen, Germany                   
              and the University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germay.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              The project supports an international engineering exchange                     
              program within the National Science Foundation- enhancing NSF                  
              efforts in the direction of mechanical and chemical                            
              engineering.  This project represents an opportunity to invest                 
              in the up-grading of an established program with an unusually                  
              strong balance between instruction and research components                     
              that goes beyond the traditional research-only or intstuction-                 
              only exchange programs.                                                        
                                                                                             
              NSF support is provided for a three-phase program.  Phase I                    
              involves strengthening the undergraduate component of an                       
              existing program.  Phase II encourages and involves short                      
              term collaborative research projects which will explore and                    
              develop the bases for long-term, in-depth collaborative                        
              research projects involving MSU and faculty at Aachen and                      
              Kaiserslautern.  Successful Phase II projects will be used as                  
              the basis for submitting regular research proposals for Phase                  
              III funding which will support multi-year, full-scale                          
              collaborative research projects.  It is anticipated that                       
              German academies will also seek appropriate support from their                 
                                                                                             
              indigenous funding sources for these efforts.                                  
                                                                                             
              In a supplementary portion of this project, the program will                   
              provide partial support for initiating the development and                     
              implementation of a few engineering courses taught in German                   
              at Michigan State University, and some faculty support to                      
              administration and further develop this program.
