Title       : U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research on Plasma Processing of Semi-Conductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1994      
File        : a9016638

Award Number: 9016638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emily B. Rudin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15725              (Estimated)
Investigator: Santosh K. Srivastava santosh@scnl.jpl.nasa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jet Propulsion Laboratory
	      
	      Pasadena, CA  91109    /   -

NSF Program : 5913      BRAZIL
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1771,
Abstract    :
              This award supports cooperative research on plasma processing                  
              of semi conductors as a collaborative research program                         
              between Santosh Srivastava of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, G.                    
              G. B. deSouza and A. C. de A. e Souza of the Federal University                
              of Rio de Janeiro and I. Iga, of the Federal University of                     
              Sao Carlos (UFSCar), Brazil.  The three groups will generate                   
              complementary data on the electron impact collision cross                      
              section for molecules of interest in the low temperature                       
              plasma deposition an etching of semi-conducting materials.                     
              The technique of low density plasma deposition and etching is                  
              used in the field of micro-electronics.  Typically, gas                        
              pressures in these plasmas are such that number densities of                   
              molecules vary from 10.9 to 10.12 cm-3 and electron energies                   
              range from  1 ev to 10 3v.  They are highly non-thermal and                    
              mainly the electron collision processes determine their                        
              character.  Therefore, for modeling these plasmas an accurate                  
              knowledge of several different types of electron collision                     
              and photo-absorption cross section is important.                               
                                                                                             
              In order to characterize all important physical properties                     
              related to ion formation by electron impact on molecules of                    
              present interest one has to know all three aspects of ion                      
              formation discussed in the previous section i.e. i) absolute                   
              values of cross sections for the ion formation by electron                     
              impact ii) photoionization cross sections and ion-ion                          
              coincidences, and iii) kinetic energy spectrum of fragment                     
              ions.  At JPL the proposer has expertise and instrumentation                   
              for the measurement of absolute values of cross sections in                    
              the electron impact energy range from threshold to 1 KeV.  At                  
              UFRJ Drs. G. G. B. deSouza and A. C. de A. e Souza have                        
              established techniques and instrumentation for the study of                    
              the second aspect.  At UFSCar Drs. Ione Iga, Lee Mu Tao, and                   
              Jose Carlos Nogueira have instrumentation for the measurement                  
              of the kinetic energy of the fragment ions.  Thus, the work                    
              performed by the three groups will be complimentary.  A                        
              collaborative effort has already generated important data                      
              concerning molecules of present interest and will continue to                  
              do so in the future.
