Title       : US-Japan Cooperative Research: Pion-Nucleus Interactions Atand Above the Delta
               Resonance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9016852

Award Number: 9016852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Redwine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1232,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a cooperative research project in                      
              medium energy physics between Professor Robert P. Redwine of                   
              the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Professor Osamu                  
              Hashimoto of the Institute for Nuclear Study, University of                    
              Tokyo.  The scientists will cooperate in investigating the                     
              interactions of pions with nuclei in the energy range around                   
              and above the delta resonance.  This project is based on a                     
              great amount of work that has been carried out in the past 15                  
              years on interactions in the delta resonance region, especially                
              at LAMPF in Los Alamos.   This experimental and theoretical                    
              work has increased considerably the understanding of the                       
              interaction mechanism itself and specific nuclear structure                    
              issues as well.  As expected, many aspects of the pion-nucleus                 
              interaction in this region are dominated by the formation of                   
              the delta resonance in the nucleus.  This has proved to be                     
              both an advantage and a disadvantage.  As the delta does                       
              appear to be so dominant, use of this dominance in descriptions                
              of the interaction have been reasonably successful.  On the                    
              other hand, this dominance can mask other interesting physics                  
              issues.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              In this project, the investigators will involve scientists                     
              from several other leading U.S. and Japanese research                          
              institutions who have been conducting experiments of this                      
              type.  In particular, scientists from the Brookhaven National                  
              Laboratory and the Japanese Laboratory for High Energy                         
              Physics (KEK) will be involved.  With the commissioning of                     
              new spectrometers at the KEK laboratory in Japan, studies                      
              with higher energy pions will enter a new phase and U.S.                       
              scientists will have the opportunity to play an important                      
              role in this opening field.
