Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Finite Element Anaylsis of Reinforced Concrete/June
               1991/New York, New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9016508

Award Number: 9016508
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christian Meyer meyer@cucevx.civil.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for the participation of ten US                    
              scientists in a joint US-Japan seminar on "Finite Element                      
              Analysis of Reinforced Concrete".  The modelling of the                        
              behavior of reinforced concrete, particularly its dynamic                      
              behavior, is an extremely important field.  Increased                          
              demands are being placed on certain special structures, such                   
              as nuclear power plant facilities and offshore drilling                        
              platforms, and hence there is a growing need for a more                        
              comprehensive analysis tool to aid in the design of such                       
              structures.  The development of the finite element method has                  
              made it possible to analyze many different kinds of structures                 
              and to model their geometry more realistically, thus enabling                  
              researchers to gain new insights into the behavior of                          
              reinforced concrete structures. The research undertaken by US                  
              and Japanese scientists in this area is complementary, US                      
              researchers having made very valuable basic contributions to                   
              the advancement of finite element methods while Japanese                       
              researchers having been much more active in transferring                       
              those advances into practice.  The seminar should therefore                    
              contribute both to the documentation of recent advances in each                
              country, and to getting new techniques being developed into                    
              practice, particularly in the US.                                              
                                                                                             
              The seminar is to be held on June 3-6, 1991 at Columbia                        
              University, New York.  The co-organizers are Professor                         
              Christian Meyer, Department of Civil Engineering and                           
              Engineering Mechanics, Columbia University, and Professor                      
              Hiroshi Noguchi, Department of Architectural Engineering, Chiba                
              University, Japan. The seminar will be divided into two                        
              parts, the first part concentrating upon the state of the art                  
              and the second on verification and application to practical                    
              engineering problems.  Specific topics to be discussed at the                  
              seminar include (1) constitutive models; (2) fracture                          
              mechanics; (3) reinforced concrete models; (4) time-dependent                  
              behavior and behavior under dynamic loading; and (5)                           
              computational aspects. This will be the second seminar on                      
              this subject under the U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science                          
              Program, the first being held in 1985. It is expected that this                
              seminar, as with the first seminar, will lead to increased                     
              exchanges of information and more extensive research collabor-                 
              ation.
