Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Rewriting and Rule- Completion Techniques for
               Horn Theories with Equality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1991  
File        : a9016100

Award Number: 9016100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5410               (Estimated)
Investigator: Hantao Zhang hzhang@cs.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2865,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Hantao Zhang, Department of Computer Science, University of                    
              Iowa, and Drs. Emmanuel Kounalis and Michael Rusinowitch,                      
              Centre de Recherche en Informatique de Nancy (CRIN), France.                   
              The objective of the project is to justify good techniques to                  
              be used in Logic Programming for handling the equality                         
              relation.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Horn Logic, a restriction of first order logic, has provided                   
              a most useful logical basis for many applications in computer                  
              science, for example, expert systems, database systems,                        
              algebraic specifications, logic programming, and symbolic                      
              calculus. In many applications of Horn Logic, it is important                  
              to incorporate the equality relation into the logic. Because                   
              Horn clauses will be interpreted as conditional rewrite                        
              rules and rewriting techniques will be used to handle the                      
              equality relation, the investigators in this project propose                   
              to carry out theoretical research to study different rewriting                 
              and completion techniques.  The results of the study will be                   
              implemented in a software system called RRL (the Rewrite Rule                  
              Laboratory), a theorem prover for experimenting with and                       
              developing new automated reasoning procedures based on                         
              rewrite methods. RRL has been successfully used for solving                    
              problems often considered a challenge for mechanized theorem                   
              provers, including significant applications in verification                    
              and specification of hardware and software.  The focus of                      
              this project will be to implement in RRL a Prolog-like                         
              interpreter and to experiment with different rewriting                         
              techniques.  Further investigations will also be conducted on                  
              methods for analyzing structural properties of logic programs,                 
              such as consistency, termination and definitional completeness                 
              and for computing in incompletely specified logic programs.                    
              The project will benefit from the complementary expertise of                   
              the US and French investigators in symbolic computation.
