Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Interstellar Clouds and Circumstellar Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9016078

Award Number: 9016078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred E. Glassgold al.glassgold@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Langer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Huggins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1215,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in astronomy                    
              between Drs. Alfred Glassgold, W. D. Langer and P. J.                          
              Huggins, New York University and Dr. A. O. Omont, Institute                    
              for Astrophysics, Paris, France.  The investigators propose a                  
              joint program to investigate interstellar clouds and circumst-                 
              ellar matter, which will focus in three areas:  circumsteller                  
              chemistry, multifrequency studies of the physical properties                   
              of interstellar clouds, and planetary nebulae.                                 
                                                                                             
              Part one of the project seeks to elucidate the physical and                    
              dynamical properties of nearby interstellar clouds by                          
              complementary observations with radio telescopes in the US                     
              and France.  Part two involves further significant development                 
              of the photochemical model for the circumstellar envelopes of                  
              red giants with large mass-loss rates.  The last part of the                   
              program deals with observations of the molecular component of                  
              planetary nebulae, mainly with the IRAM 30 millimeter wave                     
              telescope.  The objective is to elucidate the evolutionary                     
              properties of planetary nebulae, particularly their connection                 
              with red giant envelopes and the structure of ionized                          
              nebulae.  The use of the French-German IRAM telescope will make                
              available observations of circumstellar envelopes, including                   
              planetary nebulae, that cannot be obtained with instrumentation                
              now available in the US.  The project will benefit from the                    
              extensive and complementary expertise of the US and French                     
              investigators in the areas of interstellar clouds and                          
              circumstellar matter.  The results of this research are                        
              expected to advance significantly the understanding of                         
              several important aspects of the late stages of stellar                        
              evolution.
