Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Structural Phenomena in Quasi-One-Dimensional
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9016586

Award Number: 9016586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13880              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Epstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1762,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research in solid state                  
              chemistry between Dr. Arthur Epstein, Ohio State University                    
              and Dr. J.P. Pouget, University of Paris-Sud, Orsay, France.                   
              The objective of the project is to investigate structural                      
              phenomema in quasi-one-dimensional systems.  More specifically,                
              the researchers propose to explore the subtle relationships                    
              between local molecular and polymeric crystallographic order                   
              and electronic and magnetic phenomena in low dimensional                       
              solids, especially with respect to the polyaniline family of                   
              polymers and the ferromagnetic charge transfer salts.                          
                                                                                             
              The study of electronic and magnetic phenomena in low                          
              dimensional organic and organometallic solids has made                         
              revolutionary advances in the past two decades.  A key aspect                  
              of these advances is the exploration of properties of new                      
              material systems and determination of the dependence of these                  
              properties on subtle local structural phenomena. An essential                  
              aspect for the advancement of scientific study of these                        
              systems is the knowledge of the local structure and its                        
              variation with temperature and chemical modification.  This                    
              cooperative research program combines the structural expertise                 
              of the University of Paris-Sud group with the experience in                    
              integrated optical, magnetic and electrical studies of the                     
              Ohio State group.  Drs. Epstein and Pouget have a decade-long                  
              history of joint research efforts to uncover the effects of                    
              local order on the one and three dimensional electronic                        
              phenomena in molecular and polymeric systems.  Dr. Pouget's                    
              laboratory is one of the few in the world which is set up                      
              specifically to study the subtle orders in materials and Dr.                   
              Pouget himself is a leading authority in structural phenomena                  
              of low-dimensional solids.  The results of this research                       
              should significantly enhance understanding of the physical                     
              properties of polyaniline in terms of chemical structure.
