Title       : Image Compression Using Models of Human Visual System and Subband Vector
               Quantization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1992     
File        : a9016331

Award Number: 9016331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113886             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. John Mathews mathews@ee.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is on perceptually lossless or very low             
              distortion, low-rate image coders using subband vector quantization            
              and models of the human visual system (HVS).  The use of visual                
              models in the image coders attempts to remove the psychophysical               
              redundancies present in the images in addition to the statistical              
              redundancies that most image coders attempt to remove.  Two                    
              different strategies that make use of the current knowledge of the             
              HVS are being employed in the data compression systems:  (1)                   
              Quantize the intensity image after processing it with a homomorphic            
              visual model.  The idea behind this approach is that the intensity             
              image, when processed with the visual model, will look more like               
              the image that the "eye sees" and therefore minimizing the                     
              distortion in the transformed image is appropriate.  (2) The second            
              approach is to define a masking function for the image to be                   
              quantized.  This function defines threshold values for each pixel              
              of the image such that distortions of magnitude smaller than the               
              threshold function will not be perceived by the eye.  The approach             
              then is to develop a data compression system such that the                     
              quantization produces errors of magnitude smaller than this                    
              threshold function.  The specific problems that are being studied              
              are: (1) Development of a subband vector quantizer that is equipped            
              with a multichannel, homomorphic model of the HVS.  (2) Development            
              of a subband vector quantizer that used a perceptual masking                   
              function.  A combination of the two schemes, as well as                        
              incorporation of predictive vector quantization and/or optimum pre-            
               post-processing filters into the subband coder is being explored.             
              Preliminary work on extending the ideas to color image sequence                
              coding problems are also being conducted.
