Title       : Network Protocols for Broadcast Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9016361

Award Number: 9016361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195636             (Estimated)
Investigator: P M. Melliar-Smith pmms@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louise E. Moser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 The computer of tomorrow will be a fault tolerant network in                
              which communication is a fully integrated function equal in                    
              significance to storage and processing.  In such a network,                    
              challenging problems arise from the need to maintain consistency               
              of the data and of processing.  These problems are currently solved            
              using agreement protocols that require many message frames to be               
              exchanged with adverse effects on network performance.  The                    
              approach of this research to maintaining consistency is based on               
              two novel protocols.  The Trans protocol provides efficient                    
              reliable broadcast or multicast communication.  The Total protocol             
              promptly places a total order on message frames and achieves                   
              distributed agreement in the presence of communication faults and              
              of fail-stop, timing, omission, and Byzantine processor faults.                
              The Trans and Total protocols are intended to be used in local area            
              networks such as Ethernet, token ring or FDDI ring.  By exploiting             
              the inherent broadcast characteristics of the physical                         
              communication medium, substantial improvements in performance can              
              be achieved.  The design of fault-tolerant networks is greatly                 
              simplified when consistency between distributed components of the              
              network is maintained by the communication function.
