Title       : Theoretical Astrophysics Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1993     
File        : a9016810

Award Number: 9016810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moshe Elitzur moshe@pa.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This grant supports Dr. Elitzur's research on projects which share             
              the common theme of application of radiative transfer techniques               
              for line analysis in various astronomical environments.  The topics            
              include studies of star forming regions; the envelopes of late-type            
              stars; and photoionized regions, such as the accretion disks of                
              cataclysmic variable stars.  The structure of and physical                     
              conditions in these various astronomical objects will be studieed              
              from their line emission in the ultraviolet, optical, infrared, and            
              radio spectral regions.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Dr. Elitzur applies radiative transfer techniques to four specific             
              topics.  (1) The polarization of line radiation provides important             
              information on the properties of the source where it was generated.            
              A solid theoretical framework is needed to interpret the                       
              observational data.  (2) Two of the more prominant properties of               
              star forming regions are strong maser emission from hydroxyl and               
              water vapor and powerful outflows of material.  The theoretical                
              implications of both issues are addressed by Dr. Elitzur.  (3) In              
              the area of late-type stars a long range goal of Dr. Elitzur's                 
              research is the construction of a coherent picture for the outer               
              envelopes, where a multitude of interesting effects are observed.              
              (4) The study of accretion disks has steadily gained importance in             
              the last few years with the mounting evidence that disks are a                 
              common occurrence in astronomical systems of all scale sizes.
