Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Interactions of Swift Charged Particles with
               Valence Electrons Near Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1993      
File        : a9016749

Award Number: 9016749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12636              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim E. Burgdorfer burg@utkux.utcc.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1250,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for a two year cooperative                         
              research project between Professor Joachim Burgdorfer and                      
              Professor Stuart B Elston, Department of Physics and Astronomy,                
              University of Tennessee, and the Quantum Physics Group at the                  
              Department of Engineering, Kyoto University, Japan, led by                     
              Professor Michi-hiko Mannami.  The purpose of the project is                   
              to undertake a collaborative theoretical and experimental                      
              study of the collision interactions of fast charged particles                  
              with valence electrons near surfaces.  Scattering from clean                   
              well defined surfaces at glancing angles provides the                          
              opportunity to study collision processes at large impact                       
              parameters, thereby accentuating interactions with valence                     
              electrons in the proximity of the surface while suppressing                    
              contributions from ionic cores.  The project will involve                      
              firstly a theoretical and experimental investigation of the                    
              energy and angular distributions of convoy electrons ejected                   
              in glancing angle ion-surface collisions as a function of                      
              projectile charge state and velocity, and surface structure                    
              and composition.  Secondly a computer simulation of the                        
              reflection of scattered ions will be developed, with particular                
              emphasis on the simultaneous evolution of electron projectile                  
              states and the dynamical response of the valence electron.                     
              Finally a theoretical and experimental investigation of the                    
              yield and angular distribution of convoy electrons produced                    
              by channeled fast ions will be carried out.                                    
                                                                                             
              There is strong overlap between the work of the groups at                      
              Kyoto University and the University of Tennessee, with                         
              complementing capabilities in both theory and experiment.                      
              The group in the US, for example, have extensive numerical                     
              experience in Monte-Carlo simulations for electronic transport                 
              in solids, where as the Kyoto group have developed a simulation                
              code for ionic scattering from solid surfaces.  This project                   
              should provide detailed new information on the contribution                    
              of delocalized electrons to excitation processes, on the                       
              collective response of conduction electrons and its influence                  
              on secondary electron emission and, more broadly, on the                       
              usefulness of inelastic collision processes as a tool of                       
              surface diagnostics.
