Title       : Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) Support of U.S. National
               Committee and Dues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1990 
File        : a9016596

Award Number: 9016596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Blanpied                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57466              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gesina C. Carter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 5931      INTERNATIONAL INFO & ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The globalization of science is occurring in parallel with a rapid             
              expansion in the speed and sophistication of information and data              
              handling technologies, and their use for scientific purposes.                  
              Developments in these areas permit the planning and execution of               
              large scale scientific programs.  Such programs, in turn, frequently           
              require sophisticated data handling and processing techniques.  In             
              view of the multilateral character of many large scale scientific              
              programs, the handling, processing, and transmission of scientific             
              data has a major international enterprise in its own right, one                
              that is vital to those large scale programs.                                   
                                                                                             
              The Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) is a                 
              non-governmental, multilateral body, affiliated with the Interna-              
              tional Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU), whose principal                    
              objective is to facilitate worldwide communication on problems                 
              related to scientific data.  Like other members of the ICSU                    
              family, CODATA is comprised of non-governmental National Member                
              Organizations.  The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) fulfills                
              that function in the United States.  In the past, NAS's request to             
              support US participation in CODATA has been limited to payment of              
              dues, shared jointly by NSF, NIST, and DOE.  The NAS, in order to              
              upgrade US participation, has established a U.S. National Committee            
              (USNC) for CODATA similar to those that guide U.S. participation               
              in the ICSU unions; it proposes to establish a core program based              
              on tht committee that would be managed by a full-time NAS                      
              professional.  NSF is being asked to support 30 percent of that                
              core program (along with NIST and DOE), and pay one-third of the               
              $40,000 US annual dues for CODATA.
