Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Comparisons of Risk Attitudes and Perceptions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1993      
File        : a9016769

Award Number: 9016769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Slovic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Decision Sci Res Inst
	      1201 Oak Street
	      Eugene, OR  974013519    503/485-2400

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              79        Psychology Sciences NEC                 
Program Ref : 1321,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a cooperative research project between                     
              Dr. Paul Slovic of the Decision Science Research Institute in                  
              Eugene, Oregon and Professor Hirotada Hirose, Department of                    
              Psychology, Tokyo Women's Christian University.  Specifically                  
              it supports an initial working group meeting between the U.S.                  
              and Japanese researchers on a project entitled "Comparisons                    
              of Risk Attitudes and Perceptions."  This project is also                      
              supported by a grant from the NSF Decision, Risk, and                          
              Management Science Program.   It is an ambitious project to                    
              address an important issue of national consequence.  Although                  
              the United States and Japan are highly industrialized                          
              countries, their approaches to managing technological risks                    
              are quite different.  The United States relies primarily on a                  
              "confrontational model" characterized by adversarial                           
              relationships between interested parties, widespread public                    
              participation, and extensive use of the legal system.  The                     
              Japanese system, in comparison, is based on a "cooperative                     
              model" centered upon private negotiations between government                   
              and industry with an  emphasis on consensus building.  The                     
              investigators in the  cooperative study hypothesize that                       
              these contrasting approaches are reflected in major differences                
              in public attitudes and  perceptions of risk in general and                    
              risk management in  particular.                                                
                                                                                             
              The investigators will examine these differences by carrying                   
              out parallel studies of risk attitudes and risk perceptions                    
              in both countries.  They will draw upon their extensive prior                  
              experience in analyzing the components of risk in various                      
              populations.  In addition to providing information that will                   
              be relevant to future interactions between the two countries,                  
              this comparison will increase basic understanding of national                  
              risk-management styles and approaches.
