Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Formal Verification of Finite State Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1993       
File        : a9016694

Award Number: 9016694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19822              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund M. Clarke emc@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2875,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for a two year research project                    
              between Professor Edmund Clarke, School of Computer Science,                   
              Carnegie Mellon University, and Professor Hiromi Hiraishi,                     
              Department of Information Science, Kyoto University, Japan.                    
              The aim of the project is to investigate formal verification                   
              methods for finite state systems.  These systems arise                         
              naturally in the design of computer software and communication                 
              protocols, and their correctness is likely to become an                        
              important issue in the future.  Recent work has shown that                     
              finite systems can often be verified automatically by                          
              constructing and analyzing state-graph models of system                        
              behavior.  However these methods rely on decision algorithms                   
              which explicitly construct the state-graph model and because                   
              the number of states in a model may grow exponentially with                    
              the number of concurrently executing components, the complexity                
              of systems that can be verified has been limited.  This                        
              research will focus on new techniques which avoid this                         
              problem, so that formal verification can be applied to                         
              systems of realistic complexity.  A number of alternative                      
              techniques have been proposed.  One example is to exploit the                  
              hierarchical structure of the circuit in the verification                      
              process.  Each individual component may be verified separately                 
              and the results combined to infer properties of the global                     
              behavior of the system.  A second approach is to implement                     
              parallel algorithms that will run on supercomputers.                           
                                                                                             
              Both the US and Japanese researchers involved in this project                  
              have been developing techniques for detecting these design                     
              errors and recent research by both provides strong evidence                    
              that it is possible to develop practical tools for this                        
              purpose.  The research skills of the two researchers are                       
              complementary and each country has much to learn from the                      
              other about ways of dealing with this problem.  If successful                  
              this project should lead to new techniques for automatic                       
              design verification of finite state systems.
