Title       : Development of Cell Culture Analog Systems for Use With Pharmokinetic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1991  
File        : a9016798

Award Number: 9016798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Shuler mls@cheme.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Babish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              The ultimate goal of this work is to develop techniques to                     
              better evaluate the potential toxicity of chemicals to                         
              humans.  Currently, toxicological and pharmacological                          
              testing of chemicals requires large numbers of animals.                        
              Data obtained from whole animal studies are difficult to                       
              accurately extrapolate across species lines and to effects                     
              at low doses.  Basic metabolic interactions are difficult                      
              to monitor.  On both economic and ethical grounds it is                        
              desirable to reduce the number of animals utilized in such                     
              testing.  Advances in biotechnology and cell culture                           
              present an opportunity to develop alternative methods that                     
              can yield both better data and reduced use of animals.                         
                                                                                             
              This work will combine pharmokinetic models and in vitro                       
              cell culture techniques to construct a direct physical                         
              analog of the whole animal.  This concept will be tested                       
              by constructing a mouse analog - using two types of lung                       
              cells and hepatocytes from the liver.  Direct observations                     
              can be made of molecular level mechanisms for                                  
              biotransformations of xenobiotics.  Further incorporation                      
              of mechanistic information into the pharmokinetic model                        
              will allow extrapolation of observations.  Controversies                       
              on which cytochromes are responsible for bioactivation of                      
              napthalene and on which cell types are primarily                               
              responsible for its activation will be addressed.
