Title       : U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research: Competition Between Microspores Within Tetrads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1991     
File        : a9016019

Award Number: 9016019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jeanne E. Hudson                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6110               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Mulcahy mulcahy@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5920      ITALY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
              This award will support Professor David Mulcahy of the                         
              University of Massachusetts in a research collaboration with                   
              Professor Mauro Cresti of the University of Siena, Italy.                      
              The investigators intend to study microbial-like competition                   
              among pollen grains.  Preliminary data indicate that while                     
              microspores (pollen grains-to-be) are still united in                          
              tetrads, they are competing with each other for resources.                     
              The major evidence for such intratetrad competition is that                    
              the deletion of one to three members within the tetrad is                      
              characterized by increases in the size of the viable members.                  
              The extent to which surviving members are able to absorb the                   
              resources of aborted members, the degree to which viable                       
              members compete among themselves, and the extent to which                      
              ultrastructural changes may express this competition are some                  
              of the topics that will be addressed by this research.                         
                                                                                             
              In the angiosperms (and gymnosperms) pollen represents a                       
              microbial-like system of extremely large population and                        
              genotypes.  Although pollen comprises a small portion of the                   
              angiosperm life cycle, it expresses, and thus exposes to                       
              selection, approximately 60% of all spirophytically expressed                  
              genes.  This system is particularly effective in the                           
              angiosperms and may represent a significant contributor to                     
              the adaptive superiority of that group in the world flora.                     
              By combining the genetic approach of the U.S. researcher with                  
              the focus on pollen microstructure of the Italian investigator,                
              this study will not only examine a newly appreciated aspect                    
              of microspore competition, it may also reveal information                      
              which could be useful in using pollen selection to develop                     
              plants resistant to agronomically and ecologically important                   
              stresses.
