Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Study of Neutron-Proton Bremsstrahlung
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1991        
File        : a9016647

Award Number: 9016647
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Wender   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald O. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin F. Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mario E. Schillaci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Los Alamos National Lab
	      
	      Los Alamos, NM  87545    /   -

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1230,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between Dr.                     
              Stephen Wender and his research group at Los Alamos National                   
              Laboratory and Dr. Jean-Alain Pinston and colleagues at the                    
              Institute for Nuclear Science, Grenoble, France.                               
                                                                                             
              The investigators propose to measure the neutron-proton                        
              bremsstrahlung (NPB) cross section, using the continuous,                      
              high energy neutron source at the Los Alamos Meson Physics                     
              Facility.  Data for this reaction are very sparse and some of                  
              the existing data may be in error.  This experiment is                         
              important for several areas of nuclear physics.  A major goal                  
              is to map out the NBP cross section up to 400 MeV incident                     
              neutron energy to investigate meson exchange current.  This                    
              experiment will also shed light on the origin of high-energy                   
              gamma rays seen in heavy-ion reactions.  The first year will                   
              involve measurements of gamma rays using a multi-element                       
              detector.  In the second year, the investigators will detect                   
              gamma rays in coincidence with recoil proteins.  The final                     
              configuration may be a triple coincidence, with the scattered                  
              neutron detected as well. The collaboration with the Grenoble                  
              group is essential because of their knowledge and experience                   
              with multi-element gamma-ray detector arrays.  Such detectors                  
              are vital because of their insensitivity to backgrounds.
