Title       : Dissertation Research: Predator-Prey Interactions Between Fish and Drifting
               Invertebrates in Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1991   
File        : a9016445

Award Number: 9016445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter F. Sale   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This dissertation improvement award is for a project to test                   
              effects of fish predation on the structure of benthic                          
              invertebrate communities in streams.  Direct and indirect effects              
              of predatory fish on invertebrate behavior and on dispersal are                
              the major components of this research.                                         
                                                                                             
              Field sampling will provide background information on                          
              relationships between the distributions of fish, drifting and                  
              benthic invertebrates.  Field manipulation of fish density in                  
              enclosed sections of stream will test effects of fish on drift                 
              behaviour and dispersal.  A further manipulation will test the                 
              effect of fish on benthic community composition in the absence of              
              replenishment by drift from upstream.                                          
                                                                                             
              Experiments in a laboratory stream will test hypotheses about                  
              behavioural interactions between fish and invertebrates.  These                
              interactions will be filmed and recorded on video cassette for                 
              analysis.  Researchers will investigate details of the predatory               
              behaviour of fishes in the context of their effect on                          
              invertebrate behaviour.  In addition, the research will test                   
              behavioural responses of invertebrates in the benthos and drift                
              to fish and the cues used by invertebrates to detest the presence              
              of fish.  The research will contribute to the conceptual basis of              
              stream ecology and to the information base useful in stream                    
              fisheries management.
