Title       : Molecular Analyses of the Population Dynamics and Activity of a Newly Identified
               Bacterioplankton Group: The SAR11 Cluster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9016373

Award Number: 9016373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Giovannoni giovanns@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,9117,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Within the past decade it has become evident that                              
              bacterioplankton contribute significantly to biomass and                       
              biogeochemical activity in planktonic systems.  Until recently                 
              progress in identifying the microbial species which constitute                 
              these communities was slow because the majority of the                         
              organisms present (direct counts) could not be recovered in                    
              culture.  Recently introduced molecular techniques are                         
              providing the means to study the population dynamics of                        
              uncultivated microbial species.                                                
                                                                                             
              This project is based on molecular data which demonstrates the                 
              existence of a novel microbial group, the SAR11 cluster, and                   
              indicates that this group accounts for about  20% of the non-                  
              cyanobacterial microbial activity in the Sargasso Sea. The                     
              SAR11 cluster is a related group of species which were detected                
              by cloning 16S ribosomal DNA genetic markers from a natural                    
              Sargasso Sea bacterioplankton population.  This research will                  
              extend earlier observations by providing time-series and depth                 
              profile information on the distribution of these organisms at                  
              the BATS station in the Sargasso Sea, where they were first                    
              observed.  The dynamics of seasonal changes in the Sargasso Sea                
              bacterioplankton community will be measured using specific DNA                 
              probes for the SAR11 cluster (SAR11R) and marine Synechococcus                 
              (SYNF), as well as general probes for eubacterial, eukaryotic                  
              and universal small subunit ribosomal RNAs.  The specific goals                
              of the project are:  1) to test the hypothesis that the SAR11                  
              cluster population reaches a numerical maximum during summer                   
              stratification; 2) to test the hypothesis that the SAR11                       
              cluster is distributed widely in the upper euphotic zone                       
              ofoligotrophic oceanic regions; 3) to test the hypothesis that                 
              the distribution of the SAR11 cluster is correlated with                       
              aerobic photoheterotrophic activity; 4) to provide parallel                    
              time series information on the distribution of other planktonic                
              bacterial groups which are being revealed by further genetic                   
              studies nearing completion.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The theory that bacterial photoheterotrophy is an active                       
              process in the open ocean can potentially have a dramatic                      
              influence on calculations of carbon flux through the microbial                 
              loop.  The standing crop of "heterotrophic" bacterioplankton is                
              too large to be explained form primary productivity estimates                  
              using a standard 0.6 respiratory conversion factor, but could                  
              be better explained using the higher growth efficiencies                       
              associated with photoheterotrophy.
