Title       : Dissertation Research: A Cross-Sectional Study of Dental Development in
               Chimpanzees of Known Age and Sex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1993   
File        : a9016088

Award Number: 9016088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn C. Conroy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The rate and pattern ofdental development in early hominids is a               
              focus of controversy in current research in physical                           
              anthropology.  This controversy is part of the larger question of              
              whether developmental periods in early hominids can be                         
              characterized as more "humanlike", more "apelike", or distinct                 
              from either.  The prolonged developmental periods characteristic               
              of modern humans have been emphasized in many scenarios                        
              concerning the origin of various human physical, cultural, and                 
              behavioral traits.  However, recent research suggests that early               
              than modern humans, comparable to that of modern apes.  If so,                 
              brains, tool use, and social organization, will be affected.                   
              Rates of human dental development are well known, but existing                 
              standards of ape dental development are inadequate since the                   
              sample size is small, they are not from individuals of known                   
              chronological age, and radiographic information on the anterior                
              dentition is lacking.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The objective of this study is to document the pattern and timing              
              of deciduous and permanent tooth crown and root formation in a                 
              cross-sectional sample of living chimpanzees of known age and sex              
              in order to provide baseline data for comparison with human and                
              fossil hominid samples.
