Title       : Dissertation Research: Determinants of Primate Utilization of Early Successional
               State Habitats in West Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  1991    
File        : a9016046

Award Number: 9016046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12090              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund W. Stiles Tsitles@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The broad objective of this research is to characterize utilization            
              of early successional habitats by a non-human primate community in             
              West Africa.  Specifically, the proposed research will examine the             
              relationship between primate utilization of early successional                 
              plots and potentially influential components of the habitat such               
              as vegetation phenology patterns, availability and quality of fruit            
              resources in young vs. older secondary forest; distribution of                 
              large residual trees within clearings; and distance categories from            
              forest edge.  Data collection will be accomplished by systematic               
              surveys of primate utilization patterns along with vegetation                  
              phenology surveys, collection of fruits from fruit traps, and                  
              analysis of the constituents (nutrient content and digestibility               
              reducers) and morphology (color and size) of available fruits.                 
              Particular attention will be directed toward the identification of             
              keystone resources occurring within early successional habitats.               
              The field study will be conducted at Tiwai, Sierra Leone. Tiwai,               
              Sierra Leone.  A site with a high diversity (11 species) and                   
              density of primates, along with a high degree of habitat                       
              heterogeneity.  Fruit and data analysis will follow at Rutgers                 
              University.
