Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: An Approach to Tailored Metal Catalysts
               Involving Single and Multi-Metal Surface Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1991     
File        : a9016911

Award Number: 9016911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 1,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325                (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce C. Gates   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1401,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for a two year cooperative                         
              project on metal catalysts, between a group from Department                    
              of Chemical Engineering, University of Delaware, lead by                       
              Professor Bruce C Gates and a group from the Department of                     
              Chemistry, University of Tokyo, Japan, lead by Professor                       
              Yasuhiro Iwasawa.  Metals are some of the most important                       
              catalysts used in technology, and the common form of the                       
              catalyst used in practice consists of small metal particles                    
              dispersed on a high-area support.  These metals, however, are                  
              non-uniform in nature and therefore difficult to understand                    
              fully. This project will involve the bringing together of two                  
              complementary approaches to the investigation of metal                         
              catalysts developed by the teams in the US and Japan, namely                   
              the single-crystal surface science approach, and the surface                   
              organometallic chemistry approach.  The catalysts to be                        
              studied will be made from several precursors on single                         
              crystals of MgO and Mg with a few layers of oxygen.  These                     
              catalysts will then be converted to rhenium subcarbonyls,                      
              intended to be isolated mononuclear groups, pairs of these                     
              groups, and ensembles of three of these groups, respectively.                  
              Finally the samples will be treated to remove the carbonyl                     
              ligands and reduce the metal with minimum perturbation of the                  
              nuclearity.  The structures at each stage will be characterized                
              using a number of physical methods including scanning tunnel                   
              microscopy, infrared spectroscopy and ultrahigh vacuum                         
              techniques.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Both Professor Gates and Professor Iwasawa are highly                          
              competent scientists with reputations for being innovators in                  
              catalyst design and preparation.  This project should yield                    
              precise structural information characterizing the highly                       
              dispersed metal entities, as well as the metal support                         
              interface, and hopefully the results will demonstrate the                      
              relationship between the structure and catalytic properties                    
              of these materials.
