Title       : International Workshop on Structural Health Monitoring; September 15-17, 2003;
               Stanford, CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0315799

Award Number: 0315799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fu-Kuo Chang fkchang@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project is to organize and hold an International Workshop on Structural
              Health Monitoring at Stanford University, Sept. 15-17, 2003.  Structural health
              monitoring is an emerging technology, which combines advanced sensing
              technology with knowledge of material/structural response and damage
              characteristics to monitor the integrity of structures, in real time, while in
              service for sustaining their reliability and performance, minimizing
              catastrophe and human loss in addition to the reduction of maintenance cost. 
              It is, therefore, particularly important for civil infrastructures such as
              public transportation systems, buildings, highways, tunnels, etc.

The
              objectives of the Workshop are to review the progress of the current rapid
              development in the technologies related to the field, identify key and emerging
              issues in research and development, and promote exchanges and
              cross-fertilization across diverse disciplines: such as sensors, sensor
              systems, networking, computing, data mining, diagnostics, prognostics, signal
              processing, and multifunctional materials. The workshop will also address
              issues involved in practical application for civil infrastructures,
              ground/air/space transportation vehicles, and marine structures, etc. 
              

Distinguished individuals from industry, academe, and government will be
              invited to deliver keynote lectures and presentations.  Product and technology
              demonstrations will also be exhibited.   The workshop will conclude with panel
              discussions on key issues and concerns identified during the workshop. The
              workshop will produce volumes of proceedings of the technical presentations. A
              technical committee consisting of key personnel from government, industry, and
              academe will be formed to guide the future development in the field.  The
              committee will be responsible for developing appropriate guidelines and
              recommendations for government agencies and industry to promote structural
              health monitoring technologies.   


