Title       : Acquisition of a Flow Cytometer for Rapid Isolation of Mutant Drosophila Embryos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0216008

Award Number: 0216008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Crews steve_crews@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Stephen Crews at the University of North
              Carolina at Chapel Hill to purchase a high speed Drosophila embryo sorter.  The
              Sorter allows large numbers of mutant organisms to be isolated for biochemical
              and molecular experimentation.  The overall goal of the research at UNC-Chapel
              Hill involves using genetics and the study of mutant strains of Drosophila to
              understand the molecular and cellular basis of animal development and
              physiology.  By comparing biochemical and cellular phenomena in mutant vs.
              non-mutant Drosophila strains, it can be determined how observed differences
              contribute to the biological process being studied.  In this way, it is
              possible to understand, in great detail, how molecules work together to
              generate complex biological structures and phenomena.  However, one major
              problem that has hampered progress is the inability to isolate sufficient
              numbers of mutant embryos for molecular and biochemical analyses.  The recent
              development of the embryo sorter, which combines the technologies of flow
              cytometry and the use of Green Fluorescent Protein transgenic Drosophila
              strains, now allows the isolation of sufficient numbers of embryos for
              biochemical studies.  The embryo sorter also allows high-throughput screening
              of mutant and transgenic embryos for the identification of novel mutants and
              genes.

The Drosophila group at UNC-Chapel Hill consists of 8 labs focused on
              the molecular genetics of embryonic development and physiology.  All of the
              labs are committed to understanding biological processes using a comprehensive
              array of technologies involving genetics, cell biology, biochemistry, and
              molecular biology.  Labs are interested in nervous system development, cell
              adhesion, hormonal control, cell signaling, cell cycle control, RNA splicing,
              gene transcription, and DNA repair.  Large numbers of embryos will be run
              through the COPAS Select to isolate pure populations of mutant embryos.  These
              embryos will be analyzed for changes in: (1) RNA populations and gene
              expression, and (2) protein levels and modifications.  This will provide
              important insight into the biological role that the mutant gene normally plays.
               In addition, the COPAS Select will be used to sort through tens of thousands
              of embryos looking for those that have exceptional properties indicating the
              existence of novel genes, transgenic insertions, cellular markers, and
              mutations.  These new entities will allow the expansion of research efforts
              into promising new directions.

Drosophila research has a number of benefits
              to the public involving novel insight into basic biological processes, human
              health, and agriculture.  One of the most important lessons learned during the
              past 20 years of biological research is that the genes carrying-out important
              biological processes in humans are conserved in Drosophila.  This includes many
              disease genes.  The same is true for insect pests.  Because of the advanced
              genetics of Drosophila, it is advantageous to initially study basic biological
              processes in Drosophila and then continue study in other species, including
              humans.  There are currently a number of biotechnology companies that are
              utilizing Drosophila to study problems in applied science.  It should also be
              emphasized that besides applied research, work on Drosophila has proven to be
              one of the best experimental systems for understanding how biological organisms
              function.  This basic knowledge is one of the cornerstones of 20th century
              science (5 Nobel prizes have been awarded to Drosophila researchers), and
              promises to provide spectacular results in the 21st century.  Further
              significance of the funded work concerns the educational mission of the
              University of North Carolina.  The Drosophila labs are active training grounds
              for postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, undergraduates, and high school
              students.  Use of sophisticated equipment, such as the COPAS Select, to solve
              complex scientific problems will enhance the education and productivity of
              these students.

