Title       : C-RUI: Development and Applications of a Novel Biosensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0216716

Award Number: 0216716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $782917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Wright smwright@.mtsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrienne C. Friedli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Robertson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middle Tennessee St Univ
	      1500 Greenland Drive
	      Murfreesboro, TN  37132    615/898-5005

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1091,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this multidisciplinary collaborative project, to be carried at an
              undergraduate institution, is to develop optical sensors for the detection of
              chemical and biological samples. Applications include detection of
              organisms/toxins in wastewater or environmental samples, airborne hazards, as
              well as, unique genetic sequences.  These devices are expected to be
              inexpensive and robust with sensitivities exceeding that of conventional
              surface plasmon resonance sensors.  The sensor design relies on a new surface
              wave technique that utilizes surface wave resonance in photonic band gap
              materials (PBG).  The scope and limitations of the PBG surface wave technique
              will be tested using standard benchmark experiments.  The progress will be made
              in the physics and engineering, chemical and analytical, and biological aspects
              of the sensor development simultaneously.  Thus, development of
              instrumentation, PBG property prediction, a versatile interfacial layer and
              selection of appropriate genetic sequences will be the initial foci of effort. 
              Then, a variety of specific biological binding pairs will be coupled to the
              surface via organosiloxanes that are capable of photopatterning and chemical
              differentiation, culminating in a multianalyte sensor.  

Advances in
              nanotechnology have made complex biosensing devices possible, however, there is
              an increasing need for improved detector sensitivity and specificity.  The
              approach of this project is to involve students to address the fundamental
              science of biosensors, develop proof of principle sensors for specific
              applications, and capitalize upon collaboration among disciplines.  Students
              participating in the research project will be trained for the increasingly
              multidisciplinary science and technology sector as they develop
              discipline-specific laboratory skills.

