Title       : Providing Access to Scanning Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0216506

Award Number: 0216506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202834             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angel Valdes avaldes@nhm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian V. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel W. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk Fitzhugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon Hendler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L A Cty Museum Nat Hist F
	      900 Exposition Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900074057    /   -

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PROVIDING ACCESS TO SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

A grant has been awarded to
              Drs. Angel Valdes, Brian Brown, Kirk Fitzhugh, Gordon Hendler and Joel Martin
              at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County (LACM) to acquire a
              Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). The SEM is a fundamental research tool in
              biological and physical sciences, offering a level of resolution
              (magnifications over 300,000 times) not possible with light microscopy, which
              is limited to magnifications no greater than 1,000 times. A state-of-the-art
              SEM with variable pressure capability and an Energy Dispersive Spectrometry
              unit (EDS) will be purchased. The variable pressure capability is necessary to
              allow examination of uncoated samples, which is critical when dealing with type
              material or delicate specimens. The EDS unit will be essential for geological
              and archeological research. For most biological samples a sputter coater will
              be required. We selected a high resolution sputter coater that utilizes noble
              targets such as gold, gold/palladium and platinum.
The SEM will constitute the
              core of a new research unit shared by seven research departments including
              Invertebrate Zoology, Vertebrate Zoology, Botany, Earth Sciences, Invertebrate
              Paleontology, Vertebrate Paleontology and Anthropology. Another important
              component of the SEM usage at the LACM will be the identification of collection
              materials. Staff in the Marine Invertebrate Biodiversity Processing Center,
              Earth Studies, and Vertebrate Paleontology departments will be using the SEM on
              a regular basis for the identification of minerals, meteorites and biological
              specimens. The SEM will also be used by the Education Division to enhance
              public understanding of science and highlight the work of museum scholars.
              Images produced using the SEM will be a component of future exhibits,
              curriculum materials, and web sites produced for educational purposes.
              Education staff will be able to arrange tours to the SEM facility with research
              staff who will provide access to the machine and explanations of the
              application of the SEM technology to natural sciences.
 The installation of a
              SEM at LACM will offer a unique opportunity for integration of on-going
              research programs and education activities as a dynamic, interactive exhibit
              component. The SEM facility will also provide a tool for affiliated research
              associates and visitors, enhancing cooperative research activities with
              regional, national and international colleagues. The SEM will be a critical
              component of this training process and will provide the LACM students with the
              necessary tools for their research in situ.

