Title       : BE/CNH: Linking Human Socioeconomic and Marine Ecosystem Dynamics Along the
               Pacific Coast of Baja California, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0216637

Award Number: 0216637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fiorenza Micheli micheli@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie J. McCay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura I. Gonzalez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Costello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,5922,9186,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Small-scale fisheries are dominant actors in coastal marine ecosystems, engaging
              more than 90 percent of the fishers in the world and producing more than half
              of the world's annual marine catch.  The dynamics of their operations and
              decision making are poorly understood, however.  Scarcity of data, the
              multi-species and multi-fleet nature of most small-scale fisheries, and complex
              feedbacks among human institutions at the local, regional, and global scale
              render existing fisheries models inapplicable to most small-scale fisheries. 
              Small-scale fisheries typically exploit multiple stocks, have limited mobility,
              and vary widely in the types of economic drivers, cultural values, and
              management systems regulating extraction.  Most small-scale fishing is
              concentrated in coastal areas characterized by high productivity and diversity,
              such as coral reefs, coastal lagoons, and estuaries.  In turn, these locales
              are maintained by complex interactions between oceanographic processes in the
              nearshore marine environment and exchanges occurring at the land-sea interface.
               Only the simultaneous consideration of these different facets of complexity
              will allow examination of higher-level, emergent behaviors that are likely to
              characterize these complex and variable systems.  Examples of crucial questions
              that can be addressed only through simultaneous consideration of different
              biological and socioeconomic sources of variability are:  (1) How robust are
              different management systems in the face of environmental variability and
              variable amounts and type of data?  (2) What are the social, cultural, and
              economic correlates of management enforcement and users compliance?  (3) What
              are the effects of local and regional dynamics of small-scale fisheries on the
              persistence of ecosystem function and structure?  This research project will
              begin the process of developing an integrated theoretical framework regarding
              the coupled dynamics among small-scale fishers, coastal resources, and their
              biophysical setting in marine ecosystems of the Pacific coast of Baja
              California, Mexico.  A multidisciplinary group of researchers will develop
              models through the conduct of workshops and preliminary data-gathering
              activities. At the first workshop, researchers will initiate development of a
              series of stochastic, bioeconomic models that fuse ecological dynamics of
              benthic organisms with spatially and temporally explicit social and economic
              behavior of fishers.  Researchers will assemble and synthesize existing
              physical, biological, economic, and anthropological data needed for
              parameterizing models and testing the model assumptions following the first
              workshop.  The development of a framework for integrating models incorporating
              subsets of the complex interactions and feedbacks linking small-scale fisheries
              and their biological resources will be the focus of two additional
              workshops.

The significance of this project are expected to be threefold. 
              First, it will provide a holistic scientific understanding of the interactions
              between small-scale fisheries and their resources.  Second, it will provide a
              better understanding of the drivers and consequences of human impacts in the
              coastal marine environment.  Third, Baja California is a region of
              extraordinary productivity and biological diversity, currently considered one
              of the highest priorities for international conservation efforts.  The study
              will provide a modeling framework for predicting the outcomes of new and future
              use of coastal resources in Baja California, including anticipated increases in
              population densities and coastal development in the region, and will start
              building a theoretical framework more broadly applicable to small-scale
              fisheries worldwide.  In addition to enhancing fundamental scientific
              understandings, the project also offers prospects for practical implementation
              regarding the management of abalone and fisheries in the study region.  This
              project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2002 special competition
              in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural
              and Human Systems.

