Title       : Acquisition of Advanced Survey Research Technology at the Public Research
               Institute, San Francisco State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0216460

Award Number: 0216460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207905             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Potepan mpotepan@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, The Public Research Institute
              (PRI) at San Francisco State University (SFSU) will revitalize its survey
              research facility.  The award will be used to completely replace PRI's aging
              equipment with state-of-the-art technology and will dramatically enhance the
              research services and training PRI provides to the campus community,
              collaborating researchers, community organizations, and government agencies in
              the San Francisco Bay Area and California. 

The specific objectives of the
              proposal are to: (a) Improve PRI's sample management and quality control
              capacities in order to increase the quality and cost of collected data; (b)
              Support the integrated use of multiple survey modalities, innovative
              interviewing methods and multiple languages to improve research focused on
              underrepresented populations; (c) Provide the foundation for a program of
              methodological research for the study of highly diverse populations and local
              communities; and (d) Provide technical support, training, and improvements to
              PRI's office environment, including access for the disabled.  The proposed
              steps to reach these objectives include the replacement of PRI's
              Computer-Assisted Telephone Interviewing (CATI) software and computers,
              comprehensive training of institute staff, refurnishing of the Institute's
              workstations, and support of a full time support technician.

The proposed
              infrastructure will support a coordinated program of research by SFSU faculty
              and PRI staff.  The goal of these combined efforts is to enhance PRI's capacity
              as a comprehensive center for community and regional research in the San
              Francisco Bay Area.  The new infrastructure will allow innovative combinations
              of survey modalities (for example, internet-based data collection), as well as
              greater integration of qualitative data with the statistical precision of
              traditional survey methodology.  Community-focused research must produce more
              than statistical profiles; the goal is to accumulate understanding of the
              region as it is understood by its inhabitants within their social, cultural,
              economic, geographic, and historical contexts.

The project will bring
              substantial benefits to all the individuals and institutions served by PRI. 
              SFSU students in the behavioral and social sciences will be introduced to the
              new technology and methods as employees, through classroom demonstrations and
              research projects, and involvement with faculty research.  SFSU faculty will
              benefit through improved support for research and PRI's emerging role as a hub
              for interdisciplinary and collaborative projects.  The support is likely to
              result in more competitive and innovative grant proposals by faculty members as
              well as enhancement of SFSU's ability to recruit top researchers.  The proposed
              infrastructure will similarly enhance PRI's ability to provide high quality
              research to the public sector in the San Francisco Bay Area, particularly with
              regard to the growing importance of research concerning underrepresented
              populations.  Because the improvements will increase operational efficiency as
              well as covering the cost of acquiring the technology, the project will enable
              PRI to continue providing research services to all of its constituents at a
              reasonable cost.  


