Title       : Acquisition of High-Rate Loading and Damage Characterization Equipment for
               Advanced Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0216686

Award Number: 0216686
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. Kallmeyer alan.kallmeyer@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ken G. Kellogg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert V. Pieri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammad Alimi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports equipment needed for characterizing mechanical behavior of
              advanced structural materials, specifically in the areas of dynamic, high-rate
              fracture characterization and damage detection. The equipment consists of (1) a
              Dynatup instrumented low/high-velocity impact test system with an integrated
              environmental chamber and (2) a Panametrics ultrasonic scanning system. When
              integrated with the existing facilities, these instruments provide a direct and
              immediate benefit to faculty and graduate and undergraduate students in the
              Mechanical Engineering and Civil Engineering Departments in their
              materials-related research and education activities. The equipment will be
              integrated into several courses at both the undergraduate and graduate levels
              providing hands-on training and exposure to advanced materials characterization
              and evaluation methods. 

A significant area of concern when designing
              advanced structural materials for critical components is their durability and
              damage tolerance under a variety of loading and environmental conditions. The
              survivability of advanced materials must be fully understood before they can be
              utilized. Impact events, including high-velocity loading (ballistic
              projectiles) and low-velocity events (e.g., tool drops, bird strikes, hail
              damage, etc.) are of particular concern, as they can cause damage not visible
              on the surface, but which can result in significant degradation of performance.
              Full characterization of the response of materials to impact loading requires
              the capacity to experimentally generate controlled impact conditions as well as
              the ability to quantitatively measure the extent and growth of internal damage
              resulting from this dynamic form of loading.




