Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for an Undergraduate Research Program in
               Environmental Microbiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0216120

Award Number: 0216120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98133              (Estimated)
Investigator: Min-Ken Liao Min-Ken.Liao@furman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Brannon Andersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Furman University
	      3300 Poinsett Highway
	      Greenville, SC  29613    864/294-3468

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Min-Ken Liao at Furman University to acquire
              instrumentation for an undergraduate research program in environmental
              microbiology. The requested funds are for the purchase of (1) a Biolog
              MicroStation System to monitor the microbial community, (2) a  Variable Angle
              System  to perform pulsed-field electrophoretic analysis on microbial genomes,
              (3) a Dual Light Workstation  to document electrophoretic results for further
              image analysis, (4) Basic Software to estimate the microbial diversity and its
              phylogenetic relatedness, and (5) an Opticon System to quantitatively analyze
              PCR products from different organisms. These five instruments form a complete
              package necessary for the study of the microbial community. The immediate goal
              of this project is to address the following question. What
is the impact of
              urban expansion on the biogeochemical processes that occur within the Enoree
              and Saluda River basins in South Carolina? Several approaches will be taken.
              First, the impact of urbanization will be studied by comparing the microbial
              community compositions of streams associated with different land covers along
              an urban-to-rural gradient. Second, the impact of nutrient loading on rivers
              will be studied by comparing the diversity of the microbial communities above
              and below two adjacent sewage treatment plants. Third, the molecular approach
              will be undertaken to study the diversity and the relatedness of bacterial
              isolates including antibiotic-resistant ones.

This interdisciplinary
              research project attempts to reach two long-term goals: (1) to answer
              fundamental questions about microbially-mediated biogeochemical processes
              associated with cycles of nitrogen, phosphorus, and carbon occurring in
              watersheds; and (2) to describe the extent of human impact on river systems in
              the Lower Broad River basin in the Piedmont of South Carolina. The research
              team believes that the study of the microbial communities holds the keys to the
              assessment of the human impact on water
quality and the microbial impact on
              biogeochemical processes.

