Title       : Dissertation Research: Computations and Computers in the Sciences of Mind and
               Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0216981

Award Number: 0216981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Machamer pkmach+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the 1940s, the birth and development of modern computers suggested the notion
              that minds, or brains, are computers. This thesis combined the advent of
              computers with both the old idea that reasoning is a form of calculation (from
              Hobbes to formal logic) and the materialist doctrine that reasoning, and more
              generally cognition, is carried out by the brain. The view that the mind-brain
              is a computer, here called computationalism, is the topic of this dissertation
              research project. The project will trace different versions of computationalism
              from their historical root in the cybernetics movement to the many disciplines
              that incorporated it. It will complement recent scholarship in related areas by
              showing how early attempts at mathematical modeling of the brain, the
              development of new mathematical and modeling tools, and new hypotheses about
              memory mechanisms came together to form a novel conceptual and methodological
              framework for studying the functional organization of the mind-brain. The study
              will interest not only historians, but also those who work in the sciences of
              mind and brain and those who are interested in their foundations. This research
              includes both a philosophical and a historical component. The pioneers who
              developed computationalism and many of today's concepts--A. Turing, J. von
              Neumann, N. Wiener, and W. McCulloch--had clearer motivations for their views
              than their followers of today. Through understanding the reasoning of the
              pioneers--the roots of today's positions--within their historical context, and
              studying how that context has since changed, the investigators hope to shed
              light on today's views. In order to carry out the historical component of this
              project, they will rely on published material in history, philosophy, and
              science, as well as unpublished material. Funding for this project will support
              four trips to archives containing the unpublished papers of Turing,  McCulloch,
              Wiener, and von Neumann. Aside from its historical interest, clarifying the
              history of computationalism has several potential benefits.  In the philosophy
              of mind and brain sciences, this project would illuminate current discussions
              of computationalism by showing what historical role computationalism played and
              still plays in shaping research programs in different disciplines. In addition,
              in philosophy of mind, it may stimulate functionalist philosophers, many of
              whom rely on computationalism, to rethink some of their views. It may equip
              funding agencies to more efficiently distribute research funds. And, finally,
              it would affect science and technology education. Through the
              future
publication of articles directed at the general public and the design
              of an undergraduate course on Computers, Minds, and Brains, the expertise
              developed in this project would contribute to the education of the general
              public about computers and their relationship with psychology and
              neuroscience.

