Title       : Acquisition of Test Equipment for Non-Contact Measurement of Thermal and
               Mechanical Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0216287

Award Number: 0216287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Miles milesjj@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph R. Blandino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The Program of Integrated Science and Technology (ISAT) at James Madison
              University (JMU) features a multi-disciplinary curriculum that places a strong
              emphasis on hands-on, project-based learning. The Infrared Development and
              Testing Laboratory (IDTTL) was established at ISAT in 1997 to provide
              opportunities for effective hands-on, project-oriented, student-centered
              learning that reinforces concepts and skills introduced within the ISAT
              program. The IDTTL provides access to research in advanced topics and emerging
              measurement technologies, fosters development of teaming and communication
              skills in an interdisciplinary environment, and avails undergraduates of
              professional activities including writing papers, presentation at conferences,
              and participation in summer internships.
A suite of projects ongoing in the
              IDTTL is presently supported by NASA including (i) non-contact measurement of
              the thermal-structural response of an aluminized thin-film polymer membrane,
              with application to sunshields, solar sails, and membrane optics and (ii)
              development of an imaging gas-filter correlation radiometer (GFCR) for
              measurement of tropospheric carbon monoxide. The laboratory also develops
              non-contact techniques for manufacturing process control, boiler analyses, and
              predictive maintenance. The common thread connecting these projects is the
              measurement of critical parameters where contact with the target object is
              either impossible or will alter the desired parameters.
The equipment
              requested includes an infrared imager with multiple lenses, hemispherical
              directional reflectometer, laser vibrometer, shaker, and vacuum chamber with
              cold plate. These instruments will elevate the capability of the laboratory and
              allow undergraduates and faculty mentors the opportunity to advance existing
              studies, and to prepare proposals for future studies that are more competitive
              than would otherwise be possible. The equipment will also be incorporated into
              new course laboratory activities through which all ISAT majors will benefit,
              and undergraduates and faculty from other departments at JMU, including
              physics, chemistry, biology, and geology, will be invited to utilize these
              instruments. The IDTTL will improve its stature as a model for other colleges
              and universities that wish to develop an interdisciplinary research laboratory
              capable of conducting valuable research and development and providing
              undergraduates an extraordinary learning experience.


