Title       : BE/CNH: Neighborhood Ecosystems: Human-Climate Interactions in a Desert
               Metropolis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0216281

Award Number: 0216281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon L. Harlan Sharon.Harlan@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Brazel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larissa Larsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Stefanov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1689,1691,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This interdisciplinary research project explores human-ecosystem-climate
              interactions at the neighborhood scale in metropolitan Phoenix.  The project
              draws upon social and ecological theories of spatial heterogeneity in cities in
              order to understand how urban development leads to economic, social, and
              physical inequalities among neighborhoods, which in turn produce neighborhood
              differences in microclimate conditions.  Microclimate conditions influence the
              biotic environment, which then completes the cycle by influencing the
              socioeconomic and physical systems of neighborhoods.  Because neighborhoods
              have unequal resources for responding to climate stress, socioeconomic status
              of the neighborhood and other local characteristics will moderate the effects
              of this process.  The research has three specific objectives.  First, the
              project will show how the settlement of neighborhoods between 1970 and 2000
              transformed the landscape by altering land use, land cover, and climate. 
              Second, the project will demonstrate whether and to what extent the resulting
              differences among neighborhood microclimates expose humans and other biota to
              unequal levels of climate-induced stressors, such as heat, poor air quality,
              and storm hazards.  Third, the project will investigate the resilience of human
              and plant communities in neighborhoods that have unequal amounts of capital to
              cope with climate stress.  The research sites are seven Phoenix neighborhoods
              located at monitoring sites of the Central Arizona-Phoenix Long-Term Ecological
              Research project.  The neighborhoods, bounded by census block groups, include
              cases that vary by age, distance to urban center, land cover, income, and
              ethnic composition.  The project will use data from a wide variety of sources,
              including the census, social surveys of residents, historical land-use surveys
              and climate records, field measures of environmental conditions, and remotely
              sensed images of land cover and temperature.  GIS mapping, graphing tools,
              spatial statistics, and multivariate statistical analysis will be used to
              develop indicators of human, ecosystem, and climate activities and changes over
              time using.  Using key indicators, neighborhood socioecological cycles will be
              compared for places that differ by social class, physical features, and
              distance from the urban center.  Research results will be disseminated through
              publications in several disciplines and presentations at professional
              meetings.

Research on urban development in arid regions will contribute to
              understanding the regional dimensions of global climate change.  This project
              will advance the development of integrative theory in the social and ecological
              sciences by explaining how human actions influence climate change at the
              neighborhood scale.  This is a necessary link between fine-scale ecosystem
              processes, such as variation in neighborhood microclimates, and coarse-scale
              environmental phenomena, such as global warming.  The research will help
              improve models of urban growth and models of regional climate change.  The
              project also informs human vulnerability theory, which explains how social
              inequalities expose poor people to higher risks of environmental hazards. 
              While many studies of vulnerability focus on "natural" disasters that are more
              likely to harm poor people, this project will study chronic environmental
              conditions, specifically climatic variability and change, which poses a more
              lasting but less obvious threat to vulnerable populations.  This project will
              also provide opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students to
              participate and learn about the interface between science and public issues as
              well as the conduct of interdisciplinary research.  This project is supported
              by an award resulting from the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in
              the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human
              Systems.

