Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Isothermal Titration and Differential Scanning
               MicroCalorimeters for Chemistry and Biology Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a0216655

Award Number: 0216655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen U. Dunham sdunham@colby.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Greenwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dasan M. Thamattoor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colby College
	      4000 Mayflower Hill
	      Waterville, ME  04901    207/872-3000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Stephen
              Dunham, Paul Greenwood and Dasan Thamattoor of Colby College will acquire an
              isothermal titration calorimeter (ITC) and differential scanning
              microcalorimeters (DSC) for chemistry and biology research.  Research projects
              that will exploit this equipment include a) structural studies of modified
              oligonucleotides; b) metal ion binding affinities and stabilities of modified
              DNA aptamers; c) binding affinities of DNA aptamers to biological targets; d)
              ion binding affinities and structural characterization of proteins in
              nematocysts; e) ion binding selectivity of polyoxa[n]peristylanes; f) computer
              aided molecular design and guest-host chemistry of H2-antagonists; and g)
              structural analysis of RNase mutants that allow self-fertilization in plants. 
              

Calorimetry is an extremely useful tool in modern analytical chemistry. 
              Calorimetric analysis is used to measure the thermal energy (heat) exchange
              that occurs during molecular interactions and reactions.  Thus  it can provide
              a very reliable and sensitive method for determining the thermodynamic
              properties of materials such as changes in heat capacity of liquid and solid
              samples. Colby College is an undergraduate institution, and the availability of
              these instruments will have a strong impact on undergraduate research.  In
              addition, commercial ITC and DSC microcalorimeters are currently not available
              in the state of Maine.  
