Title       : Acquisition of an Optical Parametric Amplifier for High Magnetic Field Ultrafast
               Exciton Spectroscopy and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0216838

Award Number: 0216838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Junichiro Kono kono@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Reitze  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the IMR program William Marsh Rice University will acquire
              an ultrafast laser system, consisting of a chirped pulse amplifier (CPA) and an
              optical parametric amplifier (OPA).  This system will produce intense and
              coherent electromagnetic radiation with wavelength continuously tunable from
              1.15 mm to 18 mm and significantly advance our on-going research at the
              National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL). The principal investigators
              are currently developing an ultrafast optics facility at the NHMFL under the
              In-House Research Program, for the study of semiconductor quantum structures,
              especially for investigating the dynamics of excitons in high magnetic fields. 
              Particular emphasis is placed on how to create and control quantum coherence in
              excitons that are simultaneously subjected to an intense laser field and an
              intense magnetic field.  Such a system provides an ideal environment in which
              to address fundamental and unresolved issues in nonlinear and quantum optics in
              solids in a well-controlled manner.  The laser field manipulates discrete
              internal states of excitons whereas the magnetic field freezes the
              center-of-mass motion of excitons and tunes the internal energy levels.  The
              large spatial extent of excitons, compared to atoms, leads to strong
              light-matter coupling, and dramatic non-perturbative phenomena are expected. 
              Such research provides significant insight into the fundamental physics of
              light-matter interaction and can answer whether light excitation in solids is
              really quantum, as in quantum optics of atoms. Undergraduate and graduate
              researchers, including students from underrepresented groups will be involved
              and  will acquire expertise in cutting-edge techniques in ultrafast optics.  
              
%%%
With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program
              William Marsh University will acquire a state-of-the-art laser system, which
              will produce ultrashort pulses of electromagnetic radiation with wavelength
              continuously tunable in a very wide range and significantly advance our
              on-going research at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL).  The
              investigators are currently developing an ultrafast optics facility at the
              NHMFL under the In-House Research Program, for the study of semiconductor
              quantum structures, especially for investigating the dynamics of excitons in
              high magnetic fields.  Such a project provides an ideal environment in which to
              address fundamental and unresolved issues in nonlinear and quantum optics in
              solids
in a well-controlled manner. The research will involve a team of
              undergraduate and graduate researchers, including students from
              underrepresented minority groups. They will acquire expertise in cutting-edge
              techniques in ultrafast optics.   


