Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Equipment for Characterizing Polymers and Packaging
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0216092

Award Number: 0216092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289204             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Rubino m_rubino@cast-fc.rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Spencer S. Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Scholle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,9229,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is the
              acquisition of equipment to evaluate and characterize plastic materials and
              packaging in support of a new Integrated Plastics Science Center at the
              Rochester Institute of Technology.  The equipment includes a
              computer-controlled Fourier Transform Infrared spectrophotometer to fingerprint
              polymers; a computer-controlled Differential Scanning Calorimeter to assess
              thermal characteristics such as glass transition temperatures and melting
              points, a chamber for material testing of the tensile strength of plastics
              under different temperatures and relative humidity; an Oxtran 2/20 to measure
              the oxygen permeability of films and containers; and a Permatran 3/30 to
              evaluate water vapor transmission.  The equipment will be used to develop
              innovative applied research projects as part of a multidisciplinary
              curriculum.

The principal benefit of this proposal is student participation
              in innovative applied research that cuts across disciplines and addresses the
              kinds of problems they will face in technological careers in the plastics and
              packaging industries.  Students will have hands on experience with advanced
              equipment and gain a better understanding of the principles of polymers and
              plastics in a multidisciplinary environment that mirrors industry.  This
              approach will generate better prepared scientists, technologists and managers
              for an increasingly competitive global industry.  A second benefit is the
              potential the equipment offers for the creation of new courses and the
              improvement of existing courses, leading to the participation of more students
              in graduate and doctoral studies.  The equipment also will open up new
              possibilities for collaborative research with the food, pharmaceutical,
              automotive, and plastic-recycling industries, improving the quality of
              graduates entering the workforce and the international competitiveness of key
              industries.
