Title       : Acquisition of a Continuous-Wave Ring Laser for Recording Electronic Spectra of
               Gaseous, Metal-Containing Free Radicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0216172

Award Number: 0216172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211209             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Varberg varberg@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
              Department of Chemistry at Macalester College will acquire a continuous-wave
              ring laser system. This equipment will be used to measure and analyze the
              optical spectra of second- and third-row transition metal fluorides and oxides.
               The PI and his undergraduate collaborators will record laser excitation
              spectra at Doppler-limited resolution in order to determine the vibrational,
              rotational and fine-structure constants of newly observed molecules.  Further
              work at sub-Doppler resolution utilizing the technique of intermodulated
              fluorescence will reveal the hyperfine structure of the observed transitions,
              which is useful for identifying the electronic configurations of the ground and
              excited states.  In addition, the instrumentation will be used as a resource in
              advanced courses and laboratories in the Chemistry Department.  

Interest in
              understanding the complex electronic structure and spectroscopy of small,
              transition metal-containing molecules in the gas phase continues to grow.  With
              the development of high-resolution and high-power tunable laser sources,
              spectroscopists can now record and assign spectra that previously were very
              difficult to acquire or analyze.  Such molecules are of practical interest in
              fields as diverse as astronomy, catalysis, metallurgy and organometallic
              chemistry.  Diatomic molecules containing a transition metal display the
              simplest form of metal bonding and are therefore relevant as initial models for
              more complex systems.  

