Title       : Acquisition of a Comprehensive Multi-Wavelength Laser Raman System for Materials
               Education and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0216830

Award Number: 0216830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve W. Martin swmartin@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Cann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vikram L. Dalal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports acquisition of a research grade multi-wavelength laser Raman
              spectrometer. The laser Raman spectrometer has two main features: (1) multiple
              laser wavelengths (400 to 800 nm, visible range) to complement the 1064 nm line
              of the FT-Raman spectrometer, and (2) microsampling. The multiple laser
              wavelengths is accomplished through a standard 633 nm Ne He laser. Notch
              filters will be used to get within 50-cm. exp. (-1) of the 413, 568, and 647
              laser lines. To minimize the cost, the standard operating mode of spectrometer
              will be the microsampling microscope. For bulk samples, this provides the
              ability to spatially resolve the spectra to look for texture and variation in
              the sample. For microsamples, this provides the micron level resolution
              required. The microscope is equipped with an auto-focusing and xy-scan
              microscope stage that enables efficient collection of the spectra combined with
              the ability to perform automated xy-scanning of the surfaces of samples,
              greatly extending the power and flexibility of the spectrometer. Finally, a
              heating and freezing stage allows temperature dependent studies to be conducted
              from -196 to 600 degrees C. This enables examination of thermal stability of
              samples as well as the effect of temperature on the material structure. This
              laser Raman spectrometer will be heavily used in undergraduate and graduate
              teaching, as a core component in materials characterization courses that cover
              thermal and spectroscopic techniques of characterizing materials. In this way
              nearly every student in the MSE department will use these new instrument
              systems The new spectrometer will also be used for a summer NSF-REU site, where
              12 undergraduate students from all over the country come to ISU to learn about
              semi-conducting materials and devices.

Raman spectroscopy combined with
              microsampling capability has been shown by many researchers to be a critical
              analytical tool in the study of bulk, surface, and micro samples. Its power,
              flexibility, and non-destructive nature lend itself to wide spread use for
              nearly all classes of materials. Recent advances in the development of highly
              efficient, tunable, reliable, compact, and cost effective lasers combined with
              high resolution and rugged grating monochromators and solid state CCD detectors
              has moved the use of laser Raman spectroscopy from the realm of highly skilled
              spectroscopists into routine use by practicing materials scientists and
              engineers. Raman spectroscopy is particularly well suited for use in materials
              research due to minimal sample preparation, wide flexibility of sampling
              conditions (low and high temperatures, low and high pressure, low and high
              magnetic field, etc.), generally very sharp well resolved lines for solid state
              samples, and its non-destructive nature. Combined with a microsampling Raman
              microscope, Raman spectroscopy can be used extremely effectively in the careful
              study of surface chemistry, structure, morphology, texture, and even stress.
              


