Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Universal Wireless Communications System Emulator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0216381

Award Number: 0216381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100475             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lei Wei lei@ee.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Parveen Wahid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Georgiopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              



0216381
Wei

The phenomenal growth of wireless systems in thc last 15
              years represents a major paradigm change for society. Today, wireless,
              personal, and mobile communications are essential for our modern economy and
              the general well being of the country. Wireless technologies have not only
              brought in USA billions of dollars in technology export, but also significantly
              increased the productivity of the whole nation.

The instrumentation the PIs
              are requesting in this proposal is a wireless communication systems emulator.
              In short, it can transmit and receive not only standard wireless signals and
              display them in detail, but it also allows them to deviate from these
              standards. It contains a universal wireless signal generator/transmitter, a
              universal wireless signal receiver, a high resolution network analyzer and a
              multi-input network analyzer.

Wireless communications has been a major
              research focus area in the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
              Science (SEECS), UCF, over the past few years. A major mission of SEECS is to
              advance the future of wireless communications through education and research.
              The PIs involved in this effort have been conducting research in wireless
              communications for a number of years now. Some examples of the state-of-the art
              that they have been engaged are included below:

(a) Invented new decoding
              algorithms that are not only best known for block lengths from 100-250 bits,
              but also specifically geared towards practical implementation and compatibility
              with existing wireless systems. With the proposed emulator, they will be able
              to test these algorithms for applications in the real world.
(b) Introduced a
              new intelligent packet network architecture, called a cognitive packet network
              (CPN), in which the packets have intelligent capabilities for routing and flow
              control themselves. The PIs currently have a network test-bed, with fixed
              wire-line linkage, and their plan, with the help of the emulator, is to extend
              it to incorporate wireless linkages. With the proposed instrument, they can
              also increase the intelligence of the packets using the information gained from
              link-quality, channel state information, power levels. etc.
(c) Teleoperated
              robots have wide application from search-rescue operation to factory operation.
              The robotics and controls lab has several robots, real-time control systems,
              and other equipments. The proposed instrument will enable the PIs to extend
              their capability to mobile robots with advanced wireless communication
              capabilities.

The faculty members on this team have published several
              hundreds of papers in leading technical journals and conferences. In fact, all
              PIs and senior personnel have served or are serving as Editors / Associate
              Editors for prestigious international journals in the areas of their expertise.
              This state-of-the-art instrumentation will help them verify their research
              results, extend their capabilities, and justify their future research
              directions.

This equipment will also enhance their educational capabilities.
              The PIs currently offer a Wireless Communications option for their electrical
              engineering undergraduate students and have several graduate students working
              on projects in the field of wireless communications. This emulator will not
              only help demonstrate to the students the theory presented in the classroom,
              but also provide a hands-on platform for thesis and dissertation
              works.







