Title       : Origins and Molecular Evolution of Meiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0216702

Award Number: 0216702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $554019             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Logsdon jlogsdon@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Much progress has been made toward understanding how  meiosis works, but in only
              a few organisms. It is, thus, unclear which aspects and functions in meiosis
              are most fundamental. Nonetheless, the data from these organisms  provide  a
              solid basis for initiating an evolutionary investigation of meiosis--more 
              specifically, meiotic genes and their encoded proteins--in a more diverse
              sampling of eukaryotes. The central goal of this project is to better
              understand the evolution and function of the meiotic process and its molecular
              machinery. To accomplish this, the investigator will expand his ongoing
              evolutionary studies of the eukaryotic recA gene family (RAD51 and DMC1) in
              protists by (a) isolating these genes from additional protist
              species
representing major eukaryotic lineages, and (b) investigating possible
              cases of gene loss in the recA family, some of which are associated with
              putatively asexual species. To complement and support the
              proposed
experimental studies, he will employ and develop appropriate
              computational tools to carry out a systematic and comprehensive bioinformatic
              analysis of additional meiotic genes and proteins. This bioinformatic
              "data-mining" should result in the identification and initial characterization
              of key genes encoding meiotic proteins from all available eukaryotic
              (especially protist) species. In addition to providing information on the
              function and evolution of meiotic proteins, a major priority of this work is to
              establish when meiosis evolved, be it during extant eukaryotic evolution
              (leaving some surviving asexual eukaryotes that lack meiosis because they never
              evolved it), or alternatively, prior to the diversification of eukaryotes
              (making contemporary asexual eukaryotes simply the descendants of sexual
              species which have lost this ability). Phylogenetic analyses of the meiotic
              genes identified from protists will be used to directly address this issue,
              especially those genes that have duplicated and diverged from prior non-meiotic
              functions. The results from this project will guide future experimental efforts
              to isolate and study particular meiotic genes from other relevant eukaryotic
              lineages.

Meiosis is the specialized cellular division cycle in which
              diploid cells are "reduced" to haploid cells (such as eggs and sperm), which
              then fuse to generate new  (diploid) individuals. Meiosis is, thus, central to
              sexual
reproduction and has been crucial in the evolution and success of
              eukaryotes. However, the origin and evolution of sex remains one of the major
              enigmas in biology. Developing  a clearer evolutionary understanding of key
              meiotic mechanisms will not only broadly illuminate our understanding of the
              sexual process, but also lend insight into the evolution of proteins and the
              macromolecular  assemblages in which they operate. Finally, these studies
              should clearly demonstrate the importance of combining information from model
              eukaryotic genetic systems with data from less well-studied organisms in a
              comparative evolutionary framework.



