Title       : MRI: Development of a High Density, High Performance Beowulf Cluster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0216275

Award Number: 0216275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405202             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Calvin   (Principal Investigator current)
              William Rundell  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert C. Webb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael B. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Binayak P. Mohanty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond J. Carroll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Agricul Exp Sta
	      The Agriculture Program
	      College Station, TX  778432147    979/845-4761

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Texas A&M University plans to design and build a 256 processor,
medium grain
              parallel machine with as close to maximum floating
point performance per
              dollar as possible.  This system, commonly
referred to as a Beowulf cluster,
              will require a modification of
the usual paradigm in order to solve certain
              design problems
inherent in these systems. The cluster will contain 256
              processors
consisting of 128 nodes using dual AMD motherboards, each with
1GB
              ECC DDR DRAM and will be interconnected with Gigabit Ethernet
to form one of
              the largest and most powerful academic clusters.
Components will be chosen to
              minimize cost while maximizing
performance.  Novel techniques for mounting and
              cooling the
motherboards will be explored in an effort to maximize
              the
density of the nodes.  Multiple operating environments will
also be made
              available, allowing the end user to determine
which environment yields the
              peak performance for their
application. This machine will be used to solve a
              variety of
computationally intensive problems in the mathematical
              and
physical sciences and support researchers primarily located
in chemistry,
              mathematics, physics and statistics.  One group,
with a core in numerical
              analysis but with emphasis on fluid
flowing porous media, will also include
              researchers with
expertise in oil recovery and in groundwater flow
              (from
Petroleum and from Agriculture Engineering) and in
              parallel
architectures (from Computer Science).  In addition to problems
              in
large-scale computation, the groups will be solving problems in
inverse
              problems, nonparametric function estimation, statistical
methods for
              computational biology, quantum dynamics, high energy
physics, inorganic and
              organometallic systems, and polyatomic
molecules.


This effort will also
              provide an educational benefit, both within
the design and the implementation
              stages.  Mechanical Engineering
will use the novel power and cooling
              requirements of the system as
source of activity in a senior design class.
              Once the system is in
place, the departments of Mathematics, Statistics and
              Computer
Science will provide courses in efficient utilization
              and
programming to allow maximum benefit to the designated research
groups,
              as well as the rest of the university community.

