Title       : Remotely Operable Micro Environmental Observatory for Antarctic Marine Biology
               Rsearch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0216043

Award Number: 0216043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198197             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel S. Bowser   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony D. Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443455    518/431-1200

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 5111,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Research diving over the last two decades has yielded important insights into
              the ecological importance of giant (>1 mm) Foraminifera in McMurdo Sound,
              Antarctica. Unfortunately, due to logistics constraints the in-situ behavior of
              these single-celled organisms and their interactions within the food web can be
              observed only in 'snapshots' during summer dives, when algal production is at a
              maximum in conditions of 24-hour light. Much would be learned by observing
              Foraminifera over extended periods of time, to study mobility, response to food
              availability, and other directed behaviors. It would be very valuable to be
              able to extend observations to the winter months, in order to study these
              organisms under dark conditions with no algal production, and to experimentally
              manipulate in situ conditions and observe the behavioral response. Research
              diving requires costly support and cannot provide extended observation of
              individual organisms. Currently, logistical requirements, costs, complexities,
              and risks of winter diving at remote locations in Antarctica are prohibitive.
              However, manned diving is not required in order to make long-term in-situ
              observations. Technology and communications have advanced to the point where it
              is feasible and practical to install video macro- and micro-view cameras in a
              submersible enclosure, transmitting both live and sequential time-lapse images
              over the Internet to a remote user throughout the year. Such an instrumentation
              platform could then be used for experimental manipulation of the environment.
              The objective of this proposal is to develop a submersible, remotely-operable
              underwater observatory for the study of Foraminifera and associated benthic
              fauna. This observatory would be connected to a shoreline unit by fiber-optic
              cable and linked by radio to the Internet for year-round access. The design and
              operation of this observatory will function as a technology template to meet
              other year-round Antarctic research requirements by means of telescience rather
              than personnel deployment.  
