Title       : SBIR Phase II: Parallel Processing of Time-Lapse Seismic Data via the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0216413

Award Number: 0216413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Cole steve.cole@4thwaveimaging.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fourth Wave Imaging
	      16A Journey, Suite 200
	      Aliso Viejo, CA  92656    949/916-9787

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,9139,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project concerns the
              processing and analysis of time-lapse seismic data on parallel computers, using
              the Internet to control the processing flow and visualize the results.  In
              recent years, there has been exponential growth in time-lapse seismic project
              activity.  Time-lapse seismic analysis facilitates the management of oil and
              gas reservoirs by imaging fluid movement in the reservoir over time.  The
              results are used to guide reservoir management decisions-such as where to place
              a new well or where to inject water, gas, or steam to stimulate hydrocarbon
              movement-and help maximize the life of both new and existing fields while
              minimizing recovery costs.  The computer algorithms needed to process
              time-lapse seismic data are complex and require advanced computational
              hardware-typically multiprocessor Unix workstations or clusters of personal
              computers-that many potential customers do not have.  The proposed innovation
              will allow customers to process their data on a centralized PC cluster, using
              the Internet to control the processing and to visualize the results remotely. 
              The proposed innovation will improve the links between the components of the
              time-lapse seismic workflow, leading to greater understanding and more
              widespread commercial acceptance of the technology.

Potential applications
              of the research proposed by Fourth Wave Imaging include petroleum industry
              mapping of by passed oil, monitoring of costly injected fluids, and imaging
              flow compartmentalization and the hydraulic properties of faults and fractures.
               Non-petroleum applications include monitoring groundwater reserves, subsurface
              monitoring of contaminant plumes and environmental clean-up projects.  The
              web-based parallel software system developed for this project could be applied
              to other computer-intensive fields such as earthquake seismology and medical
              and satellite imaging.  Tools from this web-based software platform such as
              those for modeling rock physics and seismic data may also be useful for
              educational purposes.
