Title       : Acquisition of a Small Angle X-ray Scattering Facility at the University of
               Tennessee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0216252

Award Number: 0216252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Spruiell spruiell@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jimmy W. Mays  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda J. Magid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Dadmun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
              acquisition of a Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS) Facility at the University
              of Tennessee. The instrument will be used to characterize the structure of
              materials on a length scale of 1-100 nm. 
Current and future research that
              will benefit from the SAXS facility ranges from studies of the structure of
              'soft materials' such as polymers to the more traditional 'hard materials.' The
              studies of soft materials include investigation of the morphology of (a)
              polymer blends and copolymers, (b) polymer crystallization, (c) polymer
              electrolytes, (d) polymer composites and (e) processed polymers (fibers, films,
              moldings, etc.). Studies of 'hard materials' include investigations of (a) the
              nanostructure of new metal oxide based materials, (b) the nanometer-size
              dispersions of metals and compounds in sapphire, (d) development of
              nanoparticles through pulsed laser ablation techniques, and (e) void formation
              in carbon fibers. An interesting overlap involves the use of microphase
              separated diblock and triblock copolymers as templates to synthesize new
              nanostructures, well ordered carbon nanotubes, and nanoscale magnetic wires. In
              addition, studies of X-ray scattering of materials will provide background for
              neutron scattering studies at Oak Ridge National Laboratory with the HFIR
              reactor upgrade and, in the longer term, the completion of the Spallation
              Neutron Source (SNS). 
This acquisition will (1) foster the development of new
              areas of research in nanoscience and new collaborations among UT faculty in
              science and engineering, especially in the soft materials area,  (2) develop
              new collaborations among UTK faculty and students with scientists and engineers
              at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and with and other internationally prominent
              researchers, (3) provide opportunities for SAXS measurements to investigators
              from neighboring institutions, especially those that have traditionally served
              underrepresented minorities.

***
This award from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program supports the acquisition of a Small Angle X-ray
              Scattering (SAXS) Facility at the University of Tennessee. The instrument will
              be used to characterize the structure of materials on a length scale of 1-100
              nm.
The SAXS system will serve faculty, postdoctoral research fellows, and
              students in a wide range of sub-disciplines of Materials Science, including
              polymer science and engineering, ceramics, metallurgy, and solid state physics.
              Examples of areas of study include investigation of the structure of (a)
              polymer blends and copolymers, (b) polymer crystallization, (c) polymer
              electrolytes, (d) polymer composites (e) processed polymers (fibers, films,
              moldings, etc.), (f) new metal oxide based materials, (g) the nanometer-size
              dispersions of metals and compounds in sapphire, (h) development of
              nanoparticles through pulsed laser ablation techniques, and (i) void formation
              in carbon fibers. 
This acquisition will (1) foster the development of new
              areas of research in nanoscience and new collaborations among UT faculty in
              science and engineering, especially in the soft materials area,  (2) develop
              new collaborations among UTK faculty and students with scientists and engineers
              at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and with and other internationally prominent
              researchers, (3) provide opportunities for SAXS measurements to investigators
              from neighboring institutions, especially those that have traditionally served
              underrepresented minorities.

