Title       : GOALI: Semi-Batch High-Temperature Polymerization: Mathematical Modeling and
               Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0216837

Award Number: 0216837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45195              (Estimated)
Investigator: Masoud Soroush Masoud.Soroush@coe.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Grady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Polymers with low average molecular weight and a low polydispersity index have
              many applications in the paint and coating industry.  Production of such
              polymers requires tight control of the molecular-weight distribution of the
              polymers.  Control is achieved by adjusting the temperature, diluting the
              reaction mixture, and adding chain transfer agents, mercaptans, and cobalt
              glyxins.  Liquid-phase, high-temperature, free-radical polymerization is used
              to produce low average-molecular-weight polymers.  Preliminary results also
              show that high-temperature, free-radical polymerization of butyl acrylate (BA)
              can lead to the production of low poly-dispersity index, BA polymers.  Thus,
              high-temperature polymerization offers better controllability to produce the
              desired polymer product.

This NSF GOALI project is a joint effort between
              Drexel University and DuPont aimed at improving the quality of acrylate and
              styrenic, homo-polymers and copolymers produced via high-temperature, solution
              polymerization.  This Faculty-in-Industry project is motivated by the need to
              take a fundamental approach to improve the product quality.  The PI Soroush
              will spend one year in DuPont's Marshall Laboratory to pursue the following
              research and education activities:
     *Study the kinetics of liquid-phase,
              high-temperature (140-200oC), free-radical, BA and butyl methacrylate (BMA),
              homopolymerization reactions to develop mathematical models for
              high-temperature, BA and BMA, semi-batch, polymerization reactors.
    
              *Calculation of optimal temperature and feed flow-rate profiles as well as
              loading conditions for high-temperature, semi-batch, BA and BMA, polymerization
              reactors.
     *Formulation of a set of industrial, process modeling,
              open-ended problems to be assigned as projects to undergraduate students taking
              the process modeling courses at Drexel University.

