Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement-Paleoecology of the Upper Laetolil Beds,
               Laetoli, Tanzania: Its Implications for Hominid Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0216683

Award Number: 0216683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7255               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry Harrison terry.harrison@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The analysis of the structure of past ecosystems, or paleoecology, is regarded
              as an essential component of contemporary studies of human evolution.  Through
              detailed investigations of the association between ecology and evolutionary
              transformation it is possible to generate hypotheses about the factors that
              ultimately contributed to major events in the evolutionary history of hominids
              (humans and their close extinct relatives), including speciation, adaptive
              shifts, and extinctions.  Previously, interpretations of the paleoecology at
              the important fossil hominid site of Laetoli in Tanzania (dating to 3.5-3.8
              million year ago) have suggested that it is either an arid to semi-arid
              grassland with patches of bush and woodland or a more heavily wooded habitat. 
              The objective of this project is to resolve this contentious issue by more
              thoroughly documenting the paleoecological setting at Laetoli.  This study will
              utilize a range of data from the fossil faunas from Laetoli, and will apply a
              variety of methods and techniques to these data, such as indicator species,
              ecomorphology, ecological structure and community composition analyses.  The
              project will also investigate, for the first time, fine-grained ecological
              distinctions between individual stratigraphic horizons and different
              sub-localities.  The overall goal will be to present a more detailed, more
              comprehensive, and more informed assessment of the paleoecology at Laetoli. 
              This will take into account the broad spectrum of faunal evidence available,
              the geographical and temporal complexity represented at the site, and the
              limitations imposed by taphonomic factors.  The results of this project will
              provide a better understanding of the types of habitats exploited by early
              hominids, and lead to a more critical appreciation of their habitat
              preferences.  The project will ultimately provide an important building block
              in developing broader scale macroevolutionary models that are essential for
              understanding and interpreting the  contexts that shaped human evolution.
