Title       : Aquisition of Image Analysis Instrumentation for Environmental Microbiology,
               Cell Biology and Genetics Research and Teaching in an Undergraduate Institution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0216180

Award Number: 0216180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47027              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Huber huberdh@mail.wvsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Virgina State Colleg
	      
	      Institute, WV  25112    304/766-3000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. David H. Huber and Dr. Mark Chatfield at
West
              Virginia State College for the acquisition of an Image Analysis system.  The
              
digital image analysis applications that are required by many molecular
              biology techniques that involve DNA, RNA and protein imaging. This instrument
              will be used for environmental microbiology and cell biology research, as well
              as molecular biology instruction in several Biology Department classes.  The
              environmental microbiology research involves a long-term study of microbial
              diversity and microbial metabolism in model bioprocessing reactors that are
              used for degrading organic matter.  This research will demonstrate how the
              composition of a microbial community is linked to its overall metabolism.  A
              second area of research will examine the molecular controls of plant cell
              division using model plant cell cultures.

The goals of the environmental
              microbiology research are: 1) to examine the composition of the microbial
              communities in thermophilic anaerobic bioprocessing reactors, and 2) to
              determine the fate of antibiotic resistance genes that enter bioprocessing
              reactors.

Bioprocessing reactors, also called digesters, transform organic
              waste into methane, a useful combustible gas, and fertilizer.  The microbial
              interactions responsible for these chemical transformations in bioreactors are
              very complex and not well understood.  Improvements in reactor biotechnology
              will be a practical benefit of this research.  The
plant cell division
              research will improve our understanding of the molecular processes that govern
              plant growth.  The analyzer will also be used for molecular biology training in
              several classes at West Virginia State College.  The new instrument will
              significantly advance student training in molecular biology, microbiology and
              genetics.

