Title       : MRI - Acquisition of Test Equipment for Wireless Microsystems at RF/Microwave
               Frequencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0216265

Award Number: 0216265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayanti Venkataraman jnvee@rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sohail A. Dianat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl D. Hirschman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Santosh K. Kurinec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The instrumentation being requested would support five currently funded research
              projects and would establish test capabilities to support the upcoming
              Microsystems Ph.D. program in the College of Engineering at RIT. The previously
              stated scope will not change significantly. Additional funding will be obtained
              through RIT, the College of Engineering and industrial support. Following is
              the scope and justification for the revised equipment list.

The Microwave
              and Antenna Lab, within the EE Department, does have excellent RF measurement
              capabilities. However the lab is short of some key instrumentation for higher
              frequency characterization and the testing of micro-scale structures. The probe
              measurement system for interfacing the circuitry in the chip and on the package
              to the network analyzer is not available. The deficiency of this very crucial
              accessory is currently being addressed by making measurements at Georgia Tech.
              This short-term solution is tedious and slow, and prevents graduate students
              from optimizing designs on their own. There is a critical need for a probe
              measurement system. The number of probes and accessories previously requested
              has been reduced, to match with the available funding. Also, software that was
              previously requested for theoretical modeling of RF circuitry has been removed
              and will be obtained through research funding and in conjunction with support
              from the Electrical Engineering Department.

Network analyzers at frequencies
              up to 6 GHz are available in the Microwave lab, for measuring the reflection
              and transmission characteristics of RF components, for characterizing CMOS and
              SiGe heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBT's) and for optimizing input
              characteristics of antenna arrays. However, for higher frequency microwave
              circuit characterization a network analyzer with capabilities extending to 40
              GHz is required. Because of the reduced budget, some of the options requested
              previously have been removed. The most important ones, such as the time domain
              option, the TRL calibration and the frequency-offset mode have been retained.
              Accessories such as cables, the GPIB kit, repair and service will be provided,
              as needed, by the EE Department.

The HP89441A vector signal analyzer
              required for optimizing the smart antenna system has been removed from the
              equipment list. At present, this instrument has been loaned by HP to the
              Electrical Engineering Department for classroom and research purposes. It is
              the intention to negotiate with HP, for acquiring this equipment as a
              donation.

The chip and package fabrication would be done in the
              Semiconductor and Microsystems Fabrication Laboratory (SMFL) of RLT, which has
              a complete IC and MEMS fabrication capability. However, there is currently no
              Microwave and RF instrumentation in the facility for device characterization.
              It is critical that the test capability of the SMFL be strengthened in order to
              support the increased activity in RF-MEMS, and to support Ph.D. level research
              in Microsystems. Because of the reduced budget, some of the items that were
              originally requested were removed. Although an RF signal generator and a
              digital oscilloscope are needed for mixed-signal testing, other systems that
              are available from neighboring departments in the college (Electrical and
              Computer Engineering) should be adequate as a short-term solution. These
              systems may eventually be acquired through additional college funding. The
              semi-automated probe station, originally proposed, has been requested from
              Motorola. An equivalent model, the KLA 1201 probe station, has been recently
              committed by Motorola as a donation. The requested software packages for
              instrument control, data collection and parameter extraction will be obtained
              through research grants and industrial support.

