Title       : A Stable Isotope and Eddy Covariance System for Monitoring Ecosystem Metabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0216471

Award Number: 0216471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279101             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Hungate Bruce.Hungate@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Kolb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen C. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Non-Technical Abstract

A grant has been awarded to Northern Arizona
              University to acquire eddy covariance towers and a stable isotope ratio mass
              spectrometer. The eddy covariance equipment will be used to measure carbon,
              water, and energy exchange between southwestern ecosystems and the atmosphere.
              These fluxes are critical regulators of ecosystem processes, such as
              decomposition, 
nutrient cycling, consumer activity, and groundwater recharge
              to riparian ecosystems. They also influence regional and global climate and are
              of increasing interest to policy-makers concerned with management of greenhouse
              gases. Previous eddy covariance studies emphasize determining net fluxes in
              pristine ecosystems. The two major goals of this project are 1) to use stable
              isotope techniques to determine the mechanisms responsible for changing net
              fluxes (e.g., for carbon dioxide, determining how overstory trees versus
              understory grasses contribute to total ecosystem photosynthesis and
              respiration), and 2) using large-scale experiments, to determine how fluxes of
              carbon, water, and energy respond to disturbance and land use practices.
Eddy
              covariance and stable isotope measurements will be conducted in two
              experimental settings. First, tracts of Ponderosa Pine forest that have been
              thinned to reduce fire danger will be compared with dense, control forests,
              documenting the impacts of so-called 'forest restoration' on fluxes of carbon,
              water, and energy. Second, grasslands under varying grazing management
              practices will be compared to assess which land management practices, for
              example, are more effective at conserving water and storing carbon. In these
              experiments, instruments on towers will be used to measure 'eddies' (turbulent
              air movements) carrying pockets of air upwards, downwards, and sideways.
              Measuring vertical air movements and the amount of carbon dioxide, water vapor,
              and heat they contain enables one to calculate the net fluxes of these
              constituents between the ecosystem and the atmosphere. The isotope ratio mass
              spectrometer will be used to analyze the stable isotope composition of carbon
              dioxide and water vapor in samples of air throughout the canopy.  Stable
              isotopes of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen provide characteristic fingerprints of
              how individual components of ecosystems contribute to overall fluxes measured
              by eddy covariance, so coupling these two techniques will enable researchers to
              determine which 
ecosystem components are responsible for altering net
              fluxes.
This equipment will be used to address research questions ranging from
              the effects of climate on ecosystem functioning to the implications of
              large-scale forest restoration for regional climate and site water balance.
              Once established, this new flux measurement array will attract additional
              
researchers working on issues as diverse as design of new range management
              programs to regional influences of globally important phenomena such as El Nino
              and the Pacific Decadal Oscillation. Undergraduate students from
              underrepresented groups will be recruited to participate in the proposed
              research through an NSF funded UMEB program already in place at NAU. The
              
theme of the UMEB program includes specific research activities that dovetail
              nicely with the research enabled by this instrumentation grant (e.g., Carbon
              Balance of Colorado Plateau Ecosystems, and Livestock Management, Productivity,
              and Diversity of Southwestern Grasslands). Minority students recruited into the
              UMEB program will work with mentors 
involved with the flux and isotope
              studies and will attend special classes in which the findings of the ecosystem
              experiments are presented. In sum, the equipment funded by this grant will
              increase opportunities for training students of diverse backgrounds at NAU in
              state-of the-art techniques and research relevant to important issues in
              ecology and environmental biology

