Title       : BE/CNH: Biocomplexity: Integrating Models of Natural and Human Dynamics in
               Forest Landscapes Across Scales and Cultures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0216722

Award Number: 0216722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $566020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miguel F. Acevedo acevedo@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Armin R. Mikler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. LaPoint  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Daniel Mauldin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Baird Callicott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1689,1691,5926,9169,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Few ecosystems are now free of extensive human influence, but the ways that
              human activity affects ecosystems such systems and their reciprocal effects on
              human behavior are poorly understood.  The major objective of this research
              project is to develop integrated models that couple forest ecosystem dynamics
              to human decision making.  The project focuses on two major components and
              their interaction:  (1) the structure and functions of forest ecosystems; and
              (2) the human behaviors that affect forest ecosystem structure and functions. 
              The models of forest structure will be hierarchically arrayed, beginning with
              the dynamics of tree growth and distribution and work up to the stand and
              landscape scales.  Changes in forest cover affect ecological processes and
              functions, leading to predictable changes in water quantity and quality.  Human
              behaviors will be simulated using multi-agent models, and they will be coupled
              to the forest models through linkages that describe different forms of
              disturbance of human activities on forest and hydrologic system functions and
              by receiving feedbacks about the effects of such actions from the forest and
              hydrological models.  Information about the values driving human decision
              making will be obtained through empirical social-science research, including
              survey questionnaires.  The dynamics of the coupled natural and human systems
              will be analyzed mathematically to identify complex behavior (such as
              oscillations and "chaos") resulting from the interaction of the human and
              natural systems.  The project will examine natural-human system interactions in
              four study areas:  the Trinity River Greenbelt corridor and the Big Thicket in
              Texas and the Caparo Forest and Imataca Reserve in Venezuela.  Considerable
              data already has been gathered for the first of these sites, permitting it to
              serve as a test bed for the project.  This two-year pilot study will test the
              feasibility of modeling forest dynamics as they are reciprocally influenced by
              human decision making, and it will begin the extension of the research to the
              larger study areas.  Application of the models to the sites in Venezuela, which
              are very different culturally and ecologically, will demonstrate the generality
              of this approach to understanding coupled human and natural systems.

Results
              of this research will provide a better quantitative understanding of the
              interplay between human actions and forest dynamics.  This enhanced
              understanding will give landowners, other stakeholders, and policy makers
              reliable information about the impact of their decisions on the future
              composition, structure, and functionality of local ecosystems.  It will thereby
              facilitate a more informed analysis of the long-term consequences of private
              choices and public policies on the natural systems in which human systems are
              embedded and with which they interact.  This project is supported by an award
              resulting from the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
              Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

