Title       : MRI: 3D Nano Manufacturing of Novel Photonic Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0216423

Award Number: 0216423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiang Zhang xiang@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chih-Ming Ho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shimon Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eli Yablonovitch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funds for the
              purchase of a scanning electron microscope and a Fourier transformation
              infrared spectrometer. This equipment will be used to support research on
              development of three-dimensional nanomanufacturing technologies and on those
              technologies' applications in nanophotonic structures and devices. Most
              nanophotonic structures with designed functionalities are complicated and
              three-dimensional, therefore three-dimensional nanomanufacturing technologies
              are essential. The scanning electron microscope can provide images with high
              resolution, and the Fourier transformation infrared spectrometer can measure
              the essential optical properties of photonic structures and devices. These
              structural and optical properties will provide important information and
              guidance for the development and optimization of nanomanufacturing processes.
              
     The research conducted using this equipment is interdisciplinary and
              involves the collaborative efforts of researchers from various departments. 
              This will likely lead to advances in the sciences and technologies of
              nanomanufacturing, photonic material, and devices. By creating a tight-nit
              environment of mechanical engineers, electrical engineers, and chemists, a new
              generation of engineers with interdisciplinary knowledge and research
              experience will be trained through participating in these research activities.
              The advances in nanomanufacturing and education will benefit society by helping
              the United States maintain a competitive edge in this high technology industry
              and prepare a high quality workforce for the nation's economy and security.
