Title       : Acquisition of a Cryostage and Transfer System to Characterize Biological
               Systems and Frozen Materials with Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0216480

Award Number: 0216480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109088             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Holden holden@bren.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeff Dozier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Galen D. Stucky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua P. Schimel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacob N. Israelachvili  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of a Cryostage and Transfer System to Characterize Biological
              Systems and Frozen Materials with Environmental Scanning Electron
              Microscopy

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Patricia A. Holden and colleagues
              at the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) for purchasing equipment
              to look at the fine structure of frozen materials.  The equipment, a Cryostage
              and Transfer System, will be mounted on an environmental scanning electron
              microscope that UCSB acquired through a previous NSF award.  The combined
              system supports every aspect of modern environmental, biomolecular,
              bioengineering and materials sciences. With an environmental scanning electron
              microscope, researchers can observe complicated biological, geological and
              manmade materials without having to damage the samples by coating or drying
              beforehand.  The addition of the cryostage and transfer system allows
              scientists to look at snow or ice, or to freeze biological tissues and look at
              them while frozen.  UCSB scientists and engineers will now be able to work with
              frozen samples of all types and thereby learn about the real, unaltered
              structure of important, delicate materials.

Long term, many projects will
              use the CST-ESEM.  Initial projects include:

Discovering how much water is
              held by bacterial colonies in soil aggregates by freezing, fracturing and
              observing internal water.  We will study temperate and tundra soils to learn
              about how bacteria live in each type of soil.
 
Observing bonding of ice
              crystals, called sintering.  Sintering, or lack of sintering, controls
              avalanche hazard in alpine regions.

Determining the impurities in snow. 
              Snow contains atmospheric pollutants that are released with initial
              melting.

Freezing bacteria that have been tagged with special identifying
              molecules. We can learn where and how the tags attach and thereby study how
              pollutants interact with bacteria.

Learning how new "tunable" biological
              materials change over time by freezing and imaging them at different times in
              their development.  Such materials have promise for new artificial tissues,
              adhesives, and improved drug-delivery.

The broad significance of acquiring
              the cryostage for our microscope is multifold.  First, researchers from UCSB
              and beyond will use this instrument to study socially relevant themes such as
              pollutant biodegradation by soil bacteria, avalanche formation, release of
              concentrated pollutants in snowmelt, speculations about extraterrestrial life,
              likely changes that global warming will cause, and the next generation of
              biomedical materials and devices.  Second, we will teach many students how to
              acquire state-of-the-art data so they can develop into the next generation of
              well-trained environmental and medical problem-solvers.  Third, we will advance
              the research infrastructure nationally because ours will be one of the first
              environmental scanning electron microscopes with a cryostage in the USA. 
              Finally, we will attract and help researchers from UCSB, the local region, and
              around the world, thus enlarging the influence of our research
              infrastructure.

