Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Transmission Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0216466

Award Number: 0216466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Speck speck@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlos G. Levi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Kramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony K. Cheetham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
              University of California at Santa Barbara with the acquisition of a
              state-of-the-art field emission transmission electron microscope (FE-TEM) with
              capabilities for atomic resolution Z-contrast imaging and spectroscopy. The
              instrument is crucial to meet needs in ongoing and future research projects in
              electronic, inorganic, and structural materials, UCSB proposes the acquisition.
               The needs of the research can be fulfilled with a 200 kV TEM/STEM equipped
              with a field emission source, high angle annular dark field detector, a 2Kx2K
              CCD detector, and state-of-the-art electron spectrometer/energy filter.
              Z-contrast imaging and atomic resolution spectroscopy have been routinely
              demonstrated on the instrument with a 1.4 Angstrom probe size, 20 picoAmpere
              beam current, and energy resolution of ~0.7 electron Volts.  The acquisition of
              the proposed FE-TEM will free an existing conventional 200 kV TEM for studies
              of soft materials.  
The acquisition of the new FE-TEM will strengthen the
              education of students in advanced TEM.  Graduate students and post-doctoral
              researchers are the primary 'hands-on' users of TEM at UCSB.  Formal training
              in TEM is provided in a series of courses is offered in the Materials
              Department. A new course in advanced TEM that reflects the unique capabilities
              of a FE-TEM will be offered.  The advanced TEM course will include a lab module
              to provide hands-on training in high-resolution imaging in CTEM and in STEM and
              in advanced analytical techniques, such as electron energy-loss spectroscopy. 
              Through the Outreach program of the MRSEC, the scientists will work with high
              school teachers on TEM sample preparation and imaging and thus teach and
              connect  to a broad community of students and teachers.

To meet needs in
              ongoing and future research projects in advanced electronic, inorganic, and
              structural materials, UCSB will acquire a state-of-the-art field emission
              transmission electron microscope (FE-TEM).  Such an instrument produces an
              atomic scale electron probe.  This sub-nanometer probe (~2 x 10-10 meters) can
              be used to image individual atoms and atomic columns with direct information on
              structure, composition, and bonding.  An advanced FE-TEM provides a unique
              combination of atomic-scale information that is essential for the advancement
              of nanoscience and nanotechnology.
Graduate students and post-doctoral
              researchers are the primary 'hands-on' users of TEM at UCSB.  Formal training
              in TEM is provided in a series of courses offered in the Materials Dept.  The
              new FE-TEM will strengthen the education of students in advanced TEM. A new
              course in advanced TEM that reflects the unique capabilities of a FE-TEM will
              be offered.  The advanced TEM course will include hands-on training in
              high-resolution imaging in CTEM and in STEM and in advanced analytical
              techniques, such as electron energy-loss spectroscopy.  Through the Outreach
              program of the MRSEC, UCSB scientists will work with high school teachers on
              TEM sample preparation and imaging and thus teach and connect to a broad
              community of students and teachers.


