Title       : Enhancement of a Synchrotron Beamline for Magnetics Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0216134

Award Number: 0216134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Kurtz kurtz@phys.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Mankey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Dowben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shane Stadler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip T. Sprunger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports enhancement of a synchrotron beamline for magnetics research
              and education. Development of a new generation of spintronic materials is
              occurring and there is a need for facilities targeted to characterize the
              relationship between magnetic properties and electronic and physical
              structures. This grant addresses this need by leveraging a significant
              investment in the existing beamline at the LSU CAMD synchrotron light source.
              The upgrade will provide for improved characterization of magnetic materials
              using circularly polarized light at energies spanning the L-edges of 3d
              transition metals. The upgrade consists of two sets of improvements. First, the
              current plane-grating monochromator beamline will be enhanced to allow for the
              use of tunable, circularly polarized synchrotron light. Stepper-motor
              controlled, cooled baffles will be constructed to extract circularly polarized
              light from the upper and lower portions of the orbit. The beamline was designed
              to accommodate two gratings, and a new, 300 - 1200 eV, grating will be
              installed to extend the current photon energy range. Finally, a
              triple-reflection polarizer will be installed beyond the last optical element
              in the beamline to measure the degree of light polarization. A second component
              is a general-purpose user-endstation to provide for sample preparation,
              evaporators for in-situ film growth, and coils for magnetizing samples.
              Spectroscopy will include total yield measurements as well as photoemission and
              provide for inclusion of current LEED and RHEED instrumentation. 

This
              enhancement will leverage investments in a group of magnetic materials
              researchers from Louisiana, Nebraska, Alabama's NSF-MINT Center, and Illinois
              and provide for a simple but reliable method to characterize a broad range of
              magnetic materials. The access provided by the location of this light source,
              located in an underserved region of the country, serves the needs of
              researche

