Title       : MRI: Development of a Nanoscale Absolute Dilatometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0216420

Award Number: 0216420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $580377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Patterson spatters@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin M. Lawton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9229,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant provides resources to develop
              and install an ultraprecision absolute dilatometer and necessary supporting
              equipment at the Center for Precision Metrology at the University of North
              Carolina at Charlotte. The dilatometer will be able to make length measurements
              of a variety of samples with nanometer accuracy.  This will provide the
              capability of nanostrain measurements of material properties such as
              dimensional stability, thermal expansion, electrostriction and
              magnetostriction.

A wide variety of products with critical dimensions,
              forms, and surfaces that have tolerances in the nanometer domain are of rapidly
              increasing commercial importance. At the same time that tolerance and feature
              size are becoming smaller, the overall scale of these products has remained
              fixed or increased. Where it had previously been sufficient to know properties
              such as creep, dimensional stability, thermal expansion, magnetostriction and
              electrostriction at the level of parts per million, current and proposed meso-
              and micro-scale products demand such understanding at the part per billion
              level. The instrumentation supported by this grant will enhance understanding
              of such properties and provide engineering data for the design of next
              generation precision systems such as semiconductor lithography machines. The
              facilities developed with support from this grant will also provide the means
              to train both graduate and undergraduate students in modern ultraprecision
              measurement methods.
