Title       : Conference: 'Self-Assembly' - The Future
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0216989

Award Number: 0216989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Alan Hatton tahatton@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1687,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This special meeting of experts in the field of molecular self-assembly is to
              promote intensive discussions on, and to identify future prospects and needs
              for, fundamental research on and implementation of these concepts in emerging
              technologies. It is anticipated that these discussions will catalyze
              cross-disciplinary and international collaborations to advance the state of
              knowledge and application of this important field. 

Molecular self-assembly
              lies at the heart of advanced applications in areas as diverse as medicine,
              information technology, bio-engineering and green chemistry, and is poised to
              play a significant role in fueling the growth of the rapidly-emerging field of
              nanotechnology. To realize the potential offered by these technologies, there
              is a need to advance the understanding of self-assembled systems, from both
              experimental and theoretical perspectives, and to develop a vision as to the
              most promising areas for applications and technology development of these
              phenomena. The purpose of this meeting is to bring together a group of eminent
              scientists spanning a range of appropriate disciplines (chemistry, physics,
              chemical engineering, materials science and biochemical physics) to stimulate
              identification of the prospects and needs for advancing our understanding of
              self-assembly phenomena in the context of advanced applications in a wide range
              of areas, and to promote inter-disciplinary and international collaborations.
              The organizers will provide an exciting and inspirational atmosphere for the
              conference. As well as describing recent advances, the speakers will be asked
              to look forward and raise significant issues that should be addressed in the
              short and intermediate term for the most effective way for furthering this
              area. In this way we intend to catalyze new collaborations, which will provide
              the foundation for future research programs in the area.

A wide range of
              topics fit under the general heading of self-assembly, both in bulk solution
              and at interfaces, and these will be addressed at the meeting. Some specific
              topics, which will be discussed are not only the mechanistic aspects of
              self-assembly in surfactant systems, the role of binding energy concepts, and
              the nature of weak and long-range forces, but also how a deeper understanding
              of these principles can accelerate the development of new functional materials
              based on self-assembly principles, and of new applications of these materials.
              Many of the details of interactions at the molecular level such as
              lipid-protein interactions in biological membranes and phospholipid/surfactant
              interactions are still not well understood. A related topic of current interest
              is the spatial and temporal control of the interfacial and bulk properties of
              both liquids and solids, which is of crucial importance in microfluidic
              applications, for instance, and which will require a better understanding of
              the dynamic aspects of self-assembly and development of methods to accomplish
              these goals. New interrogative techniques are key to facilitating advances in
              all these areas of colloid and interfacial science, and will be another focal
              point of this conference.


