Title       : Development of Ultra-High Speed Detectors to Study the Physics of Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0216406

Award Number: 0216406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1411136            (Estimated)
Investigator: Eberhard Bodenschatz eb22@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sol M. Gruner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lance R. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zellman Warhaft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9134,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Particle tracking in turbulent flows requires very high temporal (approx.
              100,000Hz) and spatial resolution imaging detection systems (512 x 512 pixels).
              Such a system generates data at very high rates, which need to be transferred,
              stored, and analyzed. In addition three-dimensional tracking  of many particles
              requires the simultaneous stereoscopic imaging by four cameras.  Traditional
              detector technology cannot handle the resulting onslaught of data (> 26
              gigabytes of data per second per camera) that would need to be streamed into
              memory and stored for further processing.  Here, we will develop the next
              generation, ultra-high speed, high-resolution particle tracking instrumentation
              for following the motion of approximately 300 minute tracer particles in three
              dimensions with a temporal resolution of 100,000Hz. This new system will be two
              orders of magnitude faster than any existing conventional imaging system of
              comparable spatial resolution. The instrument will be based on stereoscopic
              imaging with four ultra-high-speed, high-resolution pixel array detectors (PAD)
              that will be developed at Cornell.  Each PAD has 1024x512 "intelligent" pixels.
              The development of the uniquely designed PAD detectors, the data acquisition
              system, and the data analysis software will result in a technological
              breakthrough for the Lagrangian analysis of high Reynolds number turbulent
              flows.  

Fully developed turbulence is ubiquitous.  Virtually all
              engineering and naturally occurring flows (e.g., atmospheric, oceanographic,
              and astrophysical flows ) involve high Reynolds number turbulence. The
              transport and mixing properties of turbulence ultimately impact our daily
              lives. In systems from the mixing and chemical reactions in a turbulent burner
              or internal combustion engine to the transport of pollutants (or bioagents) in
              the atmosphere, or even the "simple" mixing of milk into a coffee cup, the
              understanding of turbulence is essential. It is clear that many aspects of
              turbulence are best studied by following the motion of fluid particles. The
              difficulty of tracking particles in high Reynolds number turbulence has thus
              far made it impossible to test many long-standing predictions. This project
              represents a major step to confront this issue. The detection and analysis
              system to be developed will simultaneously follow 300 particles at a rate of
              100,000 pictures per second. (A standard TV camera takes 30 pictures per
              second.) This high speed will be achieved by using pixel array technology in
              which each pixel has local intelligence.  Data of this kind will enable
              theoretical advances in a number of important applications such as scalar
              mixing and cloud formation.  Moreover, the technology, once developed, is
              likely to impact broader fields than can not be envisioned at this time.  For
              example, tracking of particles is at the heart of a number of environmental
              problems (e.g., contaminant or bioagent dispersion). A successful PAD
              fabrication will likely result in more sensor chips than needed for this study.
              Many of these chips would be made available to the larger community.

