Title       : Development of a Deposition System for Research/Education in Materials
               Preparation for Field Effects Doping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0216925

Award Number: 0216925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm R. Beasley beasley@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore H. Geballe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aharon Kapitulnik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports development of a pulsed laser deposition system, a key
              component in a new deposition facility that optimizes the various layers
              required for field-effect doping in a highly controlled manner and with
              well-characterized interfaces. The system is built upon existing laboratory
              capabilities. The development should permit versatile and reliable field-effect
              structures to be fabricated that can routinely withstand the enormous electric
              field stresses inherently present in such structures. An aim is to allow very
              good control over the interfaces at which the field-effect doping occurs must
              be achieved.

The use of the field effect to dope the surface of a material
              is a well-established technique in the study and application of semiconductors.
              Until recently it was believed that field-effect doping could not be usefully
              applied to conducting (metallic) materials. Recent results using both direct,
              voltage-biased capacitive field-effect structures and ferroelectric
              field-effect structures have demonstrated that quite substantial charge
              densities can be induced.  In some cases the consequences of this field-effect
              doping have been dramatic. For example, Schoen, Batlogg and coworkers have
              achieved a superconducting transition temperature of 117K by means of
              field-effect doping into CH3Br intercalated carbon C60. These results both
              provide an existence proof that the field effect in conducting materials can be
              made to work and demonstrate dramatically the possibilities. These results
              represent the opening of a new era in the study of two-dimensional electronic
              systems, one of the most fertile areas of condensed matter physics over the
              past few decades. Concomitantly, they represent a particularly effective venue
              for the training of graduate students. 


