Title       : Acquisition of Scanning Probe Microscopy Apparatus for Research and Education in
               Atomic and Molecular Manipulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0216913

Award Number: 0216913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130805             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hari C. Manoharan manoharan@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will enable
              groundbreaking experiments that seek to apply the "bottom-up" approach of
              atomic and molecular manipulation to several focused areas in science and
              technology.  The primary experimental apparatus for these investigations is a
              custom-built low-temperature scanning probe microscope capable of both studying
              and controlling matter at atomic length scales.  The tunneling mode of the
              apparatus will be exploited to perform scanning tunneling microscopy (STM)
              within an environment comprised of ultra-high vacuum, ultra-low temperature
              down to 500 mK, a high magnetic field up to 14 T, and a multiple-probe sample
              stage for performing simultaneous electron transport measurements.  Achieving
              these challenging conditions requires the acquisition of the specialized
              equipment described in this award.  Undergraduate and graduate students working
              directly on these projects will integrate and operate the proposed
              instrumentation to perform state-of-the-art experiments.  In synergy with these
              laboratory components, this instrumentation will critically augment a
              substantial educational and outreach program already being implemented by the
              PI and Stanford University.
%%%
This award from the Instrumentation for
              Materials Research program will enable groundbreaking experiments that seek to
              apply the "bottom-up" approach of atomic and molecular manipulation to several
              focused areas in science and technology.  This scientific effort is
              interdisciplinary in nature, centering on physics and materials science but
              involving ideas, techniques, and conundrums from other fields such as
              chemistry, engineering, and information technology.  The primary experimental
              apparatus for these investigations is a custom-built scanning probe microscope
              capable of both studying and controlling matter at atomic length scales,
              requiring the acquisition of the specialized equipment described in this award.
               Undergraduate and graduate students working directly on these projects will
              integrate and operate the proposed instrumentation to perform state-of-the-art
              experiments.  In synergy with these laboratory components, this instrumentation
              will critically augment a substantial educational and outreach program already
              being implemented by the PI and Stanford University.  Through these
              multifaceted contacts between the research agenda, students, and people outside
              the laboratory, the proposed instrumentation will have a broad and unique
              impact beyond the traditional realm of experimental science.  In recognition of
              the importance of this award, Stanford University is providing cost-sharing
              funds amounting to 50% of the funds provided by NSF.  


