Title       : BE/CNH: Complexity Across Boundaries: Coupled Human and Natural Systems in the
               Yellowstone Northern Elk Winter Range
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0216588

Award Number: 0216588
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $638000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. McGinnis mcgidavi@isu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Duncan T. Patten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jason F. Shogren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Travis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Idaho State University
	      309 Fine Arts Bldg., Box 8046
	      Pocatello, ID  832098046    208/282-2592

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1689,1691,9150,9169,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A primary issue in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem is the ecology of the
              northern elk herd winter range (NEWR), where elk and wolves cross the
              Yellowstone National Park boundary into areas managed as "natural" and
              "altered" systems.  Land management inside the park and development of the
              winter range outside park boundaries suggests that wildlife management plays
              out on a landscape mosaic dominated by human decisions, values, and economic
              considerations.  The main objectives of this research project are to gain a
              better understanding of the relationships between ecosystem dynamics and human
              decision-making and to use this understanding to construct an ecosystem model
              that facilitates exploration of plausible future scenarios in a manner that
              captures the uncertainty associated with complex systems.  An investigative
              team drawn from multiple disciplines and from five different states will
              develop spatially explicit elk, wolf, and vegetation submodels and will
              integrate these models to assess the impacts of climate variability, land-use
              decisions, and economic valuation on the environment under changing conditions.
               The elk submodel will extend state-of-the-science energetics-based models to
              include information on changing landscapes and climate/snow conditions that
              affect winter feeding habits.  The investigators will develop predator
              components that mimic the impacts of the recent wolf reintroduction in
              Yellowstone.  The snow/climate submodel will be developed to produce snow depth
              and snow condition maps based on local and large-scale climate parameters and
              field measurements.  Vegetation submodels will focus on willows and aspen,
              plants that often are browsed heavily by elk.  The investigators will address
              the impacts of changing groundwater resources on these species to better
              understand their resilience to the combined impacts of elk browse and
              groundwater stress.  Because elk, vegetation, and other factors have become
              measures by which humans place values on the landscape that influence
              decisions, stakeholder groups will be studied and interviewed to assure that
              the resulting models have relevance in the socio-political context of the NEWR.
               This is particularly important, because stakeholders have a long history of
              conflict regarding land-use decisions.  This project will develop a land-use
              history, define key stakeholder-identified variables, and use probability-based
              land-use models.  Knowledge derived from stakeholder studies will be integrated
              into the natural system models as coefficients of habitat availability and
              quality; as parameters on barriers, sources and sinks; as qualitative and
              categorical constraints on modeled variables and relationships; and as feedback
              loops between the human and natural system.  The natural and human system
              submodels will be combined within the context of a single multi-agent system
              that can model complex adaptive systems.  The multi-agent system-based model
              will be used to simulate alternative states that result from assumptions about
              decisions, natural conditions, and ecosystem processes.  The results will
              demonstrate the complex nature of a highly integrated ecosystem and the role
              that climate, human decisions, and natural variability play in producing
              ecosystem change and/or stability. 

This research will merge models of
              ecosystems and human decision-making.  A primary focus is to build robust
              ecosystem models that can be integrated with a human system model based on land
              use decisions and valuation of ecosystem services.  By interacting with NEWR
              stakeholders and by developing key linkages within natural and human systems,
              this project will evaluate existing and potential land-use strategies and
              alternative policy options.  The models will demonstrate the complex
              interactions that exist within this changing landscape by simulating climate
              factors, policy decisions, and natural change in the vegetation.  Models will
              be extended to simulate potential future conditions based on sound scientific
              principles, past trends in human decision making, and possible future human
              decisions.  Scenarios may be used to help build consensus and diminish conflict
              in the NEWR before decisions are made.  The NEWR is a critical component of the
              Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, and understanding the complexity associated with
              human and natural system dynamics will help sustain the area for future
              generations.  This project will serve as a model for protected areas worldwide
              that are undergoing similar boundary conflicts.  This project is supported by
              an award resulting from the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the
              Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

