Title       : Acquisition of Computational Systems for Systems Biology Research in the MIT
               BioMicro Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0216437

Award Number: 0216437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Sorger psorger@MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy Keating  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce Tidor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher B. Burge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:
A grant has been awarded to the BioMicro Center at MIT to acquire
              high-performance computers for research in biology and biological engineering. 
              The systems will be among the most powerful at MIT and will be dedicated to
              advancing the research programs of an active group of young faculty.  These
              Assistant and Associate Professors lead research teams working on a wide range
              of problems in computational biology.  The teams are united in their interest
              in the application of numerical models, computational simulations and
              large-scale computation to biological problems.  The completion of the human
              genome sequence has emphasized the remarkable complexity of biological
              processes.  While traditional molecular biology and molecular medicine will
              continue to play an important role in unraveling how these processes work, it
              seems almost certain that fundamental advances will come from the application
              of quantitative and rigorous analytic methods.
The research includes Professor
              Amy Keating's work on protein design. Dr. Keating's goal is to discern the
              rules governing protein-protein interactions through calculation and simulation
              and to then apply the rules to actual experiments.  Professor Mike Yaffe will
              use computation to mine the human genome for proteins that play crucial roles
              in the transmission of signals within cells.  Dr. Yaffe hopes to determine how
              circuits are constructed in cells, and to compare these circuits to electronic
              and mechanical circuits.  Professor Tidor will use large-scale calculations to
              try to determine how proteins interact with each other and with small molecules
              (such as drugs). This is a long-standing problem in structural biology, but Dr.
              Tidor has recently shown that approximations drawn from engineering can be
              successfully applied to the problems that have proven to be impossible to
              calculate using conventional methods.
The new facility will not only enhance
              novel research but also graduate and undergraduate education. A new set of
              courses have the unusual distinction of being in the curriculum of three
              different departments: biology, biological engineering, and computer science. 
              The group's intention is to expose students to the very latest computational
              methods and computer systems.  Thus, high-performance computing will not only
              have a direct impact on world-class science, but also on education and
              training.  With the help of Prof. Amy Keating, the group is working hard to
              attract additional women to computational biology.  In the physical sciences
              women are significantly under-represented.  Computational biology holds great
              promise as a discipline in which the historically inequitable
              under-representation of women in physical sciences can be overcome by
              association with biology.



