Title       : Community, Immigrants and the Construction of Citizenship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0216886

Award Number: 0216886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn A. Staeheli lynner@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research examines the ways in which immigrants to the United States and
              United Kingdom understand citizenship.  Much of the theoretical debate over
              citizenship highlights two sets of issues:  1) the ways in which citizenship is
              understood and experienced as a result of the interplay between legal
              institutions and a feeling of belonging and membership in a political
              community, and 2) the ways in which ideas about citizenship may be changing in
              response to globalization.  These debates suggest ideas about and the
              experiences of being a citizen are changing as a result of international
              migration.  The research explores these debates through over 150 qualitative
              interviews and 36 focus groups with leaders and members of immigrant
              organizations in four US cities and two cities in the United Kingdom.  The
              particular focus is on organizations serving Arab immigrants. The organizations
              will cover a range of social, cultural, and political activities, and
              respondents will be selected to ensure variation across gender, socio-economic
              status, and age.  The research will examine the ways in which immigrants are
              incorporated into the cities and countries in which they currently live, how
              they understand citizenship, the connections they may continue to feel with the
              source country, and whether and how they reconcile feelings of belonging to
              communities in two countries.  The research specifically asks how ideas related
              to citizenship affect political activism and whether conditions within specific
              places shape their identification as citizens of either the host or source
              country.  

The research will yield important theoretical and tangible
              advances.  First, if migration is changing citizenship and the sense of
              belonging to a political community, then it is important to understand how they
              are changing and how the changes affect the lives of immigrants.  In focusing
              on the people who negotiate changing ideas about citizenship on a daily basis,
              the research provides the basis for theoretical advances that are grounded in
              real experiences.  This is particularly important in trying to understand the
              nature of citizenship and community in the context of globalization. 
              Transnational migration show no signs of receding, so it is important for
              receiving societies to understand the ways in which immigrants understand the
              roles of community and citizenship.  Recent events have demonstrated the
              importance of understanding why some groups feel marginalized or isolated
              within a society.  Attending to the differing conceptualizations of citizenship
              and community may create a situation in which understanding between different
              groups can be fostered

