Title       : Instrument Acquisition to Analyze Water, Soils, and Biomass for Environmental
               Research, Monitoring, and Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0216580

Award Number: 0216580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216922             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander G. Fernald fernald@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              April L. Ulery  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clint A. Loest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie Abbott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Alexander Fernald and
              co-principal
investigators Dr. Laurie Abbott, Dr. April Ulery, and Dr. Clint
              Loest at New
Mexico State University to acquire major research instrumentation
              to analyze
water, soils, and biomass for environmental research, monitoring
              and
assessment.  The awarded funds will enable purchase of four
              research
instruments: 1) a  Flow Injection Analysis System with ion
              chromatograph for analysis of major cations and anions in water, soils, and
              biomass; 2)a Nitrogen/Carbon
Analyzer for determination of N and C in soils
              and biomass; 3)a Laser Diffraction Particle Analyzer for measuring particle
              size distribution of suspended sediment and soils; and 4) an X-Ray Fluorescence
              Spectrum Analyzer for analysis of metals in liquids, soils, and biosolids.  The
              instrumentation will support research that has the goal of
providing
              information to: 1) reduce negative environmental effects of land
              use
practices, and 2) enhance quality of natural resources in New Mexico and
              the
arid Southwest.  Land use impacts on water, soil and biomass
              threaten
sustainable economic use and ecological health of rangeland,
              forest,
agriculture, and wildlife in New Mexico.  Water quality is a growing
              concern
with increasing competition for limited water supplies and
              decreasing
availability of high quality irrigation and drinking water. 
              Rapidly growing
dairies in New Mexico generate large amounts of animal waste,
              and pollution
from confined animal production threatens water and soil
              resources.  Metal
contamination is a problem in areas of New Mexico with
              naturally high mineral
occurrence and in areas impacted by mining, military,
              and agricultural
activities. 
As a minority-serving land grant institution,
              the mission of New Mexico State
University is to conduct meaningful research,
              to educate and train scientists,
and to extend information to the citizens of
              the state.  The state-of-the-art
instrumentation will provide a leap forward
              in the ability of university
investigators to conduct needed environmental
              research and fulfill the mission
to educate.  The instrumentation will
              initially support the research activities
of four investigators, faculty in
              three departments, and federal researchers. 
It will be used to train graduate
              and undergraduate students in the use of the
instruments as part of their
              research.  Obtaining this equipment will increase
NMSU competitiveness for
              future grant proposals.  The equipment will support
research to provide
              critical information that will allow agencies, communities,
and individuals to
              participate in meaningful and sustainable programs that
reduce negative
              environmental effects of land use practices and that enhance
the quality of
              water, soil and biomass resources.

