Title       : Development of a strain/temperature/suction-controlled true triaxial testing
               device for modeling unsaturated soil behavior under multi-axial stress states
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0216545

Award Number: 0216545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272178             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laureano R. Hoyos lhoyos@ce.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anand J. Puppala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A true triaxial testing apparatus will be developed to test 3-in per side,
              cubical specimens of unsaturated soil under simultaneous strain-, temperature-
              and suction-controlled conditions.  The equipment will be a mixed-boundary type
              of device, with the specimen seated on top of an arrangement of nine 5-bar
              ceramic disks and between five flexible membranes on the remaining sides of the
              cube.  The device will feature two independent pore-air and pore-water pressure
              control/monitoring systems.  Several specimens of silty sand will be subjected
              to a wide range of simple-to-complex stress paths for calibration and
              validation of the proposed device.  Suction states in the specimens will be
              induced via the axis-translation technique.  Successful completion of this
              development effort will considerably advance the existing knowledge and
              fundamental understanding of the stress-strain-strength behavior of unsaturated
              soils.  The device will be the first of its kind to be ever implemented at any
              academic setup in the US, and will constitute a major state-of-the-art
              instrumentation for research and integrated research/education activities at
              UTA in the geomechanics discipline.  Development of this equipment is also
              aimed at promoting partnerships between academic researchers and private
              instrument developers interested in the advancement of the unsaturated soil
              mechanics discipline.
