Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Genetic Analyzers for University of South Dakota
               Evolutionary Genetics Research Group
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0216473

Award Number: 0216473
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Molly Nepokroeff mnepokro@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugh B. Britten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Swallow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kaius Helenurm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to the University of South Dakota Department of
              Biology, under the supervision of Drs. Nepokroeff, Britten, Helenurm & Swallow,
              to acquire automated genetic analysis instrumentation. The equipment will be
              used for automated DNA sequencing, genetic fragment and genotyping analysis
              (e.g. microsatellite detection, DNA finger-printing using AFLPs). The equipment
              will be housed in the Biology Department, and will be used by an additional 17
              faculty from USD's Departments of Biology and Basic Biomedical Sciences. The
              acquisition of this equipment at USD is especially significant because there is
              currently no such facility on campus, and no high-throughput facility in the
              state of South Dakota.
Researchers in Biology at USD will address a number of
              important questions in evolutionary genetics, conservation biology and
              systematics using the genetic analyzer.  Specific projects to be addressed by
              Dr. Nepokroeff include the systematics of the carnation family,
              Caryophyllaceae, using molecular phylogenetic analysis of several different DNA
              sequences and phylogenetic approaches to study biogeography, (colonization and
              dispersal) in Pacific island species of the tropical shrub genus Psychotria
              (one of the most species-rich genera of flowering plants).   Additionally, she
              will study conservation and population genetics of several Hawaiian plant
              lineages using AFLP and microsatellite markers.  Dr. Britten plans to address
              population genetic structure and genetic variability of several Federally
              endangered species.  He will be investigating the effects of population
              fragmentation through habitat loss and historical sylvatic plague infections in
              Black-tailed prairie dogs using AFLP and microsatellite analysis. 
              Additionally, he plans to examine genetic variation in trumpeter swans and
              sandhill cranes.  Dr. Helenurm will address population genetics and evolution
              of insular endemic plants.  He will use DNA finger-printing methods, e.g.,
              microsatellite and AFLP markers to examine levels of genetic variability in
              several species of flowering plants endemic to California's Channel Islands,
              many of which are endangered.  He will also use AFLPs and DNA sequences to
              examine within-species (or "phylogeographic") relationships for plant species
              in the Channel Islands, a system which is poorly known.  Dr. Swallow will
              address questions concerning correlated evolution of morphological, behavioral
              and physiological traits in stalk-eyed flies (family Diopsidae), wild relatives
              of the fruit fly.  He will use DNA sequences for reconstructing phylogenetic
              relationships among species and populations of stalk-eyed flies.  Secondly, he
              will use DNA markers (AFLPs) in a QTL study to determine the number of genes
              involved in traits related to species recognition and mate choice.
The
              equipment will be used in original research by faculty, postdoctoral
              researchers, graduates and undergraduate students at USD, will be integrated
              into three courses in the USD curriculum.  The equipment will also be
              incorporated in several existing summer programs, geared to give research
              experiences to area minority high school students and their teachers. The new
              equipment and proposed programs are anticipated to serve at least four area
              colleges with research expertise and experiences, in addition to the USD
              community.  Acquiring an on-site facility will enhance the PI's competitiveness
              for federal research funds and attract new faculty and graduate students to
              USD's growing research programs.  Thus, a genetic analyzer facility will have
              an enormous impact on the quality of research and educational programs at USD,
              will allow the PIs to integrate teaching and research at a high level, and will
              enrich the USD community in a diversity of ways.
 


