Title       : Acquisition of Proteomics Equipment for Researchers at HSPH
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0216469

Award Number: 0216469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dieter A. Wolf   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dyann F. Wirth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce F. Demple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marianne Wessling-Resnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to the Harvard School of Public Health (HSPH) under the
              direction of Dr. Dieter Wolf to purchase instrumentation which will open new
              opportunities in the emerging field of system-wide analysis of protein
              expression and function ("proteomics"). A detailed understanding of the
              information contained within the many sequenced genomes available in public
              databases today requires state-of-the-art means of analyzing quantitative and
              qualitative differences in protein expression and function in a high-throughput
              format. Peptide mass spectrometry is a relatively new technology that is ideal
              for these applications and is widely expected to remain the most important core
              technology of proteomics research for many years to come.
There are two major
              areas of proteomics research that are addressed with this equipment: 1. protein
              expression profiling, and 2. identification of protein assemblies purified from
              complex samples. The research activities enabled by this NSF grant make
              extensive use of these applications in order to answer major questions in basic
              biology. The projects use samples derived from organisms across the
              evolutionary ladder. The scope of research activities is wide-ranging, and
              includes large scale analysis of the ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis system,
              analyzing determinants of cellular responses to radicals and oxidative stress,
              determining factors controlling membrane transport of metals and peptide growth
              factors, analyzing signaling and transcriptional activation pathways in cell
              lineage determination, determining protein interactions involved in
              establishing cell polarity, and many others.
The grant awarded by NSF provides
              funds for the acquisition of a combined liquid chromatography tandem mass
              spectrometer system (LC/MS/MS). This instrument adds an essential component of
              modern proteomics technology to preexisting tools HSPH has committed to this
              initiative by enabling rapid and highly accurate protein identification from
              diverse biological samples. The mass spectrometer is integrated with a high
              performance liquid chromatography system required for sample fractionation.
              Sophisticated software assists in protein identification and database
              searching.
Apart from major scientific advances through proteomics technology,
              the main impact of this grant lies with the enhancement of the training
              environment at HSPH. The new research instrumentation provides students and
              postgraduates with hands-on experience in cutting edge proteomics technology,
              thereby optimally preparing them for the demanding mission of prevailing in the
              rapidly changing landscape of the post-genomic era. Through the Minority
              Internship Program administered by the Division of Biological Sciences at HSPH
              underrepresented groups will be actively recruited to the burgeoning filed of
              proteomics research.




