Title       : ITR/SY: QoS-Aware Execution Environments for Multi-tier Network Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0216977

Award Number: 0216977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159942             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kang G. Shin kgshin@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1652,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Modern, componentized Internet services allow server consolidation 
by
              sharing common service components. 
Such sharing can potentially reduce the
              installation cost, 
space, and energy consumption.  However, to date, services
              
are seldom shared across server applications to avoid
possible interference
              between them.  Service providers often run
multiple instances of shared
              services, one for each frontend
service. The only benefit gained thus far,
              from the deployment of
multi-tier services is that new services can be
              composed quickly using
existing service components. Since these
              service
components may execute on different machines, each optimally
              configured
for its services, multi-tiered services tend to be more
scalable
              than monolithic counterparts.

The proposed research aims to address the
              shortcoming of current
OSs in executing multi-tiered services. We will focus
              on OS extensions 
that correlate and trace service activities across the tiers
              of a 
multi-tiered server farm. We will develop mechanisms for
              online
classification of activities (e.g., premium vs.~basic service classes),
              
as well as mechanisms that allow system administrators to insulate
              
(performance-wise) different service classes even when the 
activities of
              different service classes may overlap and 
share backend services. 

The
              same OS mechanisms that are used to manage multi-tiered 
services can be used
              to analyze the interactions between different 
tiers and the interferences
              between different service classes. 
We will show that a combination of service
              interaction analysis 
and service policing minimizes performance invasiveness
              
between services/applications. 
We will also investigate how to improve
              insulation between 
services in this environment. 
We will explore how
              service implementations may take 
advantage of an improved OS infrastructure
              for multi-tiered 
