Title       : Scanning Electron Microscope for Collaborative Use at Rutgers-Camden
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0216233

Award Number: 0216233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph V. Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel H. Shain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jesse W. Whitlow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Saidel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Georgia A. Arbuckle-Keil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Joseph V. Martin, Georgia A. Arbuckle-Keil,
              Daniel H. Shain, J. William Whitlow, Jr. and William M. Saidel at Rutgers
              University to obtain a scanning electron microscope for multidisciplinary use. 
              Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) provides high resolution imagery of surfaces
              ranging from synthetic materials to biological samples. Energy dispersive X-ray
              (EDX)-equipped scanning electron microscopes also have the capacity to detect
              heavy metals localized in tissue (e.g., brain) and synthetic polymers.   In an
              effort to foster interdisciplinary research among faculty in the College of
              Arts and Sciences at the Rutgers/Camden campus, the IPCBS (Information
              Processing in Complex Biological Systems) group at Camden will acquire an SEM
              equipped with EDX capabilities.  This unit operates under low vacuum, which
              permits samples to be examined without traditional time-consuming and costly
              preparative methodologies. 
	Research initiatives that would result from the
              purchase of this instrument include the detailed morphological characterization
              of polymers with electroactive properties (Dr. G. Arbuckle-Keil), fine
              resolution of fungal hyphae for mapping leaf surfaces (Dr. J. Dighton), the
              accumulation of lead in brain tissue (Drs. J. Martin, W. Saidel, R. Whitlow),
              the distribution of iodine and zinc in the central nervous system as they
              relate to thyroid hormone function and circadian rhythms, respectively (Dr. J.
              Martin, P. Sarkar), characterizing the morphology of an unusual fish eye
              (Pantadon buchholzi) that receives light simultaneously from air and water (Dr.
              W. Saidel) and the taxonomic classification of annelid species from the Amazon
              River (Dr. D. Shain).
	The ease of use of an SEM will allow graduate and
              undergraduate researchers to have hands-on experience with a sophisticated
              research instrument.  Courses that can incorporate an SEM component in their
              curricula include comparative morphology of plants, chemical principles,
              developmental botany, electron microscopy, general microbiology, instrumental
              analysis, invertebrate zoology, microtechnique and its applications, mycology
              and others.  High school students will also have access to this instrument
              through the Science Preparation Alliance of Rutgers and Camden (SPARC).  In
              summary, the acquisition of an SEM at Rutgers/Camden will greatly facilitate a
              broad range of research and teaching initiatives on this campus.

