Title       : IMR: Acquisition of a Sum Frequency Generation (SFG) Spectrometer for Surface
               Spectroscopic Research and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0216904

Award Number: 0216904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan D. Miller jdmiller@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Conboy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program (IMR) will be
              used to acquire a state-of-the-art Sum Frequency Generation (SFG) spectrometer
              at the University of Utah. SFG is the only truly interface-specific vibrational
              spectroscopic technique. The symmetry constraints on SFG prohibit nonlinear
              interactions in the bulk, while at an interface, such processes are allowed due
              to the local break in symmetry. As a result, the spectroscopy of molecules
              residing in the interfacial region can be probed selectively without any
              contributions from the molecules present in the more pervasive bulk phases.
              Analysis of SFG spectra can yield information on population, structure, and
              orientation of interfacial species with a nanometer in-depth resolution.
              Researchers from a variety of disciplines such as materials science,
              metallurgical engineering, chemistry, bioengineering, and polymer science, will
              use this equipment for advanced research and education. The research will study
              interfaces in polymer nanocomposites and self-assembling polymer and surfactant
              materials, as well as, probe the conformation and orientation of surface
              confined protein species. The investigation of adsorption phenomena and
              interfacial water structure at different technologically important interfaces
              will be an important new contribution. The studies will have far-reaching
              implications in many fields of nanotechnology, surface chemistry, biology and
              medicine and will advance our understanding of interfacial phenomena thus
              enabling new technological applications. The research is likely to result in
              the discovery of new interfacial structures, as well as, in deeper
              understanding and explanation of novel effects at solid/liquid, solid/gas and
              liquid/gas interfaces. A number of graduate students from different departments
              will work with the SFG spectrometer and receive important training in the
              advanced fields of laser surface and nonlinear spectroscopy. 
%%%
The award
              from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program (IMR) will be used to
              acquire a state-of-the-art Sum Frequency Generation (SFG) spectrometer at the
              University of Utah. SFG is the only truly interface-specific vibrational
              spectroscopic technique.. Researchers from a variety of disciplines such as
              materials science, metallurgical engineering, chemistry, bioengineering, and
              polymer science, will use this equipment for advanced research and education.
              The research will study interfaces in polymer nanocomposites and
              self-assembling polymer and surfactant materials, as well as, probe the
              conformation and orientation of surface confined protein species. The
              investigation of adsorption phenomena and interfacial water structure at
              different technologically important interfaces will be an important new
              contribution. The studies will have far-reaching implications in many fields of
              nanotechnology, surface chemistry, biology and medicine and will advance our
              understanding of interfacial phenomena thus enabling new technological
              applications. The research is likely to result in the discovery of new
              interfacial structures, as well as, in deeper understanding and explanation of
              novel effects at solid/liquid, solid/gas and liquid/gas interfaces. A number of
              graduate students from different departments will work with the SFG
              spectrometer and receive important training in the advanced fields of laser
              surface and nonlinear spectroscopy. 

