Title       : BE/CNH: Settlement Systems Within a Dynamic Environment and Economy: Contrasting
               Northern and Southern Mesopotamian City Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0216548

Award Number: 0216548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1197340            (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony J. Wilkinson t-wilkinson@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              McGuire Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Christiansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,1689,1691,5988,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The early urban settlements in the Near East provide an ideal laboratory for the
              study of long-term human-environment interactions because they offer an
              enormous array of archaeological and textual data that can be incorporated into
              an overall social, economic, and environmental analytical framework stretching
              over several millennia.  This research project will model and attempt to
              explain trajectories of development and demise of Bronze Age settlement systems
              for both the rain-fed and the irrigated zones of modern-day Syria and Iraq. 
              The project goals are to develop a holistic, dynamic, object-based model that
              can help determine the conditions under which societies became more or less
              urban or even collapsed.  The investigators will examine why third and fourth
              millennium B.C. cities in the irrigated zone of southern Mesopotamia grew to a
              greater size and complexity than those in the rain-fed north.  Traditional
              models often view cities as being founded by an over-arching authority. 
              Although the model will test such a top-down perspective, the project will
              emphasize settlement system development from the ground up.  Concepts of
              complex adaptive systems will be used to test the hypothesis that systems of
              early cities and their regions co-evolved in an intimate relationship with
              their environment, primarily by means of aggregation through time of smaller
              fundamental units (households).  Agent-based modeling will allow a wide range
              of choices and trajectories to contribute to the outcome of the modeling
              exercise.  Simulation will employ advanced object-based frameworks (DIAS and
              FACET) designed by the Decision and Information Sciences Division of Argonne
              National Laboratory.  The DIAS framework allows a range of simulation models
              and other applications to work together to address a complex modeling problem. 
              It will incorporate climate (GCM), weather (MM5), hydrological and agricultural
              (EPIC / SWAT), and demographic models plus agent-based models of social
              behavior built using the FACET framework.  Input data will be derived from the
              large corpus of landscape data, epigraphic data, and regional-scale
              environmental studies housed within the Oriental Institute of the University of
              Chicago and elsewhere.  The simulated settlement system will be validated
              against the archaeological landscape as it has been recorded by field surveys
              and satellite remote sensing.  By the end of the project, investigators expect
              to have developed a general modeling framework with an associated user
              interface that will enable interactions between humans and the environment to
              be rigorously tested over periods as long as several millennia.

The expected
              result of this work, improved understanding how humans interact with dynamic
              ecological and climatic mechanisms, is fundamental to ecological management and
              is applicable very broadly.  In addition, studies of the interplay of coupled
              human and natural systems as a cause of collapse of past societies are also of
              fundamental importance.  Cities and their hinterlands are among the most
              complex coupled natural and human systems, and urban systems will continue to
              play an increasingly important role in shaping the future of the planet.  This
              project will provide new insights into the complex interactions between people
              and their environment, and it will contribute to the study of urbanization past
              and present.  The proposed modeling framework also has potential utility as an
              educational tool, because it will enable both academic and general users to
              interact with complex environmental, cultural, and socio-economic databases in
              order to simulate the growth of settlements and cities and to analyze long term
              concepts of sustainability.  This project is supported by an award resulting
              from the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment
              focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

