Title       : Aquisition of Geophysical Field Equipment for Earth Science Research and
               Teaching at the University of Alabama
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0216520

Award Number: 0216520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis L. Harry dharry@wgs.geo.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Audrey D. Huerta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chunmiao Zheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Groshong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio B. Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0216520
Harry

With support from this Major Research Instrumentation grant,
              the Department of Geological Sciences at the University of Alabama will
              purchase geophysical field equipment to facilitate research and teaching
              activities associated with our department's emphasis on Natural Resource
              Exploration, Conservation, and Remediation.  Equipment to be purchased includes
              a ground penetrating radar system, potential field surveying equipment, a
              sediment coring system, and equipment to support high-resolution marine seismic
              surveys.  Combined with existing land and marine seismic surveying systems,
              shallow coring facilities, and state-of-the-art Earth Imaging Computational
              Facility, the requested equipment will establish a robust facility for
              acquisition and analysis of geophysical data needed to support continued growth
              in a wide variety of research and teaching activities at UA.  The equipment
              will create an environment conducive to interdisciplinary research that is
              ideally suited to the faculty in the department, and should greatly expand
              intra- and extramural collaborative research and teaching activities and
              efforts to provide service to state and local communities.  Specific plans for
              use of the equipment include NSF, DOE, and privately funded research
              initiatives in coastal processes, groundwater flow and contaminant transport,
              fossil fuel resources, sedimentary basin analysis, and tectonics.  Examples of
              such projects that will make use of the equipment in the immediate future
              include: (1) shallow geophysical imaging of the aquifer at the Macrodispersion
              Experiment (MADE) test site in Columbus Mississippi, with the goal of
              developing a stratigraphic context for hydrologic conductivity models used for
              contaminant transport modeling; (2) potential field surveying of the Black
              Warrior Basin and adjacent Appalachian and Ouachita Fold and Thrust belts, with
              the goal of determining the relationship between basin subsidence and orogenic
              tectonics; and (3) integrated geophysical and sedimentological studies of
              coastal systems with the goal of constraining the timing and physical processes
              of environment formation. 
***

