Title       : Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0216795

Award Number: 0216795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paris R. vonLockette vonlockette@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lori E. Stephans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel E. Lofland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Krchnavek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey D. Hettinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation RUI grant supports the acquisition of a
              scanning probe microscope (SPM)) for use in materials research and education.
              The selected SPM allows for temperature variation using hot and cold stages.
              For research purposes, the instrument has the needed measurement modes,
              sensitivity, resolution, and acquisition software to examine
              composition-structure-property relationships of elastomers and polymers,
              investigate magnetic domains and twin boundaries in magnetic shape memory
              alloys, assess surface roughness in thin films, characterize the defect
              structure in anisotropic superconductors, and provide quantitative feedback
              regarding dimension and quality of nanoimprinted features. These are topics
              that impact telecommunications, micromachining, industrial processing, polymer
              science, and nanotechnology industries. Several courses will benefit from SPM's
              broad array of scanning measurement capabilities, which include mapping of
              surface topography, hardness, elastic moduli, contact friction, magnetic
              domains, and tunneling current.

Polymer science, nanotechnology, and
              magnetism have been extensively used in the development of new technologies and
              there is continued demand for fundamental research within these various fields
              of materials science. Without a doubt, scanning probe microscopy (SPM) has
              spearheaded many recent advances in these fields. Acquisition of an SPM will
              permit the faculty to expand current research efforts and continue to foster
              interdisciplinary collaborations already underway. In addition, the acquisition
              will allow researchers to initiate new projects with industry and will help
              prepare students for creative contributions in these areas. 

