Title       : Development of a High-Performance Digital Video Collaboratory (DVC) for Learning
               Sciences Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0216334

Award Number: 0216334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy D. Pea roypea@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from a NSF Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award, Dr. Roy Pea
              will develop a new develop a new instrument for high-resolution digital
              panoramic audio-video recording, analysis and communication. The Digital Video
              Collaboratory (DVC) will provide an integrated suite of hardware technologies
              and Stanford's DIVER software system (Digital Interactive Video Exploration and
              Reflection) will allow researchers and educators to generate and share
              different points-of-view (POV) and analytic perspectives on the same richly
              recorded classroom events. Panoramic image acquisition is make possible by
              using a multi-camera digital video system coupled with mirrors to capture
              images over 360 degrees of horizontal arc. These camera images are then
              stitched together by software so that the captured scene may be displayed on a
              computer monitor as a rectangle that depicts the "unwrapped" 360-degree field
              of view.

To develop the DVC the team will integrate a state-of-the-art
              digital panoramic video capture system and a room-size microphone array in an
              experimental space with associated software and hardware tools for
              synchronizing, storing and managing the multimedia data streams. The DRIVER
              software system will be used to author and annotate POV-paths through these
              "Free-D" panoramic digital video records. Using a personal computer, the DIVER
              user pans and zooms a "virtual camera" window over a panoramic scene to focus
              on events of interest. The user may then mark interest points and record their
              POV-paths and associated textual annotations (for research or educational
              purposes). An annotated DIVER file can be shared through a computer network so
              others may re-experience and respond to the user's interpretive "tour" of the
              recorded activities. The user of DIVER is thus able to be a "virtual
              videographer", after the fact of panoramic video capture.

This project is
              important because researchers in the learning sciences increasingly rely on
              multimedia technologies to capture the complexities of learning environments
              and to repeatedly view recordings to deepen interoperation and analyses.
              Digital video and audio, integrated with other data types, promise far more
              complete records of learning activities than older methods, and enable multiple
              researchers to investigate common datasets, as in other disciplines. However,
              current approaches to multimedia recording are often ad hoc, yielding partial
              data and hindering the development of more powerful theory and practice. The
              Digital Video Collaboratory and the DIVER software system have potential for
              widespread use not only in learning sciences research and training and teacher
              education, but also in many fields for which panoramic audio-video recording
              and annotation can provide a useful function. An integral part of the project
              is the use of the DVC by many faculty at Stanford and elsewhere for their
              research, for graduate and undergraduate education in learning and cognitive
              sciences, and for teacher education.

