Title       : ASL Perception and Production: Evidence from Eye Tracking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0216791

Award Number: 0216791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen D. Emmorey emmorey@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Karen Emmorey will conduct three
              years of psycholinguistic research on the the perception and production of
              American Sign Language (ASL). This project includes the first experiments using
              head-mounted eye tracking technology to study eye behaviors of signers. One set
              of studies will investigate the social and conversational functions of eye gaze
              during sign perception. Deaf signing dyads and hearing speaking dyads will be
              compared to identify perceptual, linguistic, and social demands on eye gaze for
              signed versus spoken language interactions. A second set of studies will
              investigate eye movements during sign production. These studies address the
              grammatical functions of eye gaze in ASL and identify how signers co-ordinate
              their eye movements with the linguistic structure of signed sentences. Tthe
              project will also compare the eye behaviors of native deaf signers with adult
              late learners (hearing and deaf) during sign perception and production. 
              

The study of signed languages is essential to an understanding of the
              nature of human language universals and variation. It is also significant for
              the development of second language programs that train sign language
              interpreters, as well as instructors for deaf education programs. The use of
              eye gaze to mark linguistic structure is unique to signed languages, and the
              results of this project will provide insight into how language modality can
              affect grammatical encoding. The project will also identify how second language
              learners must alter their eye gaze patterns during both sign language
              perception and production. Finally, deafness has a substantial impact on the
              ability of students to gain access to academic and scientific careers, and this
              project aims to promote the participation of deaf people in research by
              supporting a deaf graduate student and providing a research environment
              accessible to deaf students.


