Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for Research in Genetic Programming,
               Quantum Computation, and Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0216344

Award Number: 0216344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99751              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Spector lspector@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1189,9218,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0216344
Lee Spector
Hampshire College

MRI/RUI:  Acquisition of
              Instrumentation for Research in Genetic Programming, Quantum Computation, and
              Distributed Systems

This proposal from a RUI institution, enabling work in
              genetic programming, quantum computation, and distributed systems, proposes
              acquiring a 16-node Linux NetworX Evolocity system for use in student and
              faculty research. The instrumentation will enable advance in multi-type genetic
              programming by allowing the user to specify a diverse set of primitives and
              related data types while simultaneously specifying little in the way of
              parameters. (Early genetic programming systems forced users to restrict all
              operation to a single data type to ensure the semantic validity of programs
              undergoing recombination and mutation. "Strongly typed" genetic programming
              systems allow the generation of programs that are able to manipulate diverse
              types.) For the quantum computation area, genetic and other automatic
              programming will be used to explore the space of possible quantum algorithms
              and their speed-ups relative to classical algorithms. Since quantum computer
              hardware is not yet available, the usual hindrance in so doing involves the
              time required for simulating the quantum algorithms; fitness must be tested
              using a quantum computer simulator that runs on conventional hardware.
              Preliminary promising results on problems with unresolved complexity will be
              employed to seek scaling algorithms for which asymptotic complexity results can
              be proved. Distributed systems, a primary focus of student's independent work
              at Hampshire College, will enable students to pursue the development of
              innovative software and programming techniques for networked, multi-CPU
              systems.


