Title       : MRI: Acquisition of High-Performance Distributed Computing and Storage
               Infrastructure at UTA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0216500

Award Number: 0216500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $950000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharma Chakravarthy sharma@cse.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sajal K. Das  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jaehoon Yu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence B. Holder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yuksel A. Aslandogan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1189,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0216500
Sharma Chakravarthy
Yuksel A. Aslandogan; Sajal K. Das; Lawrence
              B. Holder; Jachoon Yu
University of Texas Arlington

MRI:  Acquisition of
              High Performance Distributed Computing and Storage Infrastructure at
              UTA

This proposal, acquiring high-performance computing and storage
              infrastructure, aims to satisfy the research needs of several groups that
              require distributed and parallel computing resources.  Involving collaboration
              from the departments of Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) and Physics at
              UTA, and Dermatology at UT Southwestern Medical School, the research efforts
              include:
a. Database and Data Mining (e.g., visualization of search),
b.
              Software Engineering (e.g., formal methods),
c. Physics (e.g., high energy
              physics -HEP- experiments),
d. Dermatology (e.g., image database/analysis of
              skin lesion), 
e. Distributed Computing (e.g., scheduling, load balancing on
              Information Power Grid), and
f. Networking (e.g., wireless, optical;
              simulations).

The key characteristics involve:
a. Multi-disciplinary use of
              common equipment and infrastructure,
b. Multi-institutional sharing of
              equipment,
c. Enhancing current-research efforts and creating new synergy
              leading to new research ideas,
d. Combining the high-bandwith of Internet 2
              with high-performance computing and storage infrastructure to facilitate large
              image databases and video streaming research, and access to vast amounts of
              experimental data from outside the campus.

Educational impact is expected by
              enhancing the experiences of at least 40 CS and 10 physics students and 15
              faculty using the resource in an interdisciplinary mode.  Joint activities
              should lead to high quality of inter-disciplinary research fostered by the
              collaboration.

