Title       : Acquisition of Equipment by a Group of Emory University Developmental
               Geneticists for Sorting Multicellular Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0216418

Award Number: 0216418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. L'Hernault bioslh@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guy M. Benian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Moses  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shoichiro Ono  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Yedvobnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Steven W. L'Hernault at Emory University to
              support the purchase of a COPAS (Complex Object Parametric Analyzer and Sorter)
              cell sorter instrument. These funds will be used to purchase instrumentation
              that will be utilized by seven investigators that study either the fruit fly
              Drosophila melanogaster or the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans, which are
              species that are extensively utilized in developmental genetic experiments. 
              Genetic experiments in these species usually employ relatively small numbers of
              animals because these multi-cellular animals are usually sorted by hand. 
              Consequently, obtaining and analyzing large numbers of mutant animals is
              frequently impossible, especially if the mutant either dies during its
              maturation (is lethal) or is sterile.  Biochemical approaches require large
              populations of such mutants and, until recently, this was not possible. 
              However, the newly developed COPAS  technology now permits accurate sorting and
              dispensing of multi-cellular animals based on size and/or fluorescence
              differences. 
     The COPAS can be used to sort either Drosophila or
              Caenorhabditis, and this permits two different experimental approaches.  It is
              possible to construct Drosophila and Caenorhabditis strains where a specified
              chromosome is "marked" by the presence of a fluorescent green signal.  Mutants
              can be sorted away from non-mutant siblings by selecting non-Green individuals,
              so this machine makes it feasible to purify large numbers of lethal or sterile
              animals.  Secondly, it is possible to rapidly dispense a defined number of
              individuals of a chosen sex or life cycle stage with ~98% accuracy.  This
              permits evaluating individual animals on a scale that is not possible by manual
              techniques and allows isolated mutants to be assessed for desired, but rare,
              events.
     The relevance of Drosophila and Caenorhabditis to significant
              human problems is well established; Drosophila is a model for the Mediterranean
              fruit fly, a significant agricultural pest, and Caenorhabditis is a model for a
              wide variety of parasitic nematodes that infect man, pets, domestic livestock
              and agriculturally significant plants.  The COPAS technology permits
              application of innovative biochemical techniques to organisms that have
              traditionally been used for genetic analyses.  Additionally, the COPAS is a
              single machine, cost-effective way for both Drosophila and Caenorhabditis
              investigators to gain access to a technology that permits these exciting, new
              experimental approaches.


