Title       : National High School Space Weather Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0216567

Award Number: 0216567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark B. Moldwin mmoldwin@igpp.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1733      GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY



HEMISPHERE: Developing a National High School
              Magnetometer Array.
We propose to offer schools across the country the
              opportunity to measure and experiment
with Earth's natural environment, to
              contribute data to the nation's space weather
program, and to have effective
              teaching tools to educate young scientists about the space
environment. We
              have developed a relatively inexpensive, robust, sensitive magnetometer in
kit
              form that can be purchased and distributed to schools, assembled by students,
              then set
up and used to take research-quality data. Teachers will be trained
              in their operation and
how to use them in classroom activities that
              demonstrate "space-weather." The data will be
transmitted through a Web-based
              database, so that students can compare their local
readings with those of
              students at other sites around the continent and can be used by
university and
              other researchers to study geomagnetic Ultra-Low Frequency (ULF) waves.
Low-
              to mid- latitude magnetic pulsations provide important information about the
              solar
wind-magnetosphere interaction and the dynamic coupling of the
              magnetosphere and
ionosphere. The magnetic variations observable at low to mid
              latitudes include: Pc 3-4
pulsations (periods of 10-45 s), which are thought
              to have their source in the upstream
bow shock and or magnetosheath; and Pi 2
              bursts (damped pulsations with 40-150-s periods)
which are associated with
              substorm expansion onsets. This proposal seeks funding to train
Master High
              School science teachers in the use of induction coil magnetometers,
              provide
the basic space science content needed for the understanding of
              magnetic pulsation data in
space physics research, and develop mentoring
              relationships between space physicists and
local high school science teachers
              and their students. These relationships will allow the
magnetometer data to be
              fully utilized both scientifically as well as educationally.
Specifically we
              plan to develop the documentation for the magnetometer, training material
for
              testing the instrument, and educational material for using the instrument in
              the
classroom. This material will be the basis for a one-week teacher workshop
              at UCLA
bringing together six geographically diverse science teachers that
              have already gone
through a space weather workshop at NOAA Space Environment
              Center in order to train them
as Master Teachers in the use and implementation
              of the magnetometer. This project
directly impacts pre-college education by
              providing High Schools with real-life space
physics instrumentation and ULF
              data for analysis.

