Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Evolution of the Cetacean Body Plan--Eocene
               Whales from India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0216710

Award Number: 0216710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes G. Thewissen thewisse@neoucom.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern Ohio C of M
	      4209 State Route 44
	      Rootstown, OH  44272    330/325-6500

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0216710
Thewissen 

Description:  This award supports the US-India
              Cooperative Research: Evolution of the Cetacean Body Plan-Eocene Whales from
              India.  US PI Hans Thewissen, Northeastern Ohio University College of Medicine
              and Sunil Bajpai, Indian Institute of Technology (IITR), Roorkee, India will
              study one of the most remarkable evolutionary transformations in the vertebrate
              fossil record, the transformation of cetaceans (whales, dolphins, and
              porpoises) from terrestrial quadruped to obligate marine swimmer.  They will
              examine the evolutionary processes and underlying causes, with special
              reference to the organ systems that underwent the greatest changes in the land
              to water transition.  This project will test hypotheses about the evolutionary
              processes that determined much of the cetacean body plan.  These systems
              (locomotion, balance, and sound transmission) are documented by fossils and
              underlie the evolutionary success of the order Cetacea.  The PIs will integrate
              traditional anatomical and functional data with new insights from developmental
              biology to yield new understanding of the evolutionary process.  The
              investigators will collect and study fossils in India.     

Scope:  This
              will be a rare opportunity for the investigators to study the link between
              paleontology and development.  The US and Indian PIs are eminently well
              qualified; they have complementary expertise and an established collaboration. 
              Bajpai is the leading authority on fossil cetaceans in India and his
              institution houses its most significant collections.  Beyond the scientific
              community, this study will enhance tools for teaching evolution to students and
              for explaining scientific processes to the public.  The award will further
              partnerships among researchers including young scientists, collaborative links
              between the institutions, and advance theoretical interests in both countries. 
              This project is jointly funded by the Indian Department of Science & Technology
              (DST) under the NSF/DST joint program. 

 
