Title       : Development of Wideband Scanning Superconducting Quantum Interference Device
               Susceptometers for Nanomagnetic Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0216470

Award Number: 0216470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220025             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Huber martin.huber@cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn A. Moler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Nanomagnetic devices for applications such as quantum computing and
              high-capacity memory cannot be developed without faster, more sensitive
              characterization tools to directly probe phenomena and material structures at
              the nanoscale. The objective of this work is to advance the capability of a
              non-invasive, high-sensitivity technique, scanning superconducting quantum
              interference device (SQUID) susceptometry, for the dynamic characterization of
              nanomagnetic materials, systems, and phenomena. The principal investigator
              achieves this objective through two innovations. First, spin sensitivity is
              improved from the current state of the art, a few thousand electron spins per
              Hz1/2 , to a few tens of spins per Hz1/2. This improvement is accomplished by
              reduction of pickup loop dimensions in a combined optical and electron-beam
              lithography process and by utilizing an ultra-low-noise dc SQUID process.
              Second, bandwidth is increased from the current state of the art, tens of kHz,
              to tens of MHz by the use of dc SQUID series array amplifiers as preamplifiers
              for the dc SQUID susceptometer.  The devices are characterized for flux
              sensitivity and bandwidth at 300 mK and 20 mK. Operation at 300 mK is necessary
              for the e-beam defined Al pick-up loops to become superconducting, and
              operation at 20 mK is essential for the study of quantum decoherence mechanisms
              in electronic systems. Undergraduates, working with graduate students in the
              collaborator's laboratory, characterize the spin sensitivity of the devices and
              their performance under realistic scanning conditions by imaging individual
              cobalt nanomagnetic spheres of controlled diameters ranging from 3 nm to 10 nm
              and magnetic moments ranging from tens to tens of thousands of electron spins.
              Further, one SQUID susceptometer is used to image a second, identical device to
              quantitatively characterize the noise generated by the devices. 

The
              scientific emphasis of this project is to produce sensors that have
              applications in the area of nanoscale structures, novel phenomena, and quantum
              control and to use these sensors to image both static and dynamic properties of
              individual cobalt nanomagnets. Integration of a high-sensitivity,
              high-bandwidth SQUID susceptometer into a scanning platform significantly
              increases the number and kind of systems that can be studied, decreases the
              turn-around time, and increases the number of samples that can be studied in a
              single experiment. Thus, this project contributes to advances in nanoscale
              materials, devices and system architecture. An added benefit of this project is
              the educational benefits at both CU-Denver (PI's institution) and Stanford
              University (collaborator's institution) resulting from the collaboration
              between CU-Denver undergraduate students and Stanford graduate students. 

