Title       : Acquisition of a Multi-User, Field Emission-Scanning Electron Microscope for
               Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a0216703

Award Number: 0216703
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy Schneider schneider@me.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk H. Schulz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles S. Henry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel D. Bumgardner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports a multi-user Field Emission-Scanning Electron Microscope
              (FE-SEM) to be installed in an Internet-connected facility. It will allow users
              to view SEM images from anywhere on Mississippi State campus and throughout the
              K-12 educational system. While the new SEM will reside at MSU, faculty at the
              other major research universities in Mississippi will also make use of this
              facility. The fully analytical FE-SEM will serve the multi-disciplinary
              research needs of a number of faculty members from various Colleges and
              Departments throughout MSU. The primary users will explore surface phenomena in
              catalysts; microfluidic MEMs devices; organic/inorganic relations in soils and
              rocks; aspects of cell-biomaterial surface interactions and biocompatibility;
              and contributions of phase evolution and microstructure to deformation and
              fracture processes. This instrument will greatly expand the efficacy of current
              research, broaden the scope of future projects, and have a significant impact
              on materials education at MSU, sister research institutions in Mississippi, and
              the K-12 educational system.

This SEM will help foster the integration of
              research and education by providing modern materials analysis instrumentation
              with general availability across disciplines. Installation of the FE-SEM in an
              interactive setting will promote materials research as a career choice to
              students in K-12. Currently offered summer Outreach Programs for Teachers will
              be used to advertise this resource. The co-investigators will have special
              broadcast demonstrations to assist students in exploring the microstructural
              world of materials and how microstructure affects their behavior. After initial
              exposure to microscopy through demonstrations in the classroom at MSMS, the
              students will have the opportunity to actively participate in research at the
              MSU campus. The modules and demonstrations developed at MSMS will serve as a
              model for use in other high schools throughout the state of Mississippi. MSU
              plays a leading role in attracting high tech industry to the state of
              Mississippi, and enhanced analytical capabilities will help provide the
              research support needed to enhance economic development in the South. 

