Title       : BE/IDEA: Multifunctional Scanning Nanoprobes for In-Situ Analysis of Chemical
               Processes at Microbe/Mineral Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0216368

Award Number: 0216368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1287332            (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris Mizaikoff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Hesketh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrei G. Fedorov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martial Taillefert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. DiChristina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1689,1762,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0216368
Mizaikoff

The main thrust of this multi-disciplinary BE (IDEA)
              project is to develop and apply novel scanning probe microscopic (SPM)
              techniques for imaging chemical and biochemical processes at microbe-mineral
              interfaces. The ability to obtain chemical, topographical and ultimately
              optical information simultaneously at microbe-mineral interfaces has limited
              investigation of complex biological systems in previous research. Our project
              fosters interactions between experts in the fields of chemistry, biochemistry,
              geochemistry, microbiology, fluids and mass transport, microfabrication and
              spectroscopy.  For the investigation of complex chemical and physical processes
              at microbe-mineral interfaces, correlation of in-situ obtained chemical,
              topographical and optical information is necessary, in order to understand
              microbial cell chemistry. Micro- and nanoelectrodes are integrated into atomic
              force microscopy (AFM) or scanning nearfield optical microscopy (SNOM) tips
              based on optimized microfabricated cantilevers. Besides mercury/gold amalgam
              electrodes for detecting Fe2+ production, nano-pH-electrodes will be integrated
              into scanning probe tips, mapping pH variations at the microbe-mineral
              interface. Such multifunctional SPM tips will provide simultaneous
              topographical, optical and (electro)chemical information correlated in space
              and time down to the nanoscale.  Quantitative mathematical modeling and
              simulation of the electrochemical and physical processes taking place during
              the scanning process is essential for fundamental understanding and
              interpretation of obtained results. The developed multifunctional scanning
              nanoprobes will be used to determine the mechanism of reductive dissolution of
              Fe(III) minerals in the presence of FeRB and/or chemical reductants.
              Dissimilatory Fe(III) reduction is a relatively recent addition to the suite of
              anaerobic respiratory processes carried out by microorganisms and plays a
              significant role in global carbon cycling.  Finally, this combined analytical
              technique can be extended to other environmental microbial processes involving
              minerals, such as the reductive dissolution of uranium, the precipitation of
              rhodochrosite and siderite, and the formation of manganese oxides. In addition,
              multifunctional scanning nanoprobes will be applicable to a wide variety of
              electrochemically active complex processes in a multitude of relevant fields,
              such as corrosion/biocorrosion, neurophysiology and cell signaling.

