Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Multi-disciplinary
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0216308

Award Number: 0216308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414244             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashok Kumar akumar1@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Wolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julie P. Harmon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rudiger Schlaf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Srikanth Hariharan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award is to purchase a fully
              analytical JEM-2010 transmission electron microscope (TEM). The JEM-2010 is a
              multipurpose high-resolution analytical microscope with wide range of
              capabilities, such as high-resolution image observation, microarea X-ray
              analysis, versatile analysis by convergent-beam electron diffraction, and
              analysis of the atomic structure and/or bonding state of atoms. The primary TEM
              system will comprise: (i) a TEM with a high resolution pole piece for high
              resolution electron microscopy imaging (HREM) and convergent beam electron
              diffraction (CBED), (ii) a scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)
              accessory, (iii) an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS), (iv) an
              electron energy loss spectrometer (EELS) with an energy filter, and (v) a
              multichannel analyzer and support computers for data acquisition, storage, and
              processing. This instrument is capable of high spatial resolution imaging of
              crystalline and amorphous structures, small-beam electron diffraction, and
              compositional and spectroscopic analyses of micro-and nano-scale features, all
              necessary tools for characterizing materials structure.  Numerous new
              scientific investigations will be enabled with the new equipment. This
              instrument will support research in a variety of materials systems including
              nanomaterials, semiconductors, ceramics, metals, polymers, biomaterials and
              mesoporous materials. The proposed research projects cover a broad area of
              research related to synthesis and characterization of high-performance
              materials for manufacturing applications and TEM will provide an opportunity to
              conduct high-quality research to understand the microstructural properties of
              the materials.

The proposed TEM instrument will not only stimulate the
              productivity of the existing research projects related to the characterization
              of materials but also will be used for educational purposes.  The instrument
              will be used in undergraduate and graduate courses, and in outreach program for
              minority students from local schools. It will thus allow for research training
              of future scientists and engineers from diverse backgrounds in current
              techniques of electron microscopy and state-of-the-art instrumentation. A
              laboratory course will be introduced and the main purpose is to provide
              students hands-on experience starting from sample preparations to operations of
              TEM. Support for a TEM instrument will also allow the development and
              enhancement of creative partnership with the numerous local industries,
              including microelectronics manufacturing, optical coating manufacturing,
              biomedical company, and computer hardware company. Results of the project will
              be disseminated by paper presentation in regional and national conferences, and
              published in journals.
