Title       : Acquisition of CCD X-ray Detection System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0216919

Award Number: 0216919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Keszler douglas.keszler@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur W. Sleight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexandre F. Yokochi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program support will
              allow Oregon State University to purchase a new X-ray detection system that
              will be utilized for the determination of atomic-level structures of new
              high-technology materials as well as small molecules of relevance in biology
              and catalysis.  The instrumentation comprises an area detector and
              temperature-control devices for examining structures over the temperature range
              of 77 to 1273 K.  Such variable-temperature measurements provide a means for
              establishing relationships between atomic-level structures and bulk physical
              properties, such as thermal expansion, electrical conductivity, and laser
              action.  By extension, such relationships establish the framework for invention
              and development of new types of microelectronic and optical devices. 
              Temperature control can also be important for establishing the structures of
              small molecules that might be thermally unstable or only weakly efficient in
              scattering an X-ray beam. The new system also has considerable value in
              education.  Because an overall view of a diffraction pattern is available from
              the area detector, unlike in serial systems, graduate students can much more
              readily absorb the concepts of diffraction and crystallography, leading to more
              productive classroom and research experiences. The high throughput of the
              system also allows an extension of the education experience to students
              involved in a number of materials-research collaborative programs, to
              undergraduates both at OSU and neighboring institutions, and to others beyond
              the University community.  Altogether, these new opportunities will provide
              students with robust foundations for pursuing their career objectives.

This
              award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program support Oregon
              State University with the purchase a new X-ray detection system. The
              instrumentation will be used to support research and education activities in
              the areas of solid-state inorganic materials and small-molecule synthesis. The
              proposed instrument cluster comprises a CCD area detector with four-circle
              goniometer, low-temperature and high-temperature devices, and a fiber-optic
              collimator.  This cluster will provide a means to broaden and more fully
              integrate the research and education missions of the University in the area of
              structure determination. The area detector makes possible the ready
              identification of supercells and incommensurate structures, short
              data-collection times and high throughput, and much improved avenues for
              teaching concepts in diffraction and crystallography.  Coupling the high
              throughput of the area detector with low- and high-temperature devices provides
              opportunities in variable-temperature measurements that are currently
              unavailable.  Structures of inorganic materials can be determined at both low
              and high temperatures to establish relationships between crystal structure and
              thermal-expansion, electrical, or optical properties, while weakly diffracting
              or thermally
unstable small molecules can be analyzed at low temperatures to
              obtain useful structural information. Further, local undergraduate education
              institutions and companies will have access to this instrument through
              collaborative projects.

