Title       : BE/CNH: Complex Interactions Among Policies, People, and Panda Habitat in the
               Wolong Nature Reserve Landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  2002  
File        : a0216450

Award Number: 0216450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1099999            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianguo Liu jliu@perm3.fw.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5927,9169,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Human activities are widely recognized as a major force behind rapid landscape
              changes and loss of biodiversity around the world, including those in numerous
              nature reserves.  Many studies have found that government policies can
              significantly shape human activities, but most of those studies have focused on
              a single policy at a time and ignored the interactive effects among various
              policies.  Little is known about the complex interactions among the effects of
              multiple policies on the spatial-temporal dynamics of biodiversity such as
              wildlife habitat.  Studying the interrelationships of various policies for
              biodiversity conservation is critical and urgent because multiple policies
              often are implemented simultaneously.  These policies may be nonlinearly
              complementary or counterproductive.  An excellent site for studying such
              interactions is Wolong Nature Reserve in Sichuan Province in southwestern
              China.  The reserve, which is 200,000 hectares in size, is one of the largest
              homes to world-famous endangered giant pandas and several thousand other animal
              and plant species.  There are also more than 4,000 local residents and a
              variety of human activities in the reserve, such as farming and fuelwood
              collection.  Since the establishment of the reserve in 1975, human population
              size has increased by more than 70 percent.  This rapidly increasing human
              population plays a novel and unique role in degrading the pandas' habitat.  To
              prevent further degradation of panda habitat and promote habitat restoration,
              the Chinese government is implementing three conservation policies in the
              reserve:  an eco-hydropower plant program (to eliminate fuelwood consumption),
              a natural forest conservation program (to prevent illegal forest harvesting),
              and a grain-to-green program (to return cropland to forest).  The interactive
              effects of these policies on local people and panda habitat are uncertain,
              however.  The objectives of this research project are (1) to assess the
              interactions among the three policies and local residents; (2) to evaluate the
              interrelationships between local residents and panda habitat; (3) to examine
              the need for and feasibility of policy modification and improvement; and (4) to
              model and simulate multi-scale interactions among policies, people, and panda
              habitat across space and time.  The methods to be used in this study include
              field observations, face-to-face interviews with stakeholders, geographical
              information systems, remote sensing, global positioning systems, statistical
              tools, systems modeling and simulation, and advanced computer visualization
              techniques.  In addition to addressing many fundamental ecological and
              socioeconomic questions, the research will be tightly integrated with the
              education of students from elementary school to graduate school as well as
              outreach to various stakeholders from local to international levels. 

The
              project will have significant implications for biocomplexity theory,
              methodology, and application.  In terms of theory, this project will shed light
              on complex patterns and interrelated processes (e.g., nonlinearity, thresholds,
              feedback, uncertainty) among multiple policies, humans, and wildlife habitat at
              multiple spatial and temporal scales.  Regarding methodology, the research will
              take a systems approach by integrating multidisciplinary methods and advanced
              technologies to investigate the complexity of the study system.  With respect
              to application, the project will provide practical information for conserving
              panda habitat in Wolong, and it will provide useful insights for designing and
              improving policies that attempt to balance the needs of biodiversity
              conservation and economic development in the world's most populous nation.  The
              findings also will be of general interest to many other parts of the world
              because of escalating human pressures and increasingly complicated human-nature
              interactions.  This project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2002
              special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the
              Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

