Title       : MRI: Development of an Advanced Laser Communications Research Facility with
               Internet Accessible Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0216165

Award Number: 0216165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor A. Skormin vskormin@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1189,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-16165
Skormin, Victor A.
SUNY - Binghamton 

MRI: Development of an
              Advanced Laser Communications Research Facility with Internet Accessible
              Instrumentation 

This proposal, developing an experimental research
              laboratory, expands a concept of sharing advanced scientific equipment in
              "cyberspace." This technology facilitates the access to equipment via the
              Internet offering the most advanced instrumentation and relevant interactive
              instruction to diverse groups of population; thus enhancing engineering
              education and training. This development will set unique space-qualified laser
              equipment intended for space communication and offer carefully designed "fixed"
              and "open-ended" experiments nation- and world-wide. The proposed project is
              not a virtual lab, offering instead enhanced "real" infrastructure of the laser
              communications research lab. The new development involves upgrading the
              equipment and auxiliary systems and enhancing its reliability, accuracy and
              rate of operation. Hence the facility developed will be suitable for unlimited
              global access via the Internet, enabling universities, industries, high
              schools, and individual users worldwide to perform advanced experiments in
              real-time and to collect data for analysis and interpretation. This project
              specifically enables and services an often forgotten population, the disabled.
              The Laser Communication Research Laboratory (LCRL), where the development will
              take place, contributes to satellite communication technology by addressing,
              among others, the following technical research problems:

1.  Modeling,
              Characterization, and Control of Electromechanical Beam Steering Systems,
2. 
              Free Space Propagation, Diffraction and Alignment of Laser Beams,
3.  Optical
              Beam Modulation and Steering,
4.  Rejection of Atmospheric Effects in
              Communication Systems,
5.  Experimental Analysis, Modeling and Control of
              Acousto-Optic Laser Beam Steering Systems with Bragg Cells,
6.  Gimbals
              Systems, and
7.  Liquid Crystal Technology.

