Title       : Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for Nano- to
               Microscale Imaging and Chemical Analysis in the College of Engineering,
               University of Delaware
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0216219

Award Number: 0216219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrin J. Pochan pochan@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric W. Kaler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Rabolt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Barteau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tsu-Wei Chou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) is sought for the
              University of Delaware College of Engineering (COE) electron microscopy center
              to fill an immediate, widespread need for nanometer resolution scanning
              electron microscopy.  FESEM has become an indispensable instrument in
              conducting micro- to nanomorphological material imaging and chemical
              imaging/analysis.  Importantly, true nanoscale data is obtainable from of an
              immense array of materials, spanning "hard" inorganics, both electrically
              conductive and insulative, to "soft" polymeric and biologicals.  In comparison
              to traditional thermionic SEM (currenlty, the only functioning SEM in the
              college of engineering (COE) EM facility), the FESEM provides far superior
              resolution (nanostructures as small as 1 nm in diameter while our traditional
              SEM resolution is in the range of ~100 of nm) and can be operated at voltages
              as low as 0.5kV (the traditional thermal source in-house SEM must operate at
              ~30kV to reach its ultimate resolution of ~0.1 mm).  It is important to stress
              that this low accelerating voltage allows direct nanoscopic imaging and
              elemental analysis of all materials currently being studied in COE and across
              the university.  On the current COE SEM instrument, a JEOL JXA-840, imaging and
              chemical analysis is limited to conductive inorganics and only feasible at
              relatively low resolution (>0.1 mm for secondary electron imaging and ~1.0 mm
              for x-ray analysis).  Polymeric and other insulating materials must be coated
              by a thick (~10's of nm) layer of conductive metal for feasible imaging which,
              consequently, completely masks true surface structure and chemistry. 
              Biological materials with some level of hydration are simply not possible at
              ambient conditions in the traditional SEM due to high vacuum conditions.  The
              sought FESEM system is equipped with state-of-the-art energy dispersive x-ray
              spectroscopy and a cryogenic transfer and cold stage for imaging of in situ,
              hydrated (vitrified) biological materials.  With the large emphasis on
              nanotechnology in the current research paradigm, and certainly here at UD, this
              new FESEM will fill a large materials characterization gap in the college of
              engineering's research capabilities.  Consequently, it is estimated that over
              18 faculty members and 30 to 40 graduate students will immediately benefit in
              their research from the acquisition of the FESEM.

Educational training
              opportunities for graduate students and advanced undergraduates represent a
              clear benefit to the university as a whole. At present, our electron microscopy
              facility serves about 30 students and post doctors for predominantly TEM
              research purposes. In addition, over 25 students from engineering and other
              natural science majors on campus use the facility for their course work (the
              new TEM course MSEG/CHEG 832 and the TEM lab module in MSEG602, Structure of
              Materials lab offered through Materials Science and Engineering). 
              Specifically, a new MSEG602 lab module will be developed by the PI for specific
              FESEM introduction and instruction to incoming college of engineering graduate
              students.  The addition of an FESEM will provide a unique opportunity for
              students at various levels and from various backgrounds to work in an
              interdisciplinary, advanced laboratory setting that is the College of
              Engineering electron microscopy center.  Since the summer of 2001, we have
              utilized our JEOL FasTEM system, contained in the FEG2010 TEM microscope, to
              enhance our undergraduate and graduate classroom teaching and training. The
              FasTEM is a system integrated with our field emission transmission electron
              microscope (FE-TEM) that is capable of telecommunication and remote operation
              through computer networks.  In addition to remote demonstrations, elementary
              and middle school students frequently visit the lab for in-house demonstrations
              of electron microscopy.  It is obvious that these in-house and outside
              demonstrations generate significant student curiosity and interest in science
              and technology.  To better achieve our educational outreach goals (and attract
              top quality undergraduates to the university) it is our desire that we also can
              demonstrate the nanostructures of modern engineered materials with an FESEM. 
              Experience tells us that the 3-dimentional morphological images of the FESEM
              appeal more to K-12 students than 2-dimensional TEM data which is more
              difficult to interpret.  Furthermore, the UD college of engineering electron
              microscopy facility has been highlighted in the popular media through a visit
              by the Discovery Channel in the fall of 2001.  Microscopic details of fracture
              surfaces from metal cables of the Hindenberg were observed indicating the
              nature of catastrophic tensile failure.  This type of popular media outreach
              will also be further pursued in the future during which we can highlight the
              new experimental capabilities of the college of engineering electron microscopy
              facility.

