Title       : Hormone-related Differences and Similarities in Song Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0216091

Award Number: 0216091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $441792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen D. Ketterson ketterso@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,1160,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              LAY SUMMARY

Males and females typically resemble one another in some ways and
              differ in others.  Differences may arise because one sex is subject to greater
              reproductive competition than the other (sexual selection) or because the sexes
              differ in their ecology (natural selection).  Because males and females share a
              common genome, they are also subject to correlated selection, which occurs when
              genetic variants directly favored by selection in one sex ('like father, like
              son') are carried along in the other sex ('like father, like daughter'). 
              Correlated selection can hasten evolution if attributes directly favored in one
              sex also benefit the other, or it may serve as a constraint when the attributes
              are disadvantageous to the second sex.

Proximate mechanisms underlying sex
              differences and resemblances include developmental programs, steroid hormones,
              and steroid-independent differences in gene expression that lead to sexually
              differentiated tissues. Gonadal steroids can act early in development to
              organize tissues so that they are or are (or are not) responsive to activation
              by a steroid later in life. Gonadal steroids can also affect the sexes as
              adults, and, when their effects are similar, there is potential for correlated
              selection.  

The focus of this proposal is the steroid hormone,
              testosterone, and its integrating effect on sex differences and resemblances in
              adult males and females of a songbird species, the dark-eyed junco.  The
              research has four objectives: 

(1)	to assess the role of testosterone in
              sexual integration by comparing natural profiles of male and female hormone
              levels, hormonal response of females to stimuli known to increase T in males,
              and hormone levels in females that do and do not produce young by extra-pair
              fertilizations (EPFs). Resemblance between the sexes will reveal the potential
              for correlated selection.
(2)	to alter the level of circulating testosterone
              experimentally and compare effects of altered testosterone in females to
              previous results from males.  Individual experiments will address whether
              elevated testosterone in females alters attractiveness to males (sexual
              selection) and whether it affects parental behavior, social status, or immune
              function (natural selection). They will also address interactions between
              testosterone, corticosterone, corticosteroid binding globulins.
(3)	to
              determine whether female responses to altered testosterone are beneficial,
              neutral, or detrimental in the field. If the sexes constrain one another,
              alterations that are beneficial in one sex should be detrimental in the other.
              If the sexes reinforce one another, alterations may be beneficial in both
              sexes.  If the sexes are independent, then alterations already known to be
              beneficial or detrimental in males may have no fitness consequences for
              females. 
(4)	to compare how degree of relatedness affects a sexually selected
              trait and two hormone-related traits.  Juncos of known genetic relatedness will
              be assessed for family resemblance in measures of body size and a plumage trait
              that affects attractiveness.  Additional juncos will be reared and compared for
              three hormonally mediated traits. The presence of a genetic correlation would
              predict correlated selection; the absence of one would predict sexual
              independence.

Research described in this proposal will provide opportunities
              for training future scientists of diverse backgrounds in the conduct of
              laboratory and field experiments that address the integration of proximate and
              ultimate explanations for biological differences.  It will also enrich graduate
              and undergraduate courses taught at Indiana University.  Potential societal
              implications of the findings to be expected include (1) importance of
              hormonally active agents in the environment, (2) improved methods for breeding
              captive songbirds for conservation, and (3) a greater understanding of the
              relationship between sex and gender.



