Title       : Development of a New Approach to Contactless Transport Measurements at Cryogenic
               Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0216880

Award Number: 0216880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Gramila   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Advances both in the development of new materials and in fundamental
              understanding of new physics are often coupled to advances in experimental
              technology.  This work extends such technology via an instrument permitting
              conventional transport style measurements to be made without the use of ohmic
              contacts.  The approach is based on the use of capacitive coupling to samples. 
              Such a system, while involving significant experimental challenges, offers
              considerable promise for the investigation of physical phenomena where
              conventional ohmic contacts can either not be used, or are unreliable to use. 
              Examples of such areas of investigation include 2-D electron systems with
              extremely low electron densities, for which the relative importance of electron
              interaction are greatly enhanced, and low density samples at very high magnetic
              fields, where ohmic contacts can be notoriously difficult.  Another area is the
              study of the metal insulator transition, where the combined effects of low
              densities, disorder, and magnetic field effects can combine to make ohmic
              contacts unreliable. These measurement capabilities will also benefit the
              investigation of new materials, since transport measurements can be used as a
              diagnostic tool without the considerable effort often necessary to develop
              ohmic contacts.  The unique requirements of a capacitively-based measurement
              approach requires the development of new electronic and cryogenic techniques
              and instrumentation.  Combined with the prospect for exploration of important
              topics in physics, its development will provide valuable training and
              experience for graduate students.

Experience has demonstrated that pushing
              at extremes of temperature, magnetic field, or other measurement parameters,
              has exposed inadequacies in our knowledge of materials.  Exploring such areas
              has often led to new and fundamental advances in our understanding of materials
              and their physics, and even to the development of new materials.  This work
              will extend experimental capabilities by the creation of an instrument for
              making contact-less electrical measurements of electronic materials in
              cryogenic environments.  The measurement system will provide experimental
              access to a number of areas, areas for which the difficulty of making
              conventional electrical contacts effectively prevents investigation.  The
              instrument itself represents a technical challenge, involving low-noise
              measurements and complex sample environments, and its use will involve
              technologically important materials.  It provides a valuable arena for the
              training of graduate students in both advanced technology and fundamental
              physics, whose training is a cornerstone of our technological
              infrastructure.


