Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Shared Scanning Probe Microscope Facility to Improve
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0216109

Award Number: 0216109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guangzhao Mao gzmao@chem1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yang Zhao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard W. Matthew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Van Tassel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie L. Brock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      656 W. Kirby
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1414,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A Scanning Probe Microscopy (SPM) facility for the improvement of research and
              student learning at Wayne State University (WSU) will be established through
              this grant. The major instrument to be purchased, Dimension 3100 SPM with
              Nanoscope IV control station, will be shared among researchers from five
              departments spanning two colleges.  This investment addresses a critical need
              for surface characterization in many projects funded by the National Science
              Foundation at WSU and provides an advanced tool for materials study in our
              undergraduate and graduate curricula. 

Nanoscale science and engineering has
              emerged as a principal research thrust at WSU as evidenced by well-funded
              efforts in 1) nanoparticles, nanostructures, and devices for optical and
              magnetic applications, 2) protein, tissue, and biomaterial coating and
              engineering, and 3) encapsulation using biological or biologically inspired
              materials.  In each of these domains, the SPM technique is an indispensable
              tool for elucidating and comprehending structure at the nanometer scale.  The
              establishment of a centralized SPM laboratory with an additional SPM instrument
              with new, state-of-the-art features should allow us to build on our current
              strengths in interfacial and nanostructured materials research, increase
              individual research productivities, and foster collaborative research.

A
              laboratory dedicated to SPM research will be established in the WSU College of
              Engineering to house the Dimension 3100 SPM and the current Nanoscope IIIa SPM.
               This laboratory will be made accessible to all principal investigators and
              other users. The computers will be networked so that the SPM image files can be
              easily accessed.  This updated SPM facility will complement other existing
              material characterization instrumentation such as NMR, mass spectrometry, X-ray
              crystallography, optical microscopy and spectroscopy, and scanning electron
              microscopy.  A microscopist at the postdoctoral level will be hired in order to
              oversee the installation, maintenance, and training of researchers

The
              estimated number of researchers and students impacted by this proposal annually
              consists of 11 senior users, 5 postdoctoral associates, 20 graduate students,
              and over 100 undergraduate students.  The impacted external research funding
              amounts to approximately $1,000,000 annually.

