Title       : C-RUI: Cellular, Physiological and Life-history Responses of a Stream Fish,
               Blacknose Dace (Rhinichthys atromaculatus), to Urbanization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0216974

Award Number: 0216974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286132             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Snodgrass jsnodgrass@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay A. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gail E. Gasparich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1091,1148,9169,9178,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Scientists are in general agreement with the idea that urbanization and its
              accompanying habitat loss and fragmentation will result in a reduced
              communities of organisms-often referred to as opportunistic, generalist or
              weedy species-that are able to cope with the novel selection pressures and
              stressors of the urban environment through rapid evolution or plasticity, or
              both.  Evidence for this point of view comes from the disproportionate
              persistence of broadly distributed species in urban environments, the rapid
              evolution of resistance to toxins by fungi, bacteria, plants, insects, and even
              mammals, and the rapid evolution among some invertebrate groups of preference
              for introduced plant hosts.  While it is clear that specific selection pressure
              in the urban environment can result in rapid evolution of specific traits, it
              remains unclear how and by what mechanisms the overall physiology and life
              history characteristics of populations will change with urbanization.
              Specifically, will populations in urban environments become more
              "opportunistic," and if so what roles will phenotypic plasticity and evolution
              play?  To address these questions this project will investigate the response of
              a common stream fish, blacknose dace, to watershed urbanization.  Past
              comparative studies have documented increased growth rates, younger age and
              size at maturity, increased swimming performance, and reduced predator
              avoidance behavior in populations occupying streams draining heavily urbanized
              watersheds (>90 % urban land use).  The general goals of this project are to
              continue comparative studies in greater detail, including extending them to the
              cellular level, and to investigate the relative roles of phenotypic plasticity
              and evolution in producing the differences observed in urban populations. 
              Field studies will involve comparison of cellular and tissue structure, protein
              expression, metabolism, lipid storage, diet, and survival across a series of
              streams draining watersheds with 20 to > 90 % urban land use.  A common garden
              experiment will be conducted to investigate the potential genetic basis of any
              of the differences observed in past studies, or discovered during this study. 
              By conducting programs to enhance undergraduate retention in the project over
              multiple years the investigators hope to increase undergraduate understanding
              of, and desire to pursue multidisciplinary studies in graduate school.
