Title       : SBIR Phase II: Development of Integrated Fluid/Solid/Bio-Kinetic Simulation
               Software for the Characterization of Microsphere-based Bio-analytic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0216507

Award Number: 0216507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499948             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shivshankar Sundaram jls@cfdrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    256/726-4800

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9150,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
              customize advanced simulation software  for the design and optimization of
              microsphere and cell-based assays. Current assay design by trial and error is
              slow, unreliable,  expensive, and  a bottleneck for multiplexed,
              high-throughput analysis. Prior Phase I research has successfully established a
              first-ever, truly integrated (buffer flow, resolved microsphere motion and
              surface biochemistry) assay design and analysis tool. The objective of the
              Phase II effort is to further develop the initial models demonstrated in the
              Phase I effort into a comprehensive, generalized design environment. A suite of
              bead-surface biochemistry models (enzyme kinetics, multi-step reactions) and
              including user specifiable surface reaction mechanisms will be developed and
              fully integrated. In seeking to expand the application to cell-based assays,
              models for the motion and capture of deformable cells  will be created, and
              detailed flow visualization experiments tracking bead and cell motion as well
              as assay endpoints in microfluidic channels will be conducted to guide and
              validate these models. The value of the developed simulation tool will be
              demonstrated in the proof-of-concept design of a novel microfluidic, cell-based
              H-filter assay for red-blood cell based aminothiols.

The commercial
              applications of this project will be in the biotechnology and bioassay design
              markets. Miniaturized, multiplexed, high-throughput, fast, efficient and
              sensitive assays are a pre-requisite to translating the wealth of data from the
              human genome and combinatorial libraries into effective therapeutics. The
              developed software product will enable rational, computer-based design of these
              bioassays.
