Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of a MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer for Research and Education
               in Chemistry and Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0216156

Award Number: 0216156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Jeannot mjeannot@stcloudstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Neu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan S. Winter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lakshmaiah Sreerama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammad Mahroof-Tahir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St. Cloud State University
	      740 Fourth Avenue South
	      St. Cloud, MN  56301    320/255-2122

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9141,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
              Department of Chemistry at St. Cloud State University  will acquire a
              Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption Ionization - Time of Flight (MALDI-TOF) Mass
              Spectrometer.  This instrument will be used in a wide variety of studies,
              including a) the identification of molecular determinants of cellular
              sensitivity to cytostatic/cytotoxic agents that may be unique to tumor cells;
              b) the identification of genetic polymorphisms in human aldehyde dehydrogenases
              that will render differential cellular sensititivy to cytotoxic agents; c)
              characterization of electroactive polymers; and d) the study of precursor
              molecules used as dopant sources for fluorescent sol-gel glasses.  In addition,
              MALDI MS will be a major component in a new laboratory curriculum for
              biophysical chemistry.

Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI)
              time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometry is the technique of choice for obtaining
              accurate molecular weights on molecules up to and over 300,000 daltons, with
              extremely high sensitivity.  Use of a MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer has therefore
              become a standard technique in most DNA/protein core facilities.  The ability
              to obtain very accurate molecular weights of biological molecules is
              fundamental to all biological and biomedical research and essential in a modern
              research and training environment.  These studies will have an impact in the
              areas of biophysical and materials chemistry.  
