Title       : Demographic Change and Reproductive Skew in Cooperative Breeding Primates
               (resubmit)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0216096

Award Number: 0216096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Dietz jd72@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1160,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although rare relative to other social systems, cooperative breeding species
              present unique opportunities to examine hypotheses explaining the evolution of
              cooperation and competition in kin-based societies.  Early studies focused on
              the adaptive significance of alloparental care.  Specifically, why did mature
              adults remain in their natal groups helping to raise offspring not their own? 
              For various species of birds and a few mammals, substantial progress has been
              made in addressing the original question of why helpers help.  By staying at
              home, alloparents often improve their chances of finding a breeding opportunity
              and receive gains in indirect fitness.  
Early research on callitrichid
              primates (marmosets, tamarins and lion tamarins) in captivity suggested that
              social and genetic monogamy was the norm for the family but recent reports from
              the wild and in captive settings suggested that callitrichid social
              organization is highly flexible, both within populations and across taxa.  This
              variability provides fertile ground for testing hypotheses concerning the basis
              of reproductive skew and delayed dispersal. 
Dietz, Baker and colleagues
              propose a 3-year continuation of behavioral and demographic research on golden
              lion tamarin monkeys in Poco das Antas Reserve, Brazil.  This 17-year study is
              unique in terms of its ability to address questions at the population level and
              in its scope, maintaining an integrated set of databases including behavior,
              demography, kinship, morphology, reproduction, use of space, group dynamics,
              food habits and samples of blood, hair and feces.  During the first 13 years of
              this research, lion tamarin territories occupied all suitable habitat in the
              reserve, most groups contained several helpers and population growth was
              limited by high mortality during dispersal from natal groups.  In the past
              three years a novel form of predation, decimation of complete groups while in
              den sites, resulted in profound changes in the social, experiential and
              demographic context of individuals surviving in the study population. 
              Population density, group size and number of helpers decreased, and the rate of
              group extinction/recolonization increased.  In effect, this pulse of increased
              predation resulted in a unique natural experiment.  Relative to conditions
              before increased predation, Poco das Antas now contains more breeding
              opportunities for dispersing individuals, less competition to fill those slots
              and fewer alloparents to care for group offspring.
By comparing patterns of
              dispersal and reproductive sharing before and after increased predation, and by
              integrating molecular genetic and endocrine techniques with field data, these
              investigators propose to determine if tamarins are assessing the availability
              and quality of reproductive opportunities outside the natal group, the extent
              to which ecological constraints affect dispersal and reproductive sharing, the
              effects of genetic relatedness on subordinate breeding, the relative effects of
              inbreeding avoidance and age on reproductive skew, and the circumstances and
              mechanisms by which dominants control reproduction of subordinates.
	Finally,
              the presence of this NSF-sponsored project provides resources, prestige and
              incentive to the Brazilian government agency managing the reserve and serves as
              a platform for training Brazilian and American biologists at all professional
              levels.  Results of this research form the scientific basis for management of
              all four taxa of lion tamarins and were used to justify the creation of a new
              biological reserve and to inform and implement local projects including
              reforestation, planting of forest corridors, conservation education,
              reintroduction and translocation.

