Title       : Acquisition of an Analytical Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope for
               Research and Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0216494

Award Number: 0216494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224237             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Behl   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Z. Mason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Sample  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel O. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0216494
Behl

This NSF Major Research Instrumentation Program award to the
              California State University, Long Beach (CSULB) will support the acquisition
              and installation of an Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM) with
              microanalytical capabilities. This instrumentation will provide fundamental and
              necessary support for cross-disciplinary research and teaching programs in the
              natural sciences and anthropology. Productive research programs in sedimentary
              petrology, paleoceanography, structural geology, geochemistry, biochemistry,
              and archaeometry will directly benefit from access to this instrument. Student
              research and formal courses at all levels in the Departments of Geological
              Sciences, Biological Sciences, and Anthropology/Archaeology will utilize this
              instrument for imaging and compositional analysis. Intramural benefits will be
              extended to the broader educational community via well-established, NSF- and
              NIH-funded programmatic ties and joint research with faculty and students of
              local community colleges and high schools. CSULB is designated a Non-Ph.D.
              Granting and Minority-Serving Institution. CSULB and the College of Natural
              Sciences and Mathematics, where the ESEM facility will be located, has a strong
              record of commitment to community outreach efforts.  The new ESEM facility,
              with secondary and backscattered electron imaging, cathodoluminescent
              detection, and quantitative elemental microanalysis and mapping capabilities,
              will meet current research and pedagogic needs, and provide the flexibility to
              support new developments in research, teaching, and outreach missions over the
              next two decades. The Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM) will
              image and analyze highly porous, delicate, moist, dirty, vacuum-sensitive or
              rare geologic, biologic or archaeological specimens without carbon or gold
              coating that would interfere with subsequent trace elemental or isotopic
              analysis. Joint use of the ESEM facility will foster synergistic,
              cross-discipline collaboration among the geology, biology, archeology and
              environmental science disciplines at CSULB.
***

