Title       : Development of a High Resolution X-Ray Analyzer for Transition Metal Oxide
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0216858

Award Number: 0216858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor A. Tyson tyson@adm.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chi-Chang Kao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wolfgang Caliebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Synchrotron based high resolution x-ray emission spectroscopy has developed into
              a powerful approach to probe the metal site valence and spin polarized charge
              density in transition metal oxide systems.  In addition, it can be used to
              obtain light-element x-ray absorption spectra (such as carbon) with bulk
              sensitivity.   However, this approach has been limited to specialists because
              of the lack of dedicated systems.   With this award from the Instrumentation
              for Materials Research program and the Major Research Instrumentation program
              scientists at New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) will develop a high
              resolution x-ray analyzer which will be stationed at the National Synchrotron
              Light Source in Brookhaven National Laboratory. Optimizing the instrument for
              thin films will makes it, in general, useful for chemical characterization of
              dilute systems.  The instrument will be stationed the at the National
              Synchrotron Light Source and will be available to a broad range of users in
              fields as diverse of chemistry, biology, geology and physics. At all levels of
              the construction and research conducted with this analyzer graduate students
              will be involved.  The instrument will be incorporated in graduate and
              undergraduate laboratory courses. In addition, the instrument will be utilized
              as a chemical analysis tool in a transition metal oxide preparation and
              characterization workshop for Newark area high school students conducted at the
              NJIT.  This will serve to develop scientific literacy and to directly influence
              students from underrepresented groups to pursue careers in
              science.

High-resolution x-ray emission spectroscopy based at electron
              storage rings at national laboratories has developed into a powerful tool to
              examine the chemistry of metal atoms.  This tool can be applied to study the
              valence of metal sites in protein molecules in order to understand their
              function.  In addition, this approach can be used to study light atom such as
              carbon without the need for a high vacuum system.  However, its use has been
              limited to specialists because of the lack of dedicated systems. With this
              award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major
              Research Instrumentation program scientists at the New Jersey Institute of
              Technology (NJIT) will develop a high resolution x-ray analyzer which will be
              stationed at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) in Brookhaven
              National Laboratory.   Stationing the system at the NSLS will make the system
              available to a broad range of users in fields as diverse of chemistry, biology,
              geology and physics. At all levels of the construction and research conducted
              with this analyzer graduate students will be involved.  The proposed instrument
              will have a broad impact through the education of graduate and undergraduate
              students based on its use in laboratory courses.  In addition, the instrument
              will be utilized as a chemical analysis tool in a transition metal oxide
              preparation and characterization workshop for Newark area high school students
              conducted at the NJIT.  This will serve to develop scientific literacy and to
              directly influence students from underrepresented groups to pursue careers in
              science.

