Title       : Acquisition of a Multilayer Monochromator for a Synchrotron X-ray
               Microtomography Station and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0216875

Award Number: 0216875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clinton S. Willson cwillson@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kyungmin Ham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Kurtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant is for the acquisition of a multilayer monochromator for the
              synchrotron microtomography station at the Louisiana State University Center
              for Advance Microstructures and Devices (CAMD). A SXM station has recently been
              assembled at the synchrotron facility by a multidisciplinary group of
              physicists, chemists, and engineers. The SXM station has been installed on a
              CAMD bending magnet with a maximum energy of about 15 keV. It is anticipated
              that in 2002, the station will be placed on a 7.3T wiggler beamline, which will
              provide usable photons to >50 keV. While the early results have been highly
              successful, analysis of the data has highlighted the need for the monochromatic
              beam. As a polychromatic x-ray beam traverses a sample, the shape of the energy
              spectrum changes with the lower end of the incident energy spectrum absorbed
              more than the higher end. This property is known as beam hardening. For the
              lower Z elements found in environmental and biological samples, a monochromatic
              beam will aid in optimizing the contrast and thus minimizing the image
              artifacts from beam hardening effects. In addition, a monochromatic beam will
              also aid in chemical identification through contrast arising from a judicious
              choice of energies above and below core-excitation thresholds. The CAMD SXM
              beamline appears to be the only SXM beamline in the world currently without a
              monochromator. 

Synchrotron x-ray microtomography (SXM) is playing an
              increasingly important role in research in materials, biology, physics,
              geology, and environmental sciences. Many applications use tomographic imaging
              techniques to produce a three-dimensional representation of a sample. Since
              October 2000, the SXM station at LSU has been used to acquire images from such
              disciplines as chemistry, physics, biology, oceanography, material science, and
              engineering. Because of CAMD's close association with the state of Louisiana
              and LSU, education and outreach are strongly emphasized. Participants in the
              SXM research program include local high school students, undergraduate research
              assistants (through several NSF-sponsored REU programs), graduate students,
              post-doctoral associates, and both LSU and Southern University faculty and
              staff. 

