Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of a Digital Particle Image Velocimetry System for the
               Study of Turbulent Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0216365

Award Number: 0216365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93290              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Grega grega@tcnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick A. Tebbe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The College of New Jersey
	      P.O. Box 7718
	      Ewing, NJ  086280718    609/771-3255

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1415,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The engineering department at The College of New Jersey seeks to build a
              foundation for research and learning through the acquisition of
              state-of-the-art technologies. Addition of a Digital Particle Image Velocimetry
              system will greatly diversify and enhance the current infrastructure of
              resources available to faculty and students. Digital Particle Image Velocimetry
              has become a standard in flow diagnostic techniques in industry and research
              sectors. The primary attractiveness of this technique lies in the ability to
              quantify planar or three-dimensional velocity fields with incredible accuracy,
              resolution, and speed. The heart of the system consists of a dual head pulsed
              Nd:YAG laser, high resolution CCD digital acquisition package, and a software
              interface that controls all acquisition and data processing functions. Two main
              activities will be generated at the College upon acquisition of the DPIV
              system: development of a research program capable of addressing issues faced by
              industry and society related to turbulence-driven phenomena and an educational
              improvement plan consisting of the enhancement of undergraduate laboratories
              and fluid mechanics courses and increased involvement of undergraduates in
              research.

Specific thrust areas to be targeted by the research program will
              initially focus on noise generation due to turbulent flow and the
              quantification of turbulent multiphase flows. Issues addressed by the
              multiphase flow studies will include bubble interactions with turbulence and
              particle dispersion problems of interest to industry. Using DPIV, individual
              terms of the governing turbulent transport equations can be directly calculated
              so that the dominant source terms can be identified. In addition, particle
              motions and distributions can be directly observed. These capabilities can
              ultimately lead to validation of complex numerical models.

Incorporation of
              a DPIV system into undergraduate laboratories and fluid mechanics courses will
              allow students to gain deeper physical insight into a host of fluid phenomena.
              Integration of theory and design is one of the cornerstones of the well-
              balanced engineering education received by students at the College. The quality
              of several student senior design projects will be greatly enhanced through
              access to a flow diagnostic tool such as DPIV for evaluating prototypes and
              testing innovative concepts.

