Title       : Catalysis and Separations with One Hand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0216170

Award Number: 0216170
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326001             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Sholl sholl@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Gellman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to explore the fundamental aspects of
              enantioselective
chemistry on chiral metal surfaces. The investigation is
              focused on naturally chiral surfaces formed from high Miller index planes of
              metals such as Cu and Pt. The chirality of these surfaces arises from the
              kink-step-terrace structures that are formed by the intersections of three low
              Miller index microfacets. In this sense this type of surface chirality is
              distinct from the chirality imparted by the traditional approach of templating
              a surface with chiral ligands.  Past work has probed the structure of naturally
              chiral surfaces, enantiospecific adsorbate geometries, and enantiospecific
              surface reaction energetics. These properties of chiral surfaces determine the
              enantioselectivities of catalytic reactions and chromatographic separations. 
              The work proposed focuses on the exploration of naturally chiral surfaces of
              various structures using a combination of experimental and theoretical methods.
              Although there are an infinite number of chiral high Miller index surfaces,
              they are composed of a finite number of types of kink-step-terrace structures.
              The proposed investigation will explore the enantiospecificity of this set of
              structures on Cu single crystal surfaces by using chiral adsorbates that have
              previously exhibited enantiospecific surface chemistry. The educational
              activities are expected to be the traditional mentoring of graduate students. 
              The fundamental goal of the proposed work is to provide a basic understanding
              of the roots of enantioselectivity on a set of highly characterized, naturally
              chiral surfaces.

