Title       : Acquisition of EchoTherm System for Nondestructive Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0216435

Award Number: 0216435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183350             (Estimated)
Investigator: Primus V. Mtenga mtenga@eng.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Egwu E. Kalu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter N. Kalu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kamal Tawfiq  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tarek Abichou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Primus V. Mtenga and colleagues at Florida A&M
              University - Florida State University College of Engineering (FAMU-FSU CoE) to
              acquire an EchoTherm System for nondestructive evaluation (NDE) in
              infrastructure condition assessment and other applications. Infrastructure
              deficiencies such as cracking in concrete structures, corrosion in steel
              structures, production anomalies in materials have made condition assessment
              using NDE techniques a very important area of research and development .  These
              NDE techniques include visual techniques, ultrasonic based techniques, x-ray
              techniques, and now increasingly thermographic techniques. Both ultrasonic and
              x-ray techniques require the attachment of probes or film on the component or
              structure to be evaluated. The attachment of devices to the location to be
              inspected is time consuming and may cause some inconveniences such as closure
              of a facility for extended periods.  On the other hand, Infrared thermography
              (IRT) techniques have all the characteristics of providing an efficient and
              economical method for NDE.  These characteristics include the ability of
              measuring surface temperature at a distance and the ability to cover a large
              area at a time. These characteristics make the technique very useful in
              situations such as the condition assessment of bridges where minimum
              inconvenience to the traveling public is desirable.
The EchoTherm System to be
              acquired will complement an existing IRT capability at FAMU-FSU CoE. The
              EchoTherm system allows controlled heat pulse application, thus providing the
              ability to monitor heat decay precisely, which in turn allows the determination
              sizes of anomalies and their location with depth.  The availability of the
              system will enhance the productivity of the existing IRT facility and increase
              FAMU-FSU CoE competitiveness in the area of infrastructure condition
              assessment. With anticipated funding from Florida Department of Transportation,
              studies on quality control of Fiber Reinforced Polymer retrofit will be the
              maiden project for the requested equipment.
The Florida A&M Univerisity, a
              historically Black University, is a leading producer of minority and female
              engineering graduates.  The requested Echo-Therm System, augmented by the
              existing IR Camera, will provide NDE exposure to the existing diverse body of
              undergraduate and graduate students, thus bringing underrepresented groups to
              the condition assessment field.  



