Title       : MRI/ECS: Development of Wide Band Gap Semiconductor Materials Testing System
               Based on Light Induced Transient Grating Technique
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0216323

Award Number: 0216323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Shur shurm@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Remis I. Gaska  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leo J. Schowalter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for proposal ECS-0216323 "Development of Wide Band Gap Semiconductor
              Materials Testing System Based on Light Induced Transient Grating Technique"  
              

We propose to develop a unique Wide Band Gap Semiconductor Materials
              Testing System Based on Light Induced Transient Grating Technique. This system
              will allow us to obtain detailed information about materials properties of bulk
              substrates, epitaxial layers, and heterostructures for wide band gap
              semiconductors enabling the optimization of the device design for high power
              electronics, solid state lighting, and UV emitters and detector applications
              for detection of hazardous biological substances. In particular, we will
              evaluate substrate material and surface preparation, and buffer and epitaxial
              layers for LEDs, laser diodes and transistors. The studies of non-equilibrium
              recombination and transport parameters that will be made possible with this
              system will allow us to optimize growth regimes and structure design for
              heterostructures and quantum wells and to optimize n-type and p-type doping
              regimes and conditions. This unique system allows for nondestructive
              characterization technique, which could bridge the gap between optical and
              electronic characterization of wide band gap semiconductors. We believe that
              light-induced transient grating technique capable of performing in deep UV
              spectral range is the best method to extract carrier generation, trapping,
              recombination and diffusion characteristics. This system will be unique in
              several respects: it will allow for sub-picosecond pulses, will have
              sub-picosecond time resolution; tunability in 200-800 nm range, and automatic
              operation.  It will allow us to apply both external electric field and
              mechanical deformation. The proposed system will perform in deep UV spectral
              range and will be used for the studies of GaN, AlGaN, AlInGaN and SiC
              materials, AlInGaN/GaN heterostructures and AlInGaN-based high Al content
              quantum well structures

