Title       : Mechanisms of Free-Energy Transduction and Cooperativity in Myosin VI.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0216834

Award Number: 0216834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $678792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrique De La Cruz enrique.delacruz@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Members of the myosin family of actin-based molecular motors use the chemical
              energy from ATP hydrolysis to perform mechanical work such as vesicle, membrane
              and mRNA transport in cells. One member of the family, myosin VI, is unique in
              that it travels towards the pointed ends of actin filaments, as opposed to the
              barbed ends. Pointed-end directionality enables myosin VI to transport
              endocytic vesicles from the cell surface to the cell interior. Myosin VI is
              processive; for each diffusional encounter with an actin filament, a single
              myosin VI molecule possessing two catalytic subunits takes multiple steps, each
              coupled to an individual ATPase cycle, before dissociating. The two subunits
              alternate between leading and trailing positions on the actin filament track.
              Slow, rate-limiting ADP release enables myosin VI to remain attached to actin
              for a large fraction of its ATPase cycle time and is believed to coordinate the
              catalytic cycles of the two heads so that at least one is bound to actin and
              ADP at all times.

In this project, biochemical and biophysical experiments
              will be employed to provide a complete and detailed characterization of kinetic
              and thermodynamic parameters of ADP and actin binding to myosin VI, and to
              identify the mechanism of communication between the catalytic subunits during
              processive stepping. The detailed analysis of reaction mechanisms will provide
              quantitative models for the molecular mechanisms of energy transduction,
              processivity and regulation in myosin VI. General principles about free-energy
              coupling and cooperativity in molecular motors will emerge from this work.

