Title       : Model Bending: Towards Dealing with Model Inadequacies in Data Assimilation and
               Forecasting Using a Single Model Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0216866

Award Number: 0216866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $668950             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Hansen jhansen@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward N. Lorenz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry A. Emanuel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There are two major sources of errors that account for inaccurate weather
              predictions from numerical models:  the initial-condition errors and model
              inadequacies.  In this project, the PIs will tackle the model inadequacies
              problem through data assimilation and adjustment of physical parameters during
              forecast period.  They will use the model output statistics (MOS) produced from
              forecasts as pseudo-data of the system's future states in a four dimensional
              variational data assimilation (4d-Var) to find the initial conditions that
              minimize the mismatch between the MOS forecasts and the model forecasts.  A
              second, independent, application of MOS is then applied to the resulting
              forecast 4d-Var states.  This procedure is termed as a "forecast 4d-Var" as it
              takes into account the model errors through 4d-Var during forecast.  The second
              part of the research is to dynamically alter model parameters, instead of the
              initial conditions, using 4d-Var to "bend" the model toward the true state of
              the atmosphere.  Self-correcting models will be developed to allow selected
              parameters to be slowly varying functions of time and space based on physical
              constraints.  During this period, MOS for these parameters are obtained and
              then used to "predict" optimized parameters in forward runs.  This procedure is
              termed as "model bending".  Models of varying levels of complexity will be used
              to gain a better understanding of model inadequacies overall. 

The research
              will bring more attention into model errors in numerical predictions.  It has
              the potential of improving operational forecasts and directing future model
              development.  If successful, it would lead to a major breakthrough in numerical
              modeling.  The project provides good opportunities for training graduate
              students in the highly needed areas of data assimilation and predictability.
