Title       : Center for Theoretical Biological Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0216576

Award Number: 0216576
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5550000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose N. Onuchic jonuchic@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1646      PHYSICS FRONTIER CENTER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,7205,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Biological physics is rapidly emerging as a new major new frontier for science
              in the 21st century.  This field involves a cross-fertilization of ideas and
              methods from biology and biochemistry on the one hand and the physics of comple
              systems on the other.  Its goals are to both develop the conceptual
              underpinnings of a new and more quantitative biology as well as to expand our
              notions of complex matter physics by learning from evolution.  The center for
              Theoretical Biological Physics (CTBP), located at UC San Diego and with the
              participation of the San Diego Supercomputer Center, the Scripps Research
              Institute and the Salk Institute of Biological Studies, will act as a focal
              point for this emerging discipline.  The CTBP will utilize the broad expertise
              of this La Jolla-based community to pioneer new approaches to a whole variety
              of critical issues, including the evolution and functioning of genetic
              regulatory networks, the specificity of protein-protein interactions, the
              dynamic control of cell motility and the synaptic mechanisms underlying
              learning.  A complementary set of activities focused on developing
              state-of-the-art computational methods in support of biological physics is
              being funded by an ITR grant.  Training at multiple levels, from undergraduate
              up to senior investigator, will be integrated directly into the CTBP's research
              efforts; this is particularly necessary for biological physics, as it is
              inherently cross-disciplinary and inherently requires close and continual
              contact between theory and experiment.  Our success will be measured both by
              the specific research accomplishments of our members and visitors and by the
              overall effect will have in fostering the nationwide growth and coherence of
              this immensely exciting field of physics research.  The CTBP is jointly funded
              by the Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate and the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
              Directorate for Biological Sciences.
