Title       : MRI: Acquisition of SEM and EDX Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0216577

Award Number: 0216577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Cross ccross@mtech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vernon Griffiths  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MT Tech of the U of Montan
	      1300 W. Park Street
	      Butte, MT  59701    406/496-4101

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1414,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Montana Tech will acquire a new scanning electron microscope (SEM) and an
              attached energy-dispersive x-ray microanalysis (EDX) system. The system
              consists of a variable pressure SEM (LEO 1430 VP) and a digital x-ray detector
              with a PGT-SPIRIT EDX system. Both units operate from PCs running Windows 2000.
              The SEM is essentially automatic, facilitating usage by inexperienced
              operators. The EDX system also will be far easier to use. The SEM will have
              excellent imaging performance at low accelerating voltage and at chamber
              pressures that permit observation of wet specimens. Hence the biosciences
              faculty, graduate and undergraduate students will have a system that will meet
              almost any need for SEM viewing of specimens.
In consequence a significant
              female faculty and student body will have SEM/EDX access not presently
              possible. Besides the metallurgy/materials department other departments such as
              geology, environmental engineering, chemistry and health, safety and industrial
              hygiene will similarly benefit.

Although a new SEM/EDX facility will open
              doors for undergraduate training, the major role of the system will be to
              facilitate the ongoing research of faculty and graduate students. Much faculty
              and graduate student research is environmentally oriented since Butte is the
              location of the country's largest Superfund site.

In other departments
              faculty researchers and their graduate students have similarly found it
              necessary to use the MSU SEM/EDX facility. Undergraduate students in many
              departments are required to propose and carry out a senior thesis research
              project and a new SEM/EDX facility will attract interested undergraduates from
              all over campus.

The new SEM/EDX system will be connected to the campus
              computer network permitting remote diagnostic troubleshooting when needed.
              Network connection will also allow for remote on-campus access to the SEM/EDX.
              When this is successfully established it will permit undergraduate classes to
              experience relatively directly the applications of SEM/EDX to their field. It
              will then be extended to the Distance Learning program, which deals with 36
              tribal colleges thereby allowing access to Native Americans.

In the future
              the SEM/EDX facility would become part of the infrastructure needed for the
              college to play an active role in the Montana NSF-EPSCOR program, two target
              areas of which are nanotechnology and self-replicating biological structures.

