Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Research and Student Training in Imaging Fast
               Dynamics in Macroscopic Disordered Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0216719

Award Number: 0216719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78215              (Estimated)
Investigator: Narayanan Menon menon@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nalini Easwar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Candela  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony D. Dinsmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This IMR grant will enable the purchase of an ultrafast, high-resolution,
              video-imaging system for advanced imaging of fast motions in soft-condensed
              matter systems from a scale of microns to several centimetres. The physical 
              systems worked on by the group of PIs include gels, colloids, crumpled 
              membranes, granular materials, and multiphase flow in porous media.  The
              unifying theme in this work is the study of non-equilibrium systems in which
              the elementary units are large compared to molecular scales.  The underlying
              theoretical framework to deal with such non-thermal statistical systems is
              still in its infancy, however, with the appropriate instrumentation it is
              possible to perform detailed imaging of the dynamics of the individual
              macroscopic "atoms and molecules" of these systems in a way that is not
              possible in conventional materials.  The video-imaging system will enhance the
              frame rate, spatial resolution and the length of data streams we are able to
              acquire.  The increased frame rate will allow  capturing fast dynamics, such as
              ballistic motions in highly excited granular media; the improved resolution
              will help resolve small motions such as thermal motions in caged systems and
              longer data streams will enable a search for rare but important dynamical
              events such as intermittent crack jumps and buckling events in stressed
              materials. The imaging system will also be available to other local users by
              scheduling time via a webpage.  The users will be aided by graduate students,
              thus broadening their exposure to a broad spectrum of scientific problems. 
              Many of the projects involve considerable involvement by undergraduate students
              and the new capabilities will afford them exposure to advanced techniques in a
              very visual branch of materials physics.



This IMR grant will enable the
              purchase of an ultrafast, high-resolution, video-imaging system for advanced
              imaging of fast motions in soft-condensed matter systems from a scale of
              microns to several centimetres. The physical systems worked on by the group of
              investigators include gels, colloids, crumpled membranes, granular materials,
              and multiphase flow in porous media.  These are all systems of immense
              industrial importance, however, they also present new basic scientific
              challenges in that they are statistically-sized systems with elementary units
              that are very large compared to molecular scales.  The underlying theoretical
              framework to deal with such non-thermal systems is still in its infancy,
              however, with the appropriate instrumentation it is possible to perform
              detailed imaging of the dynamics of the individual macroscopic "atoms and
              molecules" of these systems in a way that is not possible in conventional
              materials.  The video-imaging system will enhance the frame rate, spatial
              resolution and the length of data streams making it possible to study new
              phenomena. Apart from projects scheduled by the investigators themselves, the
              imaging system will be available to other local users by scheduling time via a
              webpage.  The users will be aided by graduate students, thus broadening their
              exposure to a broad spectrum of scientific problems.  Many of the projects
              involve considerable involvement by undergraduate students and the new
              capabilities will afford them exposure to advanced techniques in a very visual
              branch of materials physics.

