Title       : Aquisition of Equipment for Research at the Prescott College Kino Bay Center for
               Cultural and Ecological Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0216594

Award Number: 0216594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98556              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward H. Boyer eboyer@prescott.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Prescott College
	      220 Grove Avenue
	      Prescott, AZ  863012912    928/778-2090

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Edward Boyer at Prescott College to
              acquire equipment and instruments necessary to support research in the areas of
              marine ecology, marine conservation and management, and community outreach at
              the Kino Bay Center for Cultural and Ecological Studies (the Prescott College
              field station on the Gulf of California).  The primary instruments to be
              purchased fall into three categories.  First is a GPS base station, associated
              hand held units, computers, software, and set up service.  This instrumentation
              will allow us to time/base correct GPS data and serve as the Base Station for
              this region of the Gulf of California which has no such base station within a
              500km radius.  The work done will support mapping of islands, and coasts,
              desert vegetation, and tracking of marine mammals.  The second set of
              instruments is to be utilized in our Fin Whale photo identification project in
              the Midriff Island region of the Gulf.  These instruments include boat motors,
              cameras, plankton and physical oceanographic sampling devices, binoculars, and
              spotting scopes.  The third set of instruments include microscopes, cabinets,
              herbarium supplies, and a small inflatable boat to support ongoing research on
              commercial crab growth and reproduction in nearby mangrove estuaries.  All of
              these research projects are in cooperation with Mexican Federal (Instituto
              Nacional de Ecologia), and local agencies and NGO's
	Currently, research at
              the Center has two major foci, 1) Isla Alcatraz - island inventory,
              conservation, and community based management plan development and 2) Fin Whale
              (Balaenoptera physalus) photo identification.  The island is small (about one
              half square km.), volcanic island, about 1.4 kilometer from the town of Bahia
              de Kino.  A primary focus of this research is on nesting cormorants, egrets and
              herons on the island. A biological inventory and detailed mapping of the island
              are also part of the project.
	The majority of the users of our field station
              are undergraduate students and a small number of graduate students who overlap
              with and often assist visiting researchers thereby gaining invaluable field/
              research training.  An important component of our research activities is the
              dissemination of information via environmental education projects in the local
              community,  by way of presentations at conferences, and through our web pages
              on the Prescott College website.

