Title       : Social, Ecological and Genetic Variables in a Model Vocal Learning System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0216614

Award Number: 0216614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $544340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Beecher beecher@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Social, Ecological and Genetic Variables in a Model Learning System

Michael
              D. Beecher

The use of elaborate acoustic vocalizations for communication is
              common in a wide variety of animal groups.  In the oscine passerines
              (songbirds), such vocalizations are called song and have an additional,
              intriguing aspect:  they are learned, with much of that learning occurring very
              early in life.  Song learning in songbirds has been extensively analyzed in the
              laboratory and has become a major model system for studying the neurobiology of
              learning.  Its value as a model system is enhanced by its many parallels with
              human language learning.  These parallels include an early sensitive period, a
              perceptual filtering mechanism tuned to species communication signals, a
              crucial role for auditory feedback in normal development, a separation between
              sensory and motor learning, and an early subsong or babbling stage.  Work on
              the neural basis of song perception and production in songbirds has revealed
              additional parallels between the neural centers for song in birds and those for
              language in humans.  In this context, understanding the normal course of song
              development in songbirds becomes crucial if this model system is going to
              provide general insights into the development of vocal communication systems in
              general and human language in particular.  Unfortunately, our understanding of
              normal song development is surprisingly incomplete, because most studies of
              song learning to date have been laboratory experiments in which essentially all
              social features have been removed.  Four series of studies will be carried out
              to examine social, ecological and genetic variables in the song learning
              process for one particular species, the song sparrow. In the first series of
              experiments, singing interactions between tutor and tutee, and between tutors,
              will be manipulated and analyzed as a potential variable in song learning; this
              will be the first time this has been attempted in the laboratory.  The setup
              will simulate four live song tutors, and both tutor-tutor and tutor-tutee
              singing interactions will be systematically varied; the general prediction is
              that birds will copy more songs from more interactive tutors.  A second study
              will examine the role of genetic factors by comparing song learning by eastern
              and western song sparrows.  On the basis of field studies, it has been
              hypothesized that birds in the two populations follow very different,
              genetically-based song-learning programs.  This hypothesis will be tested by
              collecting birds from both populations and raising them in a common
              song-tutoring regime; according to the genetic hypothesis, the differences
              observed in the field should persist despite the common tutoring regime.  In a
              third study, song learning will be directly examined in the field by
              radio-tracking young song sparrows through their first year and correlating the
              extent and timing of their interactions with potential song tutors and the
              degree to which the young birds copy their songs.  In the fourth study,
              playback experiments  in which the experimenter simulates a birds neighbor by
              playing recordings of the neighbor to the bird in a realistic simulation --
              will be carried out to analyze how birds in both populations use their songs in
              territorial interactions with their neighbors.  Field studies have suggested
              that the rules of communication in these two populations may be quite
              different, paralleling the presumed difference in their song learning programs.
               It is hoped that results from these different lines of research will combine
              to elucidate the social factors that shape the development of this model vocal
              learning system. In turn, such insights may shed light on human disorders such
              as autism that are characterized by a co-occurrence of language and social
              deficiencies. 

