Title       : MRI: Acquisition of an E-beam Lithography System for Nanoscale Science and
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0216374

Award Number: 0216374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leigh M. Smith leigh.smith@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Steckl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
              University of Cincinnati with the acquisition of an e-beam lithography system:
              the Raith-150. Fifteen interdisciplinary group of faculty from departments of
              physics, electrical engineering, optoelectronics, and materials science
              representing the 6 major universities in Southern Ohio will make use of the
              instrument. The instrument, which will provide the foundation for
              nanofabrication of structures with sizes down to 10 nm, will support research
              in the areas of Nanoelectronics, Photonic and Electronic Nanostructures, Nano
              BioElectronics, and Novel Microscopies. Advances in each of these areas depend
              crucially on the ability to carry out the nanofabrication provided by the
              Raith-150 system. New fundamental understanding will result from the work on
              nanoelectronics (e.g.nanotransport experiments), photonic nanostructures (e.g.
              strongly coupled quantum dots systems), new and challenging advances is
              expected in technologically relevant areas including nano bio-electronics (e.g.
              biochips and optical integrated circuits), and new tools for researchers will
              be developed (e.g. novel microscopies). A key part of the activity is the
              education and training of undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral
              fellows in modern methods of e-beam lithography.   

This award from the
              Major Research Instrumentation program supports the University of Cincinnati
              with the acquisition of an e-beam lithography system: the Raith-150. Fifteen
              interdisciplinary group of faculty from departments of physics, electrical
              engineering, optoelectronics, and materials science representing the 6 major
              universities in Southern Ohio will make use of the instrument. The instrument,
              which will provide the foundation for nanofabrication of structures with sizes
              down to 10 nm, will support research in the areas of Nanoelectronics, Photonic
              and Electronic Nanostructures, Nano BioElectronics, and Novel Microscopies.
              Advances in each of these areas depend crucially on the ability to carry out
              the nanofabrication provided by the Raith-150 system. New fundamental
              understanding will result from the work on nanoelectronics (e.g.nanotransport
              experiments), photonic nanostructures (e.g. strongly coupled quantum dots
              systems), new and challenging advances is expected in technologically relevant
              areas including nano bio-electronics (e.g. biochips and optical integrated
              circuits), and new tools for researchers will be developed (e.g. novel
              microscopies). A key part of the activity is the education and training of
              undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral fellows in modern methods
              of e-beam lithography.   

