Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Nanostructure Fabrication and Characterization System for
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0216136

Award Number: 0216136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342048             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. McCombe mccombe@nsm.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hong Luo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert H. Titus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paras N. Prasad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander N. Cartwright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program, SUNY Buffalo
              will acquire a high-resolution (1.5 nm) scanning electron microscope equipped
              to function as an electron beam lithography system and a wafer probe station
              for nanostructure device characterization, both for research and education
              purposes. This system will permit fabrication and test of metal, semiconductor,
              and polymer nanostructures for nanoelectronic, nanophotonic, and spintronic and
              molectronic applications, as well as for basic physics and chemistry studies.
              This acquisition will enhance existing and planned research programs in the
              Institute for Lasers, Photonics and Biophotonics and its affiliated materials
              activity, the Center for Advanced Photonic and Electronic Materials (CAPEM), as
              well as other research programs in the Departments of Chemistry, Physics and
              Electrical Engineering. Research efforts in these areas are presently supported
              by NSF, DARPA, ONR, AFOSR and New York State. The system will be maintained and
              operated as a research facility through the Institute of Lasers, Photonics and
              Biophotonics (ILPB). This is a University-supported institute that brings
              together faculty from science and engineering departments, and from departments
              in the School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences at the University at Buffalo,
              as well as from other universities.  A half-time Ph.D.-level technical support
              person will be responsible for Daily operation and training of students, who
              will be supervised by faculty members. A wide range of research projects will
              make use of this facility: basic physics of low dimensional (nanoscale) quantum
              fluids and magnets, studies (through nano-apertures) of internal transitions of
              excitons in lateral fluctuation single quantum dots, fabrication and evaluation
              of nanoscale thin-film transistors and nanowires, fabrication and evaluation of
              molectronic device structures, and fabrication and basic studies of
              nanospintronic structures. In addition, this system will also be used to
              educate and train a generation of students in Electrical Engineering, Physics
              and Chemistry in nanoscale lithography and device/structure fabrication and
              characterization; it will also enhance in an important way a recently funded
              NSF IGERT program.
%%%
With this award from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program, SUNY Buffalo will acquire a high-resolution (1.5 nm)
              scanning electron microscope equipped to function as an electron beam
              lithography system and a wafer probe station for nanostructure device
              characterization, both for research and education purposes. This system will
              permit fabrication and test of metal, semiconductor, and polymer nanostructures
              for nanoelectronic, nanophotonic, and spintronic and molectronic applications,
              as well as for basic physics and chemistry studies. The system will be
              maintained and operated as a research facility through the Institute of Lasers,
              Photonics and Biophotonics (ILPB). This is a University-supported institute
              that brings together faculty from science and engineering departments, and from
              departments in the School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences at the University
              at Buffalo, as well as from other universities.  A half-time Ph.D.-level
              technical support person will be responsible for Daily operation and training
              of students, who will be supervised by faculty members. A wide range of
              research projects will make use of this facility. In addition, this system will
              also be used to educate and train a generation of students in Electrical
              Engineering, Physics and Chemistry in nanoscale lithography and
              device/structure fabrication and characterization; it will also enhance in an
              important way a recently funded NSF IGERT program.

