Title       : Development of a Multiaxial Geosynthetics and Fibrous Material Test Device
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0216419

Award Number: 0216419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202731             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Wartman joseph.wartman@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank K. Ko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yick G. Hsuan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Koerner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Drexel University has been at the forefront of geosynthetic and fibrous
              materials engineering since establishing separate centers of excellence in
              these fields in 1986.  The Drexel-affiliated Geosynthetic Research Institute
              (GRI) is today the leading research and development institute dedicated
              entirely to geosynthetics.  Drexel's geosynthetics and fibrous materials
              laboratory facilities have not kept pace with the University's achievements in
              these areas.  Currently, many of the University's laboratory devices
are
              outdated.  Moreover, researchers are now recognizing that many of the existing
              devices used by the profession do not realistically simulate the in-service
              conditions of most geotextiles and industrial textiles.  To remain a leader in
              these fields, and to significantly improve its laboratory infrastructure it is
              critical that the University develop and acquire state-of-the-art test
              equipment.

Attempting to address this need, the University established a
              laboratory maintenance and
equipment upgrade program.   Accordingly, this
              award focuses on development and fabrication of a major test device that will
              greatly enhance the experimental capabilities of geosynthetic and fibrous
              materials researchers.  This highly versatile devise will be capable of
              assessing geosynthetic and fibrous material behavior under confined or
              unconfined conditions in uniaxial, biaxial, or axisymetric tension.  The device
              will be able to perform both monotonic and cyclic tests over a range of strain
              rates  and frequencies (creep to seismic rates) and under loading conditions
              that closely replicate those experienced over a range of in-service conditions.
              

