Title       : MRI: Development of an X-ray System for Noninvasive 3-D Imaging of Large-Scale
               Multiphase Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0216367

Award Number: 0216367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421845             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore J. Heindel theindel@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph N. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1415,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant will be used to develop an x-ray system to perform noninvasive
              three-dimensional imaging of large-scale multiphase flows. This new instrument
              will allow for the study, characterization, and modeling of numerous multiphase
              flow processes found in many industries including fuel production, commodity
              and specialty chemical production, mineral processing, pulp and paper
              production, wastewater treatment, food processing, and biological organism and
              pharmaceutical production.

Multiphase flows involve gas-liquid, gas-solid,
              liquid-solid, and gas-liquid-solid mixtures. The principle difficulty in
              characterizing and quantifying multiphase flows is the fact that the systems
              are typically opaque; even an air-water system becomes opaque at fairly low
              volumetric gas fractions. This necessitates either the use of invasive
              measurement probes when determining internal flow and transport characteristics
              or nondestructive (noninvasive) methods. The difficulty with invasive probes is
              that they can alter the internal flow of the multiphase system interfering with
              realistic process measurements. X-ray imaging methods provide one family of
              noninvasive measurement techniques used extensively for product testing and
              evaluation of static objects with complex structures. The project will develop
              an instrument that utilizes x-ray radioscopy, x-ray stereography, and x-ray
              computed tomography imaging techniques to characterize properties of multiphase
              flow processes, including those properties that are dynamic and time
              dependent.

The project will develop the x-ray hardware, software, and
              facilities to complete x-ray computed tomography (i.e., CT scans) of multiphase
              flows in large vertical columns, providing time-averaged local phase
              distributions with a typical resolution of 500 microns. The system to be
              developed in this project will allow for vertical columns up to 4 m high and 32
              cm in diameter to be studied. These dimensions will allow for the first time,
              without significant interference of either wall effects or mechanical
              interference
from invasive probes, investigation of these industrially
              important systems. Various letters of support, from a variety of industries,
              have stressed this is a critical need.  The explosion of computer power in the
              last three years allows for the first time the ability to acquire, process, and
              display the data volumes needed to adequately characterize these complex
              systems.

The instrumentation that will be developed will include a novel
              application of x-ray stereography and stereographic reconstructions to
              visualize time-resolved flow structures in three dimensions. This new and
              unique capability will allow for the measurement of currently unavailable phase
              characteristics found in complex multiphase flows, such as phase rise/settling
              velocities, phase trajectories, phase coalescence and breakup rates, and phase
              growth and shrinkage rates. With this instrument, data acquisition will be
              possible of internal characteristics of multiphase flow at a sufficient
              resolution to be used for model validation of these complex flows, and, to our
              knowledge, will provide a leading edge research capability currently
              unavailable at any institution.

Once this instrument is developed, many
              other ISU researchers, as well as industrial collaborators (e.g., Air Products
              and Chemicals, Inc., Cargill, Inc., DOW Chemical Company, Fluent, Inc., Foster
              Wheeler Development Corporation, Kimberly-Clark Corporation, Potlatch, Proctor
              & Gamble Company, and Schlumberger Oilfield Services), have identified many
              potential uses of this instrument in studying gas-liquid, gas-solid,
              liquid-solid, and gas-liquid-solid flows. Even traditional computed tomography
              and stereography of industrial components requiring a large field of view can
              be done with this instrument. This instrument will also provide a unique
              opportunity to form various multidisciplinary collaborations between faculty,
              academic and industrial researchers, and students, and provide a one-of-a-kind
              instrument at a public university to which many different researchers will have
              access.

