Title       : Development of a Digital Video/Data Recorder for Monitoring Behavior and
               Multi-Dimensional Movements of Marine Mammals at Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0216525

Award Number: 0216525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall W. Davis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : ,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Research on the behavioral and energetic adaptations of Weddell seals
              (Leptonychotes weddellii ) to the cold dark Antarctic fast-ice environment have
              been facilitated by recent developments in animal-borne video systems. The PI
              has developed a small, analog video/data recorder that can be attached to
              free-ranging marine mammals to observe their underwater behavior, track their
              three-dimensional movements, and simultaneously record data on their
              environment. The current effort will build on this success and advance the
              technology to the next level. The video/data recorders will be redesigned
              include the following new features:  digital video recording for up to 30 h, a
              Global Positioning System (GPS) for geolocation at the surface, extended data
              recording for up to 14 days, and a 50% reduction in size. Development includes
              specifications for an advanced digital video/data recorder and operating
              software. The new video/data recorder will be jointly designed and fabricated
              by Texas A&M University at Galveston and Pisces Design (San Diego, CA). The
              system will consist of two parts. The first will be a small aluminum housing
              for the microcontroller and sensors for pressure, swim speed, compass bearing,
              ambient temperature, ambient dissolved oxygen, ambient light level, tilt, pitch
              and roll. The use of a 31 gigabyte or larger mini-hard drive for storing
              compressed, digital video and audio will allow a considerable size reduction
              from previous designs while retaining full programmability and increasing the
              recording duration to ca. 30 h. The microcontroller will have at least 8
              analog-to-digital converters at 12-bit resolution or greater. This housing will
              also contain lithium ion batteries that will power the micro-controller,
              compass, sensors and GPS. The second housing will contain the miniature video
              camera with near-infrared light emitting diodes (LED) as a light source. The
              camera will be a low light sensitive, black and white camera. This
              high-resolution camera is sensitive to visible and near-infrared wavelengths of
              light. The near-infrared LED light source is designed for imaging in total
              darkness without disturbing the animal's behavior (near-infrared light is
              invisible to marine mammals and fishes). This new generation of video/data
              recorder will be used initially as part of current studies of the foraging
              behavior of free-ranging Weddell seals in Antarctica and will yield new
              insights into the activities of animals at sea. This includes the study of
              general foraging strategies, searching behavior, searching mechanics, modes of
              swimming, and foraging efficiency for different environmental conditions and
              prey type. The new instruments will advance the ability to conduct these
              investigations byproviding high quality digital video recordings, enhancing our
              ability to track the movements of animals at the surface (with GPS) and while
              submerged (with three- dimensional tracking), and reducing the size to decrease
              hydrodynamic drag. In addition to the study of marine mammals, the video/data
              recorder has broad applicability to a variety of submersible platforms and
              human divers. The video/data recorder will contribute to the development of new
              undersea technology and instrumentation that can be used to better understand
              and protect marine organisms and their habitats.   
