Title       : Acquisition of A Load Actuator System for Enhancing Civil Engineering Research
               and Research Training in an Undergraduate Institute (MRI/RUI)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0216149

Award Number: 0216149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114344             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jie Han jxh0305@mail.widener.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vicki Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Balaur Dhillon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Widener Univ Main Campus
	      One University Place
	      Chester, PA  19013    215/499-4000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This award funds the acquisition of an automatic load actuator system for
              enhancing civil engineering research and research training at an undergraduate
              institute.  Currently the Department of Civil Engineering at Widener University
              has a Geotechnical, Concrete, and Structures Testing Laboratory that houses a
              50,000 lb capacity testing frame equipped with a manually operated Enerpac
              hydraulic ram.   The available loading system, although crude, is suitable for
              teaching purposes and for destructive testing of structural members under
              static load conditions only.  The PIs are constructing a geotechnical testing
              box for future research purposes.  Planning for these and other research
              projects makes the acquisition of a closed loop loading system suitable for
              dynamic testing and deflection studies highly desirable.  Some of the areas of
              research include: (1) responses of geosynthetic-reinforced and pile-supported
              foundations under dynamic loads; (2) performance of fiber-reinforced polymer
              piles under horizontal dynamic loads; (3) geosynthetic-reinforced slopes under
              dynamic footing loads; (4) use of geosynthetic to span over sinkholes, (5)
              load-deflection response and crack patterns in FRP-reinforced concrete beams;
              (6) shear capacity of FRP-reinforced concrete beams; and (7) behavior of
              semirigid bolted connections in steel frames.

The acquisition of this
              automatic load actuator will provide the testing facility necessary for
              faculty, graduate, and undergraduate students at Widener University to conduct
              high-quality research projects in structural and geotechnical engineering. 
              This advanced testing system will establish a solid infrastructure for faculty
              to seek research funds from governmental agencies and private sectors and
              research collaborations with researchers at other research institutes.  The
              unique combination of the load actuator and the geotechnical testing box will
              attract high-quality researchers to use this advanced testing system for
              different research purposes.   Because students in the master's degree program
              at Widener University are primarily part-time, working full-time during the day
              and attending graduate courses part-time in the evening, most research projects
              have significant undergraduate participation.  A closed loop load actuator with
              dynamic data acquisition capabilities would provide the students with valuable
              knowledge of state-of-the-art tools for experimental work and the analysis and
              interpretation of data.  With increased research funds, more full-time students
              (including underrepresented groups and women) can be supported to pursue
              advanced degrees in civil engineering.  The acquisition of a load actuator
              system would also allow for significant enhancement of the civil
              engineering/structural portion of the Summer Camp program that has a five-year
              track record of success to inspire local high school students' interests in
              engineering research and careers.

