Title       : Acquisition of a Femtosecond Laser System for Semiconductor Research and
               Photonics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0216785

Award Number: 0216785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Snoke snoke@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hong Koo Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program the
              University of Pittsburgh will be able to acquire a laser system which would be
              a very flexible system for photonics research. This system will have wavelength
              tunability from the near-infrared to ultraviolet, variable repetition rate, and
              pulse width variable from 100 femtoseconds to picoseconds, plus a narrow
              linewidth constant-wave option for some wavelengths. This laser will be replace
              most of the functions of an existing dye-laser system which has become obsolete
              and will provide new optical functions which will allow a greater range of
              experiments. These experiments are part of the ongoing research at the
              University of Pittsburgh in the area of semiconductor photonics. This system
              would have immediate impact on undergraduate research at the University of
              Pittsburgh, because with the availability of the new system, the Nd:YAG-pumped
              dye laser system presently in use would be made available for a new
              undergraduate training facility for high-power lasers. This facility will be
              part of the existing Certificate in Photonics undergraduate education program
              at the University of Pittsburgh, created through a past NSF program and with
              continuing support from NSF. The new laser system would also have immediate
              impact in graduate education, because the primary users of the new system will
              be graduate students.
%%%
With this award from the Instrumentation for
              Materials Research program the University of Pittsburgh will be able to acquire
              a laser system which would be a very flexible system for photonics research.
              This laser will be replace most of the functions of an existing dye-laser
              system which has become obsolete and will provide new optical functions which
              will allow a greater range of experiments. The experiments are part of the
              ongoing research at the University of Pittsburgh in the area of semiconductor
              photonics. This system would have immediate impact on undergraduate research at
              the University of Pittsburgh, because with the availability of the new system,
              the Nd:YAG-pumped dye laser system presently in use would be made available for
              a new undergraduate training facility for high-power lasers. This facility will
              be part of the existing Certificate in Photonics undergraduate education
              program at the University of Pittsburgh, created through a past NSF program and
              with continuing support from NSF. The new laser system would also have
              immediate impact in graduate education, because the primary users of the new
              system will be graduate students.

