Title       : Acquisition of Powder X-Ray Diffraction and Spectroscopy Instrumentation for
               Mineral and Soil Research at New Mexico Highlands University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0216556

Award Number: 0216556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91188              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Lindline lindlinej@nmhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico Highlands Univ
	      University Avenue
	      Las Vegas, NM  87701    505/425-7511

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0216556
Lindline

The Natural Resources Management Department at New Mexico
              Highlands University (NMHU) will use this Major Research Instrumentation award
              to acquire a powder x-ray diffractometer and direct reading spectroscope for
              earth materials research.  The new instruments will serve the following
              functions:  (1) provide analytical capabilities for rock, mineral, sediment,
              and soil research; (2) facilitate teaching and applying key concepts in
              geology, environmental science, and natural resources management courses; and
              (3) support student training in modern analytical methods.  The powder x-ray
              diffractometer will permit the identification of different crystalline phases,
              compositional determinations of solid solution minerals, and the calculation of
              mineral structures.  The spectroscope will provide bulk chemical compositional
              data for rock and mineral samples.  This instrument acquisition addresses the
              need for modern analytical equipment to support NMHU's mission of providing an
              excellent, up-to-date, undergraduate education within the sciences.  NMHU is a
              historically Hispanic institution committed to programs that focus on its
              multiethnic student body (76% minority students), especially the Hispanic and
              Native American cultures that are distinctive of New Mexico.  This equipment
              will facilitate student-involved faculty research in a number of regional
              projects of interest to New Mexico students including the Cenozoic volcanic
              history of northeastern New Mexico, the sedimentary record of local lakes, and
              the effects of fires on forest soils and native vegetation.  Given the 76%
              minority student population served at NMHU and the approximately 40 earth
              science majors, the instrumentation will positively impact the education and
              training of underrepresented groups.
***

