Title       : Acquisition of Chromatography Equipment for Polymeric Materials Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0216816

Award Number: 0216816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Dadmun Dad@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jimmy W. Mays  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program will allow
              the University of Tennessee to purchase instrumentation for chromatographic
              separation and molecular characterization of polymers and copolymers that are
              synthesized and/or studied at the University of Tennessee (UT).  More
              specifically, two chromatographs - one capable of operation at elevated
              temperatures and the other operating at ambient or near ambient temperatures -
              will be purchased.  To optimize the utility of these systems for characterizing
              complex polymers, such as branched polymers, block and graft copolymers, and
              polymers with reactive end-groups, the instrument will include a variety of
              detectors including light scattering, differential viscometer, ultraviolet, and
              differential refractometer units.  To further expand the usefulness of the room
              temperature chromatograph, columns will be purchased for operating this unit as
              either a size exclusion chromatograph (SEC) or as a temperature gradient
              interaction chromatograph (TGIC), as necessary. The acquisition of these
              instruments will provide UT polymer scientists and engineers with a
              state-of-the-art facility for measurement of polymer molecular weights,
              polydispersities, conformational characteristics, and branching.  Improved
              polymer characterization capabilities will favorably impact the research of
              more than 60 researchers in the UT Chemistry, Materials Science, and Chemical
              Engineering Departments, including projects such as the correlation of
              molecular weight distribution to complex rheology, crystallization studies of
              polymers and copolymers, optimization of interfacial adhesion in polymer blends
              and composites, effect of biopolymer structure on food chemistry, and new
              branched polymers as novel elastomers and for testing polymer dilute solution
              theory.  In addition, these instruments will allow us to develop new
              laboratories for Introduction to Polymer Chemistry, Polymer Physical Chemistry,
              and Polymeric Materials courses, thus exposing approximately 100 undergraduate
              and graduate students annually to the use of multi-detector SEC and TGIC for
              polymer characterization.

The acquisition of instrumentation for
              chromatographic separation and molecular characterization of polymers and
              copolymers that are synthesized and/or studied at the University of Tennessee.
              This will provide polymer scientists and engineers with a state-of-the-art
              facility for measurement of molecular weights, polydispersities, conformational
              characteristics, and branching of polymers and copolymers.  Improved polymer
              characterization capabilities will favorably impact the research of more than
              60 researchers in the UT Chemistry, Materials Science, and Chemical Engineering
              Departments.  In addition, these instruments will allow the PI's to develop new
              laboratories for Introduction to Polymer Chemistry, Polymer Physical Chemistry,
              and Polymeric Materials courses, thus exposing approximately 100 undergraduate
              and graduate students annually to the use of multi-detector Size exclusion
              chromatography and temperature gradient interaction chromatography for polymer
              characterization.


