Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Computer-Enhanced Specimen Analysis Station for
               Multidisciplinary Museum Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0216039

Award Number: 0216039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52388              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joe B. Keiper jkeiper@cmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce Latimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy O. Matson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph T. Hannibal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland Mus of Nat Hist
	      
	      Cleveland, OH  44101    /   -

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

	A grant has been awarded to The Cleveland Museum of Natural History
              (CMNH)under the direction of Drs. Keiper, Hannibal, Latimer and Matson to
              obtain the components for a computer-enhanced specimen analysis station.  This
              will entail integrating two microscopes (one compound microscope and one
              dissection
microscope), macrophotography equipment, a three-dimensional
              digitizer, a high resolution VCR, and a sound lab with two networked computers.
               These instruments will allow museum personnel, and their college and high
              school students, graduate students, colleagues, and visiting scientists, to
              accurately identify, study, and catalog research specimens housed at CMNH. New
              equipment will allow for more efficient computer cataloging, more accurate
              analysis of specimens (including, but limited to, animal, plant, fossil,  
              mineralogical, archaeological, and anthropological materials), and open up new
              avenues of research for CMNH that will be enhanced with modern computer
              software capabilities.
	
	This equipment will improve the research
              capabilities of The Cleveland Museum of Natural History.  It will facilitate
              analyses and new scientific discoveries by museum staff, students, and
              associates from multiple disciplines.  Analysis of paleontological and
              anthropological materials will reveal new insights into the evolutionary
              history of a variety of organisms.  The equipment will promote discoveries of
              new information on biological organisms necessary for conservation efforts,
              including survey work, animal ecology, and descriptions of new species and life
              stages. Because the public will be able to view ongoing work and observe
              computer-enhanced specimen analysis though a monitor, this project will promote
              public awareness of scientific research in museums.


