Title       : Acquisition of ICP for Metal Analysis on Environmental Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a0216261

Award Number: 0216261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96828              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold W. Pinnick pinnicha@wvsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Mayhugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Guetzloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Virgina State Colleg
	      
	      Institute, WV  25112    304/766-3000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Harold W.
              Pinnick and colleagues at West Virginia State College will acquire an
              inductively-coupled plasma (ICP) atomic emission spectrometer for metal
              analysis on environmental samples.  They plan to investigate
              naturally-occurring metal ions, their concentrations and anthropogenic metal
              contamination in aquatic and terrestrial environments.  The overall goal is to
              understand the chemistry that occurs at abandoned coal mine sites in West
              Virginia, as a first step to designing and implementing remediation. 
              

Inductively-coupled plasma  spectroscopy is an effective technique for
              determining the presence of trace elements and their concentrations.  It
              provides a rapid and quantitative determination of a large number of heavy
              metals in a variety of sample types.  It can ascertain metal concentrations in
              the parts per billion range, and it can determine at least 35 elements
              simultaneously within minutes.  The availability of an ICP will enhance the
              educational experience of the undergraduate students attending West Virginia
              State College
