Title       : Acquisition of Analytical Equipment for Nutrient Analysis and Particle Size
               Determination in Ecological Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0216553

Award Number: 0216553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Auerbach auerbach@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Arnone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul S. Verburg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric V. McDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian H. Fritsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                     
              Abstract

0216553
Auerbach, Michael

A grant has been awarded to Drs.
              Michael Auerbach, Paul Verburg, John Arnone, Eric McDonald, and Christian
              Fritsen at the University of Nevada Desert Research Institute (DRI), for the
              acquisition of three pieces of analytical equipment to be employed in current
              and future studies of nutrient cycling in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. 
              The equipment includes a flow injection ion analysis system, a dissolved
              organic nitrogen analyzer, and a laser diffraction particle size analyzer. 
              Specific goals that will be accomplished through the proposed equipment
              acquisition include the following: (1) enhanced analytical capabilities to
              benefit ongoing research; (2) pursuit of new research avenues in the field of
              physical and chemical characterization of dissolved organic and particulate
              nutrients in aquatic ecosystems; (3) integration of terrestrial, hydrologic,
              and air research within the university system of Nevada to address
              environmental research questions; and  (4) establishment of a training facility
              for undergraduate and graduate students.

Faculty from DRI are engaged in a
              wide array of studies focused on nutrient cycling in terrestrial and aquatic
              ecosystems.  Currently funded research includes assessment of nutrient loadings
              in rivers and streams, effects of management on nutrient cycling in terrestrial
              ecosystems, nutrient cycling in extreme environments, and interactions between
              climate and terrestrial ecosystems.  These studies are carried out in a variety
              of ecosystems including high elevation semi-arid watersheds, deserts of the
              southwestern U.S., tallgrass prairie, and the Antarctic.  These diverse studies
              share a common need to assess nutrient composition and particle size
              distribution of soils, particulate, and suspended nutrients in lakes and
              streams.  Currently available equipment at DRI does not allow for routine
              analyses of inorganic and organic nutrients that are needed to satisfy the
              increasing demand for these data.  In addition, the methods in use for particle
              size analysis do not provide the detailed information needed for many ongoing
              and new studies.

Graduate student research training is an important part of
              the research enterprise at DRI.  Graduate students will be trained in operating
              the equipment as part of their curriculum.  A laboratory technician will be
              assigned to operate and maintain the equipment and will be responsible for
              training graduate students in conjunction with the principal investigators. 
              The new equipment will greatly enhance DRI's analytical capabilities in soils
              and water research by creating an infrastructure that will support a series of
              fundamental studies.  The requested equipment also has applicability to other
              areas of inquiry currently ongoing at DRI including research on dust emissions
              in deserts and transport of radionuclides in soils.  Further, this new
              equipment will allow DRI to contribute to solving critical state and national
              environmental problems (e.g., increasing demands for drinking water, protection
              of endangered fish species).

