Title       : U.S.-Russia-Mongolia Joint Collaborative Research: Comparative Framework for
               North Asian Genetic Diversity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0216732

Award Number: 0216732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anna M. Kerttula                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327307             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Hammer mhammer@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tatiana Karafet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5221      ARCTIC SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hammer
0216732

This research will use human genomic variation patterns as a
              tool for testing hypotheses concerning the early peopling of North Asia and the
              Americas and for assessing the relative effects of sex-specific demographic
              processes and natural selection in shaping North Asian genetic diversity.
              Within genetics, the study of lineages that are inherited paternally,
              maternally or biparentally can offer different insights into the origins and
              global dispersals of Homo sapiens. The genetic analyses will be applied to a
              panel of 16 males from each of 6 Siberian populations. Comparisons of
              intra-specific patterns of variation within and among human populations, and
              with levels of divergence between humans and great apes at these loci, will
              enable tests of the effects of natural selection and potential differences in
              male and female effective population sizes. Informative polymorphisms
              discovered in this Siberian ascertainment panel will be genotyped in a larger
              set of North Asian samples to allow further tests of the associations between
              linguistic, geographic, and genetic variation and the effects of genetic drift,
              migration, and admixture on North Asian populations. These results will be used
              to aid in constructing more realistic colonization models involving different
              stages for the early peopling of the Americas.

Results from this research
              will enhance our understanding of the evolutionary history of our species. 
              Reconstructing the patterns and processes of human evolution in Asia is of
              interest because the the earliest dispersal routes of anatomically modern
              humans out of Africa are not well understood from the archaeological and
              paleontological records.  Further, this region is the origin for subsequent
              migrations to Japan, Siberia, and the Americas. The 31 native ethnic groups of
              Siberia, 14 of which are available for this project, offer significant
              opportunities to examine the evolutionary forces that may have acted on early
              modern human populations. Until very recently many native Siberian groups
              retained traditional subsistence economies and lifeways that may have reflected
              a pre-Neolithic population structure. North Asian populations, especially those
              adapted to boreal climates in the northernmost regions inhabited by humans, are
              genetically subdivided, and genetic drift has played a key role in shaping
              patterns of variation in Siberia. Furthermore, the demographic history of
              Siberian populations has led to an unusually strong association between
              language and genetic variation. The proposed research is a first attempt to
              develop a comparative genetic framework using data obtained from the same set
              of samples.

The proposed research will directly address three major
              challenges that now face anthropological geneticists. The multiple locus
              approach to be taken here will help to understand: (1) which portions of the
              human genome are variable; (2) how genomic and evolutionary processes have
              interacted to generate observed patterns of diversity; and (3) what the
              relative roles of each of these forces have been over different periods of time
              and in different populations. In addition to having a fascinating evolutionary
              history, Native Siberian populations represent an ideal model system within
              which to address these timely issues.
