Title       : MRI: Development of a Colloidal Force-Distance-Adsorption Apparatus for Particle
               Science Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0216129

Award Number: 0216129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Ducker wducker@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Y. Walz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program Virginia
              Polytechnic Institute and State University will develop a new experimental tool
              for measuring colloidal forces.  An understanding of these forces is important
              in materials science, cell biology, soil science, waste disposal and water
              purification, ceramic engineering, the development of personal products, and in
              quality control in the microelectronics industry.  The instrument will combine
              capabilities of atomic force microscopy (AFM) and total internal reflection
              microscopy (TIRM), while overcoming most of the drawbacks for each technique. 
              The instrument will provide a new capability: the ability to measure adsorption
              isotherms during particle collisions.  The atomic force microscope is currently
              the most widely used method for measuring colloidal forces.  A major problem
              with this application is that the separation between the particle and the
              surface is not measured; it is derived indirectly.  With this apparatus, the
              separation will be obtained directly, from the scattering intensity from an
              evanescent wave produced by totally reflecting a laser beam at the
              substrate/fluid interface.  This approach is based on the TIRM technique. The
              TIRM technique will be improved through modulation of the scattered evanescent
              wave. The adsorption of material to surfaces is the main method by which
              colloidal forces can be modulated, so it is useful to determine adsorption
              during particle interactions.  We will develop a technique for measuring
              adsorption during collisions using fluorescent tags on the adsorbates. Graduate
              and undergraduate students will participate in this instrument development
              project.

Many of the objects that we encounter in everyday life actually
              consist of very fine particles.  For example, bricks, paper, clothing, china,
              soil, most foods, cosmetics, and even humans are composed of small particles. 
              The physical properties (e.g. stiffness, flow, and workability) of these
              objects depends on the forces between the particles.  Part of the process of
              creating new and improved products is the manipulation of the forces between
              particles to obtain desirable material properties.  The first stage of
              manipulating these forces is to measure them. With this award from the Major
              Research Instrumentation program Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
              University will develop a new experimental tool for measuring the forces acting
              on particles.  The new apparatus will combine existing techniques, the force
              probe from Atomic Force Microscopy and the distance probe from Total Internal
              Reflectance Microscopy, and incorporate improvements through the use of signal
              modulation and fluorescent tagging of molecules. A graduate student and
              undergraduate students will participate in this instrument development
              project.


