Title       : Molecular Aspects of Flow Effects on Crystallization in iPP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0216491

Award Number: 0216491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia A. Kornfield jak@cheme.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The microstructure of a semicrystalline polymer depends strongly on processing
              history.  Imposing flow fields on a crystallizing polymer melt can accelerate
              the rate of crystallization and result in the formation of oriented
              crystallites.   In spite of intensive research over the past three decades, the
              fundamental basis of the effects of processing on structure development remains
              elusive. This research probes the underlying molecular-level processes:  the
              interplay of the relaxation dynamics of the molten chains, the distortion of
              segmental orientation created by flow, the kinetics and anisotropy of
              nucleation from a distorted melt, and their effects on the subsequent kinetics
              and morphology of crystallization.  Under current DMR support, surprising
              discoveries have reshaped current thinking.  The rate limiting factor in the
              formation of the oriented precursors that template the row-nucleated morphology
              is the rate of molecular motion in the subcooled melt, which is unanticipated
              by any existing model of flow-induced crystallization.  The role of
              macromolecular dynamics, particularly the distribution of relaxation times, was
              demonstrated using relatively narrow distribution materials and their binary
              blends.  Small amounts of long chains (with known molar mass and
              stereoregularity)  added to a base resin of much shorter chains (approximately
              one-fifth as long), greatly enhanced the flow-induced formation of oriented
              precursors.  The concentration dependence of the effect of long chains
              indicates that long-chain/long-chain overlap plays a central role.  In view of
              the profound effect of low concentrations of long chains, proposed research for
              the next three years focuses on the dependence of the long-chain effect on
              their relative relaxation time and stereoregularity compared to the bulk,
              searching for mechanistic clues.  To clarify the interplay between the earliest
              stages of flow-induced structure formation (the creation of point-like
              precursors) and the subsequent formation of threadlike precursors, homogeneous
              and heterogeneously nucleated model polymers will be compared. The kinetics of
              disappearance of the threadlike precursors when held at elevated temperature
              will be used to test our current hypotheses regarding their structure.

The
              diverse and ubiquitous application of polymers is largely due to
              "semicrystalline polymers," which account for two-thirds of the annual
              production of synthetic polymers.  Over 100 billion pounds a year are made of
              polyethylene and polypropylene alone!  Their properties can be tuned over an
              enormous range by controlling the extent and form of crystallization.  For
              example, the development of highly oriented crystallites during spinning gives
              certain polyethylene fibers a modulus approaching that of steel.  However,
              fundamental understanding needed to achieve intended properties by design
              remains elusive because of the complex effects of molecular structure and
              processing history on material properties.  New methods to observe the earliest
              events during crystallization are revealing surprising truths.  Contrary to
              existing models, oriented nucleation induced by flow occurs as fast as the
              motion of the chain-like molecules permits-the usual activation barrier
              vanishes.  And the polymer chains that matter most in this process are the
              longest ones, needing to be at least four times longer than average.  Such
              advances in molecular-level understanding guide the design of semicrystalline
              polymers to optimize their processing characteristics and ultimate material
              properties, with benefits to the automotive, electronics, food and health care
              industries.

