Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Field-Emission, Controlled Temperature Environmental
               Scanning Electron Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0216530

Award Number: 0216530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $433000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. McKelvy Michael.McKelvy@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Roberson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1414,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Developing a detailed knowledge of advanced solid state, biological,
              bioengineering, and environmental materials formation and behavior will
              facilitate a broad array of advanced technologies. Wide ranging advances can be
              engineered based on an enhanced understanding of natural and artificial
              materials and related processes. An essential component of advancing this
              understanding is in situ and ex situ observation down to the nanoscale, without
              significantly affecting the mechanisms and materials observed. The combination
              of field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM; 2nm resolution), with
              environmental control (up to 10 torr), temperature control (-186 oC to 1,000
              oC), orientational imaging (e.g., phase and grain boundary characterization),
              and energy dispersive spectroscopy (elemental analysis and mapping) provide
              such an opportunity. The objective of this proposal is to acquire an
              environmental FESEM. This E-FESEM system will be used to advance our
              mechanistic understanding of a wide range of multidisciplinary materials and
              reaction processes through nanoscale observation and elemental/biochemical and
              structural analysis. In particular, the E-FESEM will be utilized to support
              projects in the following research areas: (i) solid-state materials and
              processes (e.g., nanomaterials formation, nanolithography, chemical vapor
              deposition, and materials corrosion), (ii) biological materials and processes
              (e.g., cytoskeletal organization, fertilization, and photosynthesis), (iii)
              biomaterials and processes (e.g., tissue interface engineering, photosynthetic
              and photo-detection systems), and (iv) environmental materials and processes
              (e.g., atmospheric aerosols, mineral weathering and carbonation, including CO2
              sequestration, and astrobiological systems).

ASU is very well placed to
              provide full research, research training and educational access to this
              nanoscale laboratory. The instrument will be operated as a user facility within
              the Center for High Resolution Electron Microscopy, with access being provided
              to all qualified users. The proposed system will be fully integrated with the
              Goldwater Materials Visualization Facility (GMVF). The GMVF
              (http://gmsl.eas.asu.edu/gmvf) will house 20 copies of the associated image,
              elemental and structural analysis software, enabling broad access to this
              advanced research tool, both in the GMVF and via the internet and vBNS
              networks. This broad, off-instrument, software access will allow the microscope
              to be dedicated to full-time image and data acquisition. Simultaneously, up to
              20 researchers/students will be able to perform image, elemental and structural
              data analysis. This capability will allow the diverse multidisciplinary
              research group using the system to integrate their research into the classroom,
              including on-line system observation. Students will be empowered to do
              hands-on, cutting-edge research image and data analysis in the
              classroom/laboratory setting (e.g., in graduate laboratory courses, which
              already heavily use the GMVF and the integrated capabilities of the Goldwater
              Materials Science Laboratories). 

The acquisition of the
              controlled-temperature E-FESEM will substantially advance the multidisciplinary
              research and educational goals of a broad range of departments, centers, and
              programs at ASU. These units include the Departments of Bioengineering,
              Biology, Chemical & Materials Engineering, Chemistry & Biochemistry, Geological
              Sciences, Plant Biology, and Physics & Astronomy, as well as the Center for
              Solid State Science (CSSS) and the Astrobiology Program. This breadth of
              interest, together with the broad system access provided by the Visualization
              Facility, will bring the excitement of a wide range of multidisciplinary
              cutting edge research to university, and even pre-university, classrooms via
              the internet and high bandwidth vBNS networks.

