Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Research Infrastructure for Distributed Sensor Applications
               in the Home of the Future
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0216137

Award Number: 0216137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rahul Simha simha@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1189,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0216137
Rahul Simha
George Washington University

MRI:  Acquisition of
              Research Infrastructure for Distributed Sensor Applications in the Home of the
              Future

This proposal, developing an infrastructure for applications that can
              exploit a network of sensors and actuators in the home environment, extends
              work already in progress on future technologies aiming at launching a long-term
              research program around the Home-21 theme with a broader base of applications
              and a stronger research focus.  Applications (with respective examples)
              involve:
1. Sensors distributed around the home (detecting intrusion),
2.
              Sensors on an occupants (helping monitor infirm or disabled occupants), and
3.
              Sensors on a service provider (helping a fireman navigate a burning
              home).
Faculty with research interests in networking, human-computer
              interaction, MEMS devices, sensors and biomedical engineering will collaborate
              on a single infrastructure to support these classes of applications. Although
              the theme centers on the home of the future, the infrastructure and
              applications apply to other living environments including, for example, hotels,
              dormitories, offices, ships, and assisted-living facilities. Special attention
              will be devoted to applications that will use sensors and actuators on
              occupants at multiple level of granularity, coarse-grained (location of
              occupant within the house) and fine-grained (movement of limbs). Such
              applications involve placing sensors on the occupant that are wireless
              connected to algorithms that track movement and can, in some cases, also send
              location-specific feedback (via the actuators) in accordance with the desired
              objective. Ancillary projects involve Safety (falls, fire, etc.), Security
              (intrusion monitoring), Health Monitoring Measuring (measuring telemedicine
              applications, monitoring and relaying vital signs), and RF monitoring
              (controlling harm from electromagnetic radiation). The equipment, including
              magnetic trackers, wireless equipment, RF analyzer and software, and support
              equipment, serves as a testbed for senior design students. Hence, a key
              component is its focus for undergraduate research and training. 

