Title       : Workshop on the History of Algebra in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0216982

Award Number: 0216982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Singer singer@msri.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen V. Parshall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Math Sci Res Inst
	      1000 Centennial Drive
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-0143

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES # 0216982 
Workshop on the History of Algebra in the
              Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries

Michael Singer, Mathematical Sciences
              Research Institute, Cal -Berkeley
Karen Parshall, University of Virginia
              


This proposal is for a workshop at the Mathematical Sciences Research
              Institute at the University of California at Berkeley in spring 2003.    The
              conference, which culminates a semester-long focus at the Institute on
              commutative algebra, brings together leading historians of mathematics and
              mathematicians for a five-day discussion  of relevant topics.  This workshop
              represents an important departure for the institute, which normally focuses on
              purely mathematical enterprises.  The organizers are Jeremy J. Gray (Centre for
              the History of the Mathematical Sciences, The Open University) and co-PI, Karen
              Hunger Parshall (Departments of History and Mathematics, University of
              Virginia). 

The workshop should have two components: lectures and moderated
              discussions. Some twenty, hour-long lectures are to be delivered over a
              five-day period by established researchers, more junior scholars, and advanced
              graduate students.  Ample time for questions and discussion follows each
              lecture.  Each day closes with a moderated discussion period for a dialogue
              between the historians and the mathematicians visiting MSRI about critical
              issues in the history of modern algebra.  Among the topics to be analyzed
              are:
o the contribution of David Hilbert to modern algebra, his re-working of
              the ideas of
Dedekind and Kronecker, and the role of his new formulation of
              the subject in guiding
subsequent research;
o the origins of Emmy Noether's
              work and its later developments;
o the spread and development of algebraic
              thought from Germany to Britain, France, and the United States;
o the
              importance and the nature of the connections between commutative
              algebra,
algebraic geometry, and algebraic number theory;
o the philosophy
              and the teaching of modern algebra; and
o the institutionalization of modern
              algebra in the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries.

This workshop
              provides a unique forum for the interaction of historians of mathematics and
              mathematicians, who represent one of the primary audiences for research in the
              history of mathematics.  Moreover, the workshop will allow us to take a major
              step forward not only in understanding the evolution of modern algebra in the
              nineteenth and twentieth centuries but also in defining a common agenda for
              on-going research in the history of modern mathematics.  Both of these
              objectives will be accomplished in the short term through interactions at the
              workshop and in the long term through a published, book-length volume with an
              explicitly historiographical component.

