Title       : MRI: Acquisition of an Infrared Thermal Imaging System for Applications in
               Ecology and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0216439

Award Number: 0216439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117474             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Kunz kunz@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Thomas Kunz at Boston University to acquire
              an
advanced infrared thermal (IRT) imaging system to investigate the ecology
              and behavior of animals and plants. The instrumentation is prepared for rugged
              fieldwork and includes a high resolution infrared camera and lenses,
              video-signal electronics for real-time data acquisition, and small computer
              with specialized software for operation. The system accurately measures the
              surface temperature of organisms and objects without making physical contact.
              Detailed observations of plants and animals can be made in total darkness and
              without impinging on an organism's normal activities. The highly sensitive data
              enables further inferences to be made about metabolic activity and behavior for
              known organisms under investigation. Research projects involve a variety of
              animal and plant species and address problems in thermoregulation and behavior,
              ecosystem mass and energy exchange, and biological field assessments in
              difficult environmental situations. 

The IRT system will be utilized for
              studies that address behavior, ecology, and
physiological requirements for
              species of bats, lizards, migratory, ground-nesting birds, and carnivorous
              plants. Thermoregulation in lizards, insects, carnivorous plants, and several
              bat species will be investigated. Ground-based thermal imaging data to assess
              variation in energy balance from soils, individual leaves, and entire
              vegetation canopies will enable validation of computer models and space-based
              thermal remote sensing of land surfaces. Census data will be collected of
              migratory, ground-nesting birds and Brazilian free-tailed bats; field surveys
              will be made of foliage roosting bats. Several proposed studies involve the
              ecologically-important, Brazilian free-tailed bats which roost in the Southwest
              U.S. These particular bats provide one of  the most impressive examples of a
              continental-scale, natural pest-control service in North America through
              consumption of enormous quantities of agricultural pests that could ultimately
              affect the Central U.S. corn belt. IRT technology will produce reliable
              estimates of the size and activity of the bat colonies, quantify aspects of
              insect life cycle and infestation, and ultimately link levels of bat activity
              and feeding with levels of insect infestation, crop damage, and the need for
              pesticides. Studies are proposed that will provide a better understanding of
              the behavior and ecological impact of a variety of animal species, provide new
              insight into the life processes of carnivorous plants, and validate
              larger-scale, space-based, remote sensing data and computer models for large
              land areas.

The broader scope of research with this instrumentation is to
              develop a clearer picture of
the complex processes within an ecosystem that
              regulate how water, energy, and carbon are exchanged between soil and
              vegetation. Research projects will also provide training
opportunities for
              undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral scientists. Projects will
              also use the visually striking images captured by the IRT system to communicate
              new discoveries to a broad public audience via articles in popular media,
              textbooks, TV, and on the world wide web.

