Title       : Development of a Cryogenic Spectroscopic Ellipsometer for Materials Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0216124

Award Number: 0216124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dmitri N. Basov dbasov@physics.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports instrument
              development of a spectroscopic ellipsometer capable of precision  measurements
              of the optical constants of complex materials in a broad range of frequencies
              (400-45,000 cm-1) both at cryogenic and elevated temperatures (5-700 K). New
              spectroscopic capabilities provided by the ellipsometer are essential to carry
              out difficult experiments pertinent to physics of strong electronic
              correlations in oxides, to ferromagnetism in semiconductors and many other
              problems. The principal advantage of ellipsometry is that this technique
              eliminates or minimizes experimental ambiguities connected with the
              determination of the optical constants using more conventional spectroscopic
              methods such as transmission or reflectance measurements. However, practical
              realization of theses advantages in the infrared IR part of the spectrum 
              requires development of an original set-up since instruments with the needed
              specifications are not commercially available. Broad spectral coverage of the
              proposed instrument will be achieved through a cost-efficient merger of an
              infrared home-build ellipsometer  based on a Fourier-Transform interferometer
              with a standard rotating analyzer apparatus for visible-near-UV operation. The
              project integrates research and education thus aiding towards preparation of
              highly skilled personnel with expertise that is in high demand both in academia
              and industry.

The systematic studies of the optical properties of new
              materials can provide unique insights into the electronic structure, both
              carrier and lattice dynamics  that is difficult or impossible to obtain through
              alternative experimental approaches. This award from the Major Research
              Instrumentation Program supports the development of a spectroscopic
              ellipsometer capable of precision  measurements of the optical constants of
              complex materials in a broad range of frequencies  both at cryogenic and
              elevated temperatures. Novel experimental capabilities provided by this
              instrument will facilitate resolution of some of the long-standing issues in
              contemporary condensed matter physics and materials science. The development
              program naturally integrates research and education thus aiding towards
              preparation of highly skilled personnel with expertise that is in high demand
              both in academia and industry. Research infrastructure developed in the course
              of this project will benefit a large group of investigators at several
              institutions.

