Title       : Development of Instrumentation for Teaching and Research on Thin Magnetic Film
               Microstructure Switching Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0216726

Award Number: 0216726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Erskine erskine@physics.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alex L. de Lozanne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project develops new tools and methodology to study properties of magnetic
              microstructures.  A broad range of technology-enabling magnetic phenomena is
              emerging from research on thin films and thin-film based structures.  The novel
              magnetic effects associated with engineered materials now provide the basis for
              a broad range of new magnetic devices including magnetic sensors that improve
              hard-disk performance in computers (giant-magnetoresistance read heads) and
              permit magnetic-materials-based random access memory (MRAM) to be developed. 
              In order to optimize the performance of the new magnetic materials and explore
              new device architecture that exploits the new magnetic phenomena, precise
              understanding and control of the magnetic effects are required.  The new
              instrumentation to be developed from this NSF award and the research to be
              carried out using it will advance our understanding of magnetic phenomena that
              enables new technological applications.  The research will study factors that
              govern critical magnetic properties such as magnetic switching thresholds, the
              speed at which information can be stored and retrieved, and factors that govern
              how magnetic materials growth and microstructure fabrication affect the
              properties.  The research is likely to result in discovery of new magnetic
              effects as well as deeper understanding of novel magnetic phenomena that have
              already been discovered.  The research will provide rigorous training for
              graduate students in the important fields of condensed matter physics and
              materials technology that is essential for the United States to maintain a
              leading position in science and technology.


This project develops new
              tools and methodology to study properties of magnetic microstructures.  A broad
              range of technology-enabling magnetic phenomena is emerging from research on
              thin films and thin-film based structures.  The novel magnetic effects
              associated with engineered materials now provide the basis for a broad range of
              new magnetic devices including magnetic sensors that improve hard-disk
              performance in computers (giant-magnetoresistance read heads) and permit
              magnetic-materials-based random access memory (MRAM) to be developed.  In order
              to optimize the performance of the new magnetic materials and explore new
              device architecture that exploits the new magnetic phenomena, precise
              understanding and control of the magnetic effects are required.  The new
              instrumentation to be developed from this NSF award and the research to be
              carried out using it will advance our understanding of magnetic phenomena that
              enables new technological applications.  The research will study factors that
              govern critical magnetic properties such as magnetic switching thresholds, the
              speed at which information can be stored and retrieved, and factors that govern
              how magnetic materials growth and microstructure fabrication affect the
              properties.  The research is likely to result in discovery of new magnetic
              effects as well as deeper understanding of novel magnetic phenomena that have
              already been discovered.  The research will provide rigorous training for
              graduate students in the important fields of condensed matter physics and
              materials technology that is essential for the United States to maintain a
              leading position in science and technology.


