Title       : Vision on the Run: Resolving Moving Natural Images with Arthropod Eyes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0216836

Award Number: 0216836
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cole Gilbert cg23@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1193,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This comparative project addresses how information from the natural world is
              encoded by an animal's visual system to enable it to respond appropriately to
              resources, such as prey or mates, or stress sources, such as predators.  The
              specific objective is to develop a rigorous quantitative understanding of the
              consequences of variation in photoreceptor performance in the eyes of two
              arthropods, a beetle and a crab, that live in relatively similar flat habitats,
              but which vary in their behavior, eye movements and types of objects to which
              they respond.  As these animals move about their environment, the visual image
              will be blurred because the photoreceptors are too slow or too coarsely spaced.
               However, the blur may not be uniform throughout the image - photoreceptors
              that view regions of the world into which the animal is traveling or which are
              more likely to contain objects of interest may have been selected to perform
              better, whereas more blur in other areas of the visual field may be tolerable. 
              We will combine anatomical and physiological data about photoreceptors over the
              eye with laboratory behavioral experiments and field recordings of natural
              scenes to learn how visual performance limits or enhances specific types of
              movement in the animal's natural world.  The proposed research is the most
              comprehensive attempt to date to explore the transfer of information from
              natural scenes through an animal's photoreceptors during its normal behavior
              and will provide training in physiology, behavior, and scene analysis for young
              scientists and several undergraduate students, including underrepresented
              minorities who have worked in the lab in the past.  The results will allow, for
              other species, important insight into the degree to which behavior-driven
              degradation of visual information may adversely affect adaptive behaviors.  In
              addition to their basic application for sensory ecology, the results of this
              project will have a strong bearing on machine vision and will be valuable to
              robotics engineers attempting to design visual sensors that allow optimal robot
              performance.  A postdoctoral scholar and undergraduate students will be
              involved in the research, and an interactive web site about the research will
              be created.


