Title       : MRI: Development of Integrated Tunable Picosecond Optical Microscopy System with
               Multichannel Heterodyning Detector Array
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0216155

Award Number: 0216155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Holger Schmidt hschmidt@soe.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ali Shakouri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0216155
Schmidt

Continuous progress in microscopy and ultrafast optics has
              allowed researchers to investigate
phenomena on ever smaller length and
              shorter time scales, leading to a multitude of novel applications.  Here, the
              PIs propose to build a measurement system that combines both ultrahigh spatial
              and temporal resolution. This system will enable access to a whole new class of
              experiments for which both characteristics are required and will significantly
              enhance the research facilities at UC Santa Cruz.  They propose to develop a
              system that integrates the temporal resolution of a tunable ultrafast
              Ti:Sapphire laser with the spatial resolution of an atomic force microscope
              with NSOM capabilities and a high-resolution photodetector array. The
              ultrashort optical pulses emanating from the Ti:Sapphire laser are fed into the
              fiber of the near-field microscope or focused directly on a sample using
              far-field optics. A subwavelength aperture at the output of the NSOM is used to
              emit or collect the light pulses, and creates a unique optical probe for
              investigating a wide variety of samples and substrates. The tunability of the
              Ti:Sapphire allows for a large accessible spectrum in the near-infrared while
              leaving options for future upgrades. The complete system will simultaneously
              have a time resolution of about 200fs and a spatial resolution of 100 nm.

If
              funded, research projects and student training in nanoscale electronics will be
              carried out: One example for the ensuing research activities is the study of
              the dynamics of magnetization switching in single-domain metallic nanomagnets
              for high-density magnetic storage. Only the combination of both high spatial
              and temporal resolution will allow studying the dynamics of individual magnets.
              Knowledge of the magnetization reversal time is critical for assessing the
              intrinsic limitations for write-operations using such nanomagnets.
              Magneto-optic Kerr spectroscopy is capable of capturing reversal dynamics, but
              so far not with the required capabilities for single-domain magnets. The second
              project is spatially resolved
picosecond ultrasonics. Here, the goal is to
              analyze interfaces below a metal-covered semiconductor surface, a situation
              typical for integrated circuits. By heating the metal with a short optical
              pulse, an acoustic wave is created that propagates inside the semiconductor and
              is partially reflected at interfaces.  The depth of the interface can be
              determined from the return time of the reflection signal. In combination with
              the high spatial resolution of a near-field scanning microscope and a unique
              multichannel heterodyning detection method using a photodetector array,
              non-destructive high-resolution imaging of the wafer can be obtained.

These
              examples clearly demonstrate the wide range of experiments that will become
              accessible. The main components (Ti-sapphire laser, AFM/NSOM) are each widely
              used state-of-the-art instruments and their combination which require
              significant development for pulse broadening compensation, polarization control
              and also multi-channel detector array will create unique capability for many
              more fields in nanotechnology, such as time-resolved spectroscopy of
              semiconductor quantum dots. Exciting collaborations across campus departments
              and with other universities are anticipated.  The system will have broad impact
              on research and education in nanoscience. It will provide excellent training
              for students in several key areas of current interest such as nanoscopy, laser
              optics, and time-resolved spectroscopy. In addition, it will be integrated in a
              laboratory experiment for a nano-optics class that the P.I. is developing at
              UCSC as part of an NSF CAREER program.

