Title       : Acquisition of a 750 MHz NMR Spectrometer/Cryoprobe System and High Field NMR
               Console/Probe Upgrades for Biomolecular NMR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0216077

Award Number: 0216077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1178025            (Estimated)
Investigator: James Stivers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Blake Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel Tolman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Shortle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert S. Mildvan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY

A grant has been awarded to Dr. James T. Stivers at Johns
              Hopkins University School of Medicine to purchase a Varian 750 MHz NMR
              spectrometer equipped with a triple resonance probe, to upgrade existing 500
              MHz and 600 MHz instruments with present generation consoles, and to purchase
              an additional high sensitivity triple resonance probe with a tunable X channel
              for the existing 500 MHz instrument.  .  These spectrometers will be located at
              the NMR facility, and will be used to significantly advance fundamental
              research into the structure, mechanism and dynamics of biological
              macromolecules using multi-dimensional heteronuclear NMR methods.  This
              acquisition will allow the research programs of six primary NMR investigators
              to take advantage of revolutionary magnet and probe technologies that are
              essential for studying large biological molecules under dilute conditions.  The
              750 MHz spectrometer with cryoprobe will provide a significant increase in
              chemical shift dispersion and sensitivity that is essential for studying
              denatured states of proteins, aliphatic proton regions of nucleic acids, and
              obtaining spectral resolution of native 20-40 kDa proteins and large protein
              and protein-DNA complexes that are now under study.  The 750 MHz
              spectrometer/cryoprobe system will allow NMR data to be acquired with
              sensitivity that is over 4-fold greater than the spectrometers currently being
              used, and will enhance the measurement of residual dipolar couplings in
              macromolecules.  This technology will also allow the study of biological
              molecules that are currently inaccessible due to inherent weakness of the NMR
              signals, low solubility, low sample availability, or short-lived stability. 
              

The types of NMR experiments that will be enhanced using the new NMR
              systems will include the complete array of double and triple resonance
              heteronuclear experiments using isotopically 13C, 15N and/or 2H labeled protein
              and nucleic acid samples.  In addition, the 750 MHz spectrometer will be used
              for homonuclear 1H experiments, such as DQF-COSY, TOCSY and NOESY on
              macromolecules that may be difficult to isotope label, or in situations where
              resolution is critical, such as the heavily overlapped sugar proton regions of
              nucleic acids, or the aromatic regions of proteins.  The NMR experiments will
              be used to obtain chemical shift assignments, measure structural restraints for
              macromolecular samples in the form of NOE derived distances, J-coupling derived
              dihedral angles, and using residual dipolar couplings derived atomic vectors
              and alignment tensors.  Additionally, heteronuclear NMR experiments will be
              used to study both fast (ps) and slower (ms to ms) dynamics in macromolecular
              systems.  

These instruments will be used to facilitate NMR studies on
              biological macromolecules and their complexes in efforts to probe the physical
              and chemical basis for protein and nucleic acid function.  We anticipate that
              these fundamental discoveries will impact protein engineering efforts, protein
              fold predictions, as well as our ability to target enzymes with small molecule
              inhibitors and activators.  The upgraded NMR facility will enhance student
              training by providing a user friendly instrument, and ample user time that is
              required for student researchers to become comfortable in the execution of
              modern NMR experiments.  The participating investigators will initiate a new
              course covering the basics of executing homonuclear and heteronuclear NMR
              experiments on these new instruments.  This course will augment the existing
              graduate curriculum, and will attract advanced undergraduate students from
              local universities, including minority serving inttitutuons. 

