Title       : RUI/MRI: Acquisition of Equipment to Support Research and Undergraduate Training
               in Aquatic Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0216204

Award Number: 0216204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jasmine Saros saros.jasm@uwlax.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger J. Haro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristofer Rolfhus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Sandheinrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin La Crosse
	      1725 State Street
	      La Crosse, WI  546013742    608/785-8000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to the River Studies Center (Center) at the University
              of Wisconsin-La Crosse for the acquisition of equipment to support research and
              undergraduate student training in aquatic science.  Drs. Saros, Haro, Rolfhus,
              and Sandheinrich will oversee the research. The Center was established in 1972
              to facilitate the University's scientific involvement with environmental and
              resource-management issues pertinent to the Upper Mississippi River. 
              Subsequently, it has expanded its research activities to other aquatic
              resources in Wisconsin, the Upper Midwest and the nation, providing research
              opportunities to nearly 100 graduate students and more than 250 undergraduates.
               The Center has become nationally recognized for its investigations of
              non-point source pollutants in rivers, streams, lakes, and wetlands.  Ongoing
              studies in the Center are focusing on two pollutants, nitrogen (as essential
              element) and mercury (a highly toxic metal), which have caused widespread
              degradation of aquatic resources.  Members of the Center are currently
              exploring the extent to which atmospheric N deposition may be altering alpine
              lake communities in the western U.S. and are investigating how
              groundwater/surface water interactions affect N dynamics and export in
              watersheds under multiple land management practices in the Upper Midwest.  The
              Center's mercury investigations are assessing landscape factors controlling
              methylmercury contamination in food webs of lakes of Voyageurs National Park,
              the production and accumulation of methylmercury in nearshore environments of
              southern Lake Superior, and the linkages between methylmercury exposure and
              endocrine disruptors in wild fish.  Collectively, the Center's investigations
              of non-point source pollutants provide a broad array of research opportunities
              for graduate and undergraduate students of aquatic science.  The grant will
              support the purchase of equipment to further enhance the Center's capabilities
              in investigations of non-point source pollution and education of students in
              aquatic sciences.

Analyses of water chemistry and aquatic food webs are
              critical to understanding the source and effects of non-point source pollution
              in lakes and streams.  Nitrogen enrichment can alter the composition and
              dynamics of food webs, whereas the exposure of humans and wildlife to
              methylmecury occurs via the aquatic food web.  The equipment purchased through
              this grant includes an elemental analyzer to measure ratios of various
              nutrients in aquatic organisms, and a total organic carbon analyzer to quantify
              dissolved organic carbon, an important factor influencing the transport and
              availability of inorganic mercury and methlmercury to aquatic organisms.  Two
              microscopes will enhance the Center's imaging capabilities An automated mercury
              analyzer and temperature-controlled bath will enhance the Center's ability to
              determine mercury in water, sediment, and aquatic organisms.  

The variety
              and extensive nature of theses activities will promote the understanding of
              several issues related to non-point source pollution by nitrogen and mercury. 
              Nitrogen enrichment and mercury contamination of aquatic ecosystems are
              problems of pressing regional and national concern, both from an ecological and
              human health perspective.  The acquisition of this equipment will foster the
              synthesis of results among aquatic ecosystems that span an array of ecological,
              geological, and chemical characteristics; this information will aid managers
              and scientists in making more informed decisions.  Moreover, the equipment will
              enhance the research of Center faculty, whose scientific credentials and
              motivation ensure competitiveness in obtaining financial support for research
              in aquatic science.  In addition, the equipment will further enhance the
              training and research of the many undergraduate and graduate (M.S.) students
              who will benefit from ready access to well-equipped, scientific facilities.

