Title       : Visual computation of surfaces under partial occlusion and transparency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0216944

Award Number: 0216944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179845             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manish Singh manish@ruccs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Manish Singh will conduct two
              years of research on visual perception-how we see a complex, changing world of
              overlapping objects.  The perceived world includes three dimensional objects
              and surfaces. The inputs to our eyes, however, are not "objects" or "surfaces,"
              but fluctuations in the two-dimensional arrays of light projected onto each
              retina.  These retinal arrays change a great deal as we move in the world-as a
              couch gets partly hidden behind a coffee table when walking across a room, or a
              dog is partly seen behind thick foliage.  A fundamental and unsolved problem of
              vision is to understand how our brain can sort out such complex changing light
              arrays into perceived surfaces and objects.

The funded research uses
              computer-generated stereoscopic displays in which some objects are partly
              occluded by other objects, and thus present only disjoined portions of their
              boundaries to the eyes. Despite this, observers perceive complete, unitary,
              objects-not disparate fragments. One aspect of the research program examines
              constraints involving both surface shape and contour geometry that may
              determine the continuity and shape of partly occluded objects. A second aspect
              of this research concerns when an occluding object is partially transparent. In
              this case, light reflected from two different surfaces (the transparent, and
              the underlying opaque surface) is merged at the retinas, but we see two
              separate surfaces placed at different depths along the same line of sight. 
              This component of the research investigates the geometric (figural) and
              photometric (light intensity) constraints that the brain uses to split image
              luminance into two distinct surfaces placed at different depths.

This
              research will enhance understanding of a central aspect of human vision.
              Additionally, it will contribute valuable knowledge that can be used to
              construct artificial vision systems for recovery of surface layouts from camera
              images. 

