Title       : Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope at Yale Geology and Geophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0216784

Award Number: 0216784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344338             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shun-ichiro Karato shun-ichiro.karato@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay J. Ague  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wei Tong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth E. Blake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark T. Brandon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0216784
Karato

This award will permit the purchase of a scanning electron
              microscope (SEM) with a range of capabilities for high-resolution analyses of
              structures and compositions of Earth materials, including biological samples. 
              The SEM we will purchase is a Philips XL30 ESEM-FEG, which operates with both
              low- and high-vacuum modes with a field emission gun (FEG) and a
              software/hardware package for an electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD)
              pattern analysis. This new facility is critical to the diverse research
              activities at Yale Geology and Geophysics including studies of:  (1)
              deformation microstructures of experimentally and naturally deformed samples
              (Karato, Brandon), (2) fluid-rock interaction (Ague, Rye), (3) microbial
              geochemistry and geomicrobiology (Blake).  Complete orientation measurements
              with high-spatial resolution, as provided by the EBSD package attached to this
              type of state-of-the-art SEM, are critical to microstructural studies on
              deformed rocks by Karato and Brandon.  Geologic application of this technique
              is widespread in Europe, but has been limited to only a handful of labs in the
              United States.  The spatial resolution of orientation measurements is close to
              0.25 mm when the FEG electron source is used with an EBSD package. Such a high
              spatial resolution is critical, particularly for the experimental studies in
              Karato's group where microstructural developments under high-pressure
              conditions are studied using specimens with very fine grain size. Similarly,
              the ESEM mode of operation of this SEM has major advantages in several research
              areas at Yale Geology and Geophysics.  This includes the study of fluid-rock
              interaction through the charge-contrast imaging technique (which works
              selectively at ESEM mode), and the study of microbial geochemistry and
              geomicrobiology, which requires high-resolution images of the morphology of
              mineral surfaces and associated microorganisms.  Addition of this facility to
              the existing analytical and other experimental facilities will significantly
              enhance the research programs of experimental Earth science at the department
              of Geology and Geophysics at Yale University.
***

