Title       : Functional Proteomics - Acquisition of a Biacore 3000 System for Surface Plasmon
               Resonance Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0216251

Award Number: 0216251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Kent skent@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas K. Bishop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to the University of Chicago to acquire a Surfac
              Plasmon resonance (SPR) analyzer. Underlying all biological processes are
              highly specific interactions between large molecules such as proteins, DNA and
              RNA.  In order to determine the mechanisms that promote life it is important
              not only to detect interactions between macromolecules, but to measure their
              strength using quantitative methods.  The members of our group of research
              laboratories share an interest in understanding how molecules recognize their
              specific partners among the huge number of macromolecules in and on
              cells.

The instrument measures the change in light refraction near a surface
              that occurs when macromolecules interact on that surface. This phenomenon is
              called surface plasmon resonance (SPR).  SPR allows very rapid and quantitative
              measurements of interactions between macromolecules.  The instrument has
              robotic functions that allow automatic processing of many different samples
              making it possible to test many different interactions under a wide range of
              conditions with relative ease. 

The proposed funding would contribute
              significantly to the ability of investigators at the University of Chicago to
              contribute to the understanding of a number of biological processes.  These
              processes include how pollen recognizes plants of its own species, how hormones
              recognize specific target cells, how viruses convert inactive virus precursor
              proteins into active ones, how cells repair their DNA, how cells turn on
              specific genes so that they are expressed as RNA, and how RNA is modified by
              large protein-RNA machines.  In addition to advancing our knowledge of the
              living world, the proposed work will eventually lead to improvements in
              medicine, agriculture, and industrial manufacturing.  Moreover, the
              availability of an SPR system will enhance the education of undergraduate and
              graduate students at the University of Chicago by providing them the
              opportunity to gain hands on experience with a state-of-the-art method for
              characterizing the interactions of biomolecules.   The SPR instrument will be
              part of a series of instruments housed in the Biophysics Core facility. This
              facility contains several high-end instruments which contribute valuable
              learning tools for biology students.  The Biophysics facility is one of a
              number of facilities at the University of Chicago that make the University
              attractive to a wide variety of students including women and people from
              underrepresented groups. The University engages in a range of programs designed
              to specifically attract and retain students from underrepresented groups.

