Title       : Acquisition of a High Field Solid State NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0216201

Award Number: 0216201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $770000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gina L. Hoatson gina@physics.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Vold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,9184,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program at NSF, and
              the Department of Defense, Profs. Gina Hoatson and Robert Vold at the College
              of William and Mary will acquire a high field (18 tesla), multinuclear  solid
              state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) Spectrometer. This equipment will enable
              researchers to carry out studies on a) ferroelectric and piezoelectric
              materials; b) high performance carbon nitride films; c) technologically
              important conducting polymers; and d) biologically important amino acids and
              cyclic dipeptides.   

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is the
              most powerful tool available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure
              of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize
              specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
              interactions between molecules in solution.  Access to state-of-the-art NMR
              spectrometers is essential for carrying out frontier research. The results from
              these NMR studies will have an impact in a number of areas including 
              development of wear-related coatings, ultrasonic transducers and electronic
              actuators, and electrochromic devices.  In addition, amino acids and cyclic
              dipeptides are important to study because these model systems yield insight
              into problems of protein folding, molecular recognition and enzyme activity.  
