Title       : Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Etching System for Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0216892

Award Number: 0216892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wu Lu lu@ee.eng.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Berger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Ringel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the
              acquisition of an inductively coupled reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE) system at
              The Ohio State University.  This facility will immediately generate new
              materials and materials-allied research programs at Ohio State with substantial
              teaming amongst interdisciplinary partners. It will have enormous impact on a
              very wide range of existing electronic materials - based research programs in
              several academic departments, many of which are currently supported by NSF. 
              The equipment is engineered for research level and pilot line plasma processing
              using corrosive processing gases such as Cl2, BCl3 or SiCl4. It has an
              automatic switch dual power range RF generator, which makes etching possible
              under very low ion energies. The formation of this facility will allow the
              coalescence of inter-university research programs across the state, that span
              fundamental studies on the effects of ICP-RIE processing on the properties of
              semiconductors to the development of novel device structures, heterostructures
              and nanostructures. The equipment chosen for this purpose is explicitly
              designed for such flexible utilization, so that the breadth of activities and
              wide ranging impact expected will be achieved.  
%%%
With this award from the
              Instrumentation for Materials Research program The Ohio State University will
              establish a state-of-the-art facility for the plasma processing of a wide range
              of electronic and photonics materials, with the acquisition of an inductively
              coupled reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE) system. This facility will immediately
              generate new materials and materials-allied research programs at Ohio State
              with substantial teaming amongst interdisciplinary partners. Once in place, the
              ICP-RIE will rapidly attract local and statewide industrial joint projects
              ranging from sensor technologies to photonics and energy conversion
              technologies. To ensure open access to multiple users, the ICP-RIE system will
              be placed into our well-established Semiconductor Processing Clean room
              structure to be employed in the research and education of dozens of
              undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral associates from both
              inside and outside Ohio State.  Finally, the ICP-RIE system will allow us the
              ability to process a wide range of materials, a core capability that we are
              currently lacking.   This system will complement existing facilities in the
              clean room, and thus its impact will be greatly enhanced by the leveraging
              obtained via almost all projects using the clean room facilities.

