Title       : MRI/RUI: High Sensitivity Profiling of Hydrogen and Nitrogen Using Nuclear
               Reaction Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0216571

Award Number: 0216571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131279             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Marble marble@tarleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tarleton State Univ
	      PO Box T-1179
	      Stephenville, TX  764011179    817/968-9000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation RUI award is for the development and
              construction of an improved Nuclear Reaction Analysis (NRA) detection system
              based upon the Alabama A&M coincidence scheme, but with one to two orders of
              magnitude improvement in the signal-to-noise ratio. Previous results indicate
              that by modifying the detector geometry and materials, a larger, more efficient
              detector is possible without increasing the background signal. By using sample
              cooling and beam rastering, this larger detector will be able to routinely
              profile hydrogen in semiconductors with a sensitivity of one part-per-million
              and a surface depth resolution of five nanometers while remaining compatible
              with existing IBA facility requirements. The development of this detector would
              likely increase the use of NRA in the materials characterization community
              since it could be easily added to any existing IBA facility with minimal cost.
              This would allow companies and universities to perform hydrogen profiling by
              NRA and to use NRA for calibrating other IBA techniques including SIMS.
              Finally, the detector's ability to dramatically reduce all background sources
              including competing nuclear reactions without the reduction in efficiency of a
              germanium detector should open up new opportunities for profiling other light
              elements including nitrogen, boron, and carbon with greatly improved
              sensitivities.

Light trace elements are known to have dramatic effects on
              the electrical, chemical and mechanical properties of many types of materials
              in even minute quantities. NRA is a powerful ion beam technique for
              quantitatively profiling light impurities in materials with excellent depth
              resolution. NRA has previously been used to profile a wide range of trace
              elements including H, B, C, N, and F in problems ranging from hydrogen
              embrittlement of metals to the dating of arrowheads. Potentially important
              applications of NRA include passivation studies of SiO2/SiC and SiO2/Si
              interfaces using hydrogen or nitrogen and the profiling of carbon and boron in
              metals to test predictions of computer simulations. Presently, few electronic
              companies or universities have NRA capability due to the technical difficulties
              inherent in obtaining high sensitivity. 


