Title       : Acquisition of a stable isotope mass spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0216030

Award Number: 0216030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew R. Campbell campbell@mailhost.nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric E. Small  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip R. Kyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David I. Norman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fred M. Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0216030
Campbell

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports
              the acquisition of a state-of-the-art stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer
              (SIRMS) with on-line sample preparation systems for continuous flow analysis of
              stable isotopes of Carbon, Oxygen and Hydrogen in natural waters and carbonates
              at the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology. A new Finnigan Delta Plus
              SIRMS will replace a 14 years old machine (a Finnigan Delta E) that is no
              longer supported by the manufacturer and is having increasing periods of down
              time due to electronics and vacuum system failures.  The enhanced capabilities
              of a new SIRMS with on-line sample preparation systems for continuous flow (CF)
              analysis will allow for the analysis of very small samples with high
              throughput.  Indeed, the newer generation of CF-SIRMS systems allow for orders
              of magnitude smaller samples to be analyzed with improved precision.  This
              capability is important for study of micro-spatial isotopic variability in
              authigenic carbonates, sedimentary cements and pegmatite minerals, as a result
              of which we are now learning of the great degree of heterogeneity and potential
              historic information recorded at this scale which was previously homogenized
              and analyzed in bulk to interpret geologic history.  
The new SIRMS will
              support research ranging from studies of the sources of volatiles in volcanic
              emissions to hydrological and ecological studies of the pathways groundwater
              transport and processes of evaporation and transpiration in the semi-arid to
              arid Southwestern U.S. to studies of the genesis of hydrothermal ore deposits. 
              Further, this facility will be an attractive addition to New Mexico Tech's
              analytical arsenal in facilitating the recruitment of minority students to the
              geosciences through its relationship with a local Native American College (Dine
              College) and through its association with the NSF-supported New Mexico Alliance
              for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (NM-AGEP), which seeks to assist
              underrepresented groups in preparation for careers in science academia. 
              
***


