Title       : Acquisition of a Scanned-Probe Microscope System for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0216772

Award Number: 0216772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142310             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Ralph ralph@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul L. McEuen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynden A. Archer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melissa A. Hines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Thorne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the
              acquisition of a Digital Instruments Dimension 3100 Scanned Probe Microscope
              (SPM) System with a NanoScope IV Controller. This instrument will be placed in
              a central facility to be employed in the research of dozens of undergraduate
              and graduate students from many departments at Cornell. It will also be used by
              Cornell nanotechnology classes, K-12 tours, and outside users. The microscope
              will enable new research directions dealing with nanoscale electrical devices,
              nanoscale chemical modification, polymer dynamics near surfaces, the
              development of new types of scanning microscopy, and biomaterials
              characterization. It will take the place of an older SPM that will be relocated
              to Simmons College, a women's college in Boston, to be used in undergraduate
              research aimed at developing polymer materials for organic light-emitting
              diodes. 
%%%
This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
              program supports the acquisition of a Digital Instruments Dimension 3100
              Scanned Probe Microscope (SPM) System, which will be placed in a central
              facility for use by dozens of undergraduate and graduate students in projects
              that require imaging samples with nanometer-scale resolution. For example, it
              will be used to examine molecular-scale electronic devices while they are in
              operation, the atom-by-atom processes by which chemicals can sculpt surfaces,
              and the self-assembly of biological materials. The microscope will also be
              employed by Cornell nanotechnology classes, visiting high-school teachers and
              students, and outside users. It will take the place of an older scanned-probe
              microscope that will be relocated to Simmons College, a women's college in
              Boston, Massachusetts. This will provide students at Simmons and nearby
              colleges the opportunity to work with a research-quality instrument as they are
              encouraged to consider technical careers.

