Title       : MRI: A Focused Ion Beam System for Nanoscale Science and Engineering Research
               and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0216464

Award Number: 0216464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $622000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Klein klein@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Luzzi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation program, the University of
              Pennsylvania (Laboratory for Research on the Structure of Matter), the
              Nanotechnology Institute and the Rohm and Haas Corporation, a FEI Strata DB235
              Focused Ion Beam will be installed within the Penn Regional Materials
              Characterization Facility at the Penn MRSEC. This multi-functional instrument
              will enable research in nanoscale structure-property relationships via in-situ
              experiments on individual molecules and molecular assemblies, as well as carbon
              nanotubes. Using enhanced etching modules, the DB235 provides key capability
              for the production of minute specimens for the study of mechanical properties
              at the nanoscale in polymer and intermetallic materials. Research groups will
              also use the instrument to conduct device-editing operations to efficiently
              explore new circuit designs for particle detectors and detector arrays that
              mimic human function. The flexibility and automated operation of the DB235
              allows integration into educational programs, where it will contribute to NSF
              education programs for undergraduates and high school teachers, and to the
              Penn-Drexel-Community College NSF Partnership for Innovation for
              nano-biotechnology education.

With support from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program, the University of Pennsylvania (Laboratory for
              Research on the Structure of Matter), the Nanotechnology Institute (NTI) and
              the Rohm and Haas Corporation, a FEI Strata DB235 Focused Ion Beam will be
              installed at the Penn MRSEC. With capabilities for sectioning and etching
              materials at the nanoscale, and for the deposition of nanometer-scale
              conducting features, the DB235 will have a broad impact on nanoscience and
              nanotechnology research. The flexibility and automated operation of the DB235
              will be used in NSF-funded education programs for undergraduates and high
              school teachers, and in the Penn-Drexel NSF Partnership for Innovation for
              nano-biotechnology education. Housed in the Penn Regional Materials
              Characterization Facility, the instrument will be available to a large regional
              community of users, including corporations and academic institutions. Through
              the NTI, the DB235 will be used by research teams comprised of researchers from
              Penn, Drexel, Penn State, Temple, Widener and Villanova Universities, Thomas
              Jefferson, Penn and Windber Medical Schools/Institutes, Children's Hospital and
              Haverford College.

