Title       : Collaborative Research: QTL Analysis of a Cave Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0216103

Award Number: 0216103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $479999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Borowsky rb4@scires.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1080,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0216103/0217178
Browsky 
Tabin		

The long term goal of this research is to
              understand the nature of the developmental genetic differences that make all
              individuals of a species unique, and distinguish the various species from one
              another.  Towards this end, differences between two types of fishes that are
              closely related, but genetically distinct, will be studied.  The Mexican tetra,
              Astyanax mexicanus, has some populations that live in rivers and others that
              live in caves.  Cave forms differ from their surface relatives by having
              greatly reduced eyes and pigmentation.  The caves in which they live provide
              little food and they have adapted to this by developing a slower metabolism. 
              Other senses are overdeveloped to compensate for the lack of vision: e.g.,
              smell, taste and the ability to detect vibration and current.  Not only can
              they survive eternal darkness, they thrive in caves.

The genome of this
              species will be mapped at a fine scale using microsatellite DNA markers, in
              hybrids between the cave and surface forms.  The map and further analysis of
              the hybrids will permit the detection and characterization of genes (QTL) that
              are responsible for the differences between cave and surface forms.  The
              results will give estimates of the "genetic architecture" of trait differences:
              the number of genes involved and magnitudes of their individual effects, and
              their positions in the genome relative to one another.  Positional information
              of some of the major effect QTL will be used to identify and clone the genes;
              this will facilitate their functional analysis.  The results will shed light on
              the genetic pathways involved in development and maintenance of complex traits,
              like the vertebrate eye and other aspects of the sensory system, control of
              pigmentation, behavior and metabolism.  The results will also inform on the
              nature of genetic differences distinguishing populations and species, and on
              the constraints on evolutionary change resulting from trait correlations.


