Title       : BE/IDEA: Development of a Instrument for in situ Measurement of Microbial Enzyme
               Activities in Aquatic Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0216154

Award Number: 0216154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1311855            (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Ammerman ammerman@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Chant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Klinkhammer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1694      BE: INSTRUM DEVELOP FOR ENV AC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Microbial cell-surface enzymes (ectoenzymes) are important agents of polymer
              hydrolysis in aquatic environments and indicators of the state of microbial
              carbon, nitrogen, or phosphorus nutrition. However, like most other microbial
              metabolic rate measurements in aquatic environments, ectoenzyme activity
              measurements have usually been limited to manual assays with discrete water
              samples. An instrument for continuous underway measurements of microbial enzyme
              activities using high-sensitivity fluorescent substrates has recently been
              developed. This instrument has been used aboard ship to map the ectoenzyme
              activities alkaline phosphatase and leucine aminopeptidase in the surface
              waters of the Mississippi River plume. With this instrument these enzyme
              activities can be mapped in much the same way that temperature, salinity,
              phytoplankton fluorescence, and other parameters are mapped from a research
              ship while underway. However, this system is limited to horizontal mapping of
              water samples continuously pumped from the surface and requires frequent
              operator intervention.  This Biocomplexity Instrumentation Development for
              Environmental Activities (IDEA) project will take the next much larger step.
              The research and education team includes a microbial ecologist (Dr. J.
              Ammerman) and a geochemist (Dr. G. Klinkhammer), both of whom have interests
              and expertise in sensor development, a coastal physical oceanographer and
              modeler (Dr. R. Chant), and a non-faculty education specialist (Mr. E. Simms). 
              The goal of this project is to develop a remotely operated instrument for
              measurement of microbial enzyme activities and to deploy it at the Rutgers
              University Long-term Ecosystem Observatory at 15 meters depth, called LEO-15,
              for periods of weeks to months. This instrument is called the Multiple Enzyme
              Analyzer (MEA), and should be capable of the simultaneous measurement of up to
              four different enzyme activities. A simple mooring with biological, chemical,
              and physical sensors will be deployed near the enzyme analyzer to help provide
              a context for the microbial rate measurements (along with additional data from
              LEO-15).  The enzyme and related data will be analyzed with time-series
              methods, spectral analysis techniques, statistical modeling, and other
              techniques to gain insight into microbial processes in the coastal zone. A
              second deployment of the MEA will take place at the new Martha's Vineyard
              Coastal Observatory (Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution), along with an
              automated flow cytometer and image analyzer used for plankton cell counting and
              sorting.  This instrument is under development by Dr. R. Olson and colleagues
              with Biocomplexity IDEA support. This enzyme analyzer will provide continuous
              real time microbial metabolic rate measurements on time scales that are
              currently unavailable. Such measurements will add an important biological
              component to the extensive chemical and physical measurements that can be made
              at ocean observatories. In addition, education efforts in aquatic microbiology
              will include training workshops for primary and secondary school teachers
              followed by lesson development and implementation, as well as university
              undergraduate and graduate student research and education
