Title       : Development of Optical Excitation Scanning Probe Microscopes With Atomic
               Resolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0216083

Award Number: 0216083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Weiss stm@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports scientists
              at Penn State University to develop new atomic resolution scanning probe
              optical spectroscopies by combining the spatial resolution of the scanning
              tunneling microscope (STM) with well-established, readily interpreted near
              ultraviolet, visible and infrared spectroscopies.  A vital missing piece in the
              vast majority of scanning probe measurements is the ability to make unambiguous
              interpretations of images and chemical assignments of adsorbates. The
              researchers focus on adding spectroscopies that are already well established
              for ensemble-averaged measurements that can accomplish these assignments,
              specifically ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) and infrared (IR) spectroscopies. By
              coupling IR and optical spectroscopies with a local probe, the researchers will
              gain the ability to characterize and to identify individual nanostructures and
              even individual molecules and atoms based on their optical and electronic
              properties. This work will advance the state of the art in nanometer-scale
              science, measurement, and analysis. Optical spectroscopies provide
              well-understood methods to determine chemical identity and bonding changes and
              to determine electronic structure using IR and UV-Vis excitation, respectively.
              These capabilities will be combined to create a local optical spectrometer in
              the near UV, visible and IR, with wide applications in surface and interface
              science. Evanescent coupling will be utilized to deliver photons to the
              tunneling junction, using the STM tip as a detector. The surfaces studied will
              be well characterized, as they will be grown epitaxially on a variety of
              prisms. These experiments will complement the recently built dispersed photon
              emission STM built under the auspices of an instrument development grant from
              the NSF Divisions of Materials Research and Chemistry. These instruments will
              then be transitioned to the broader scientific community after development and
              optimization. Two talented graduate students and an undergraduate will
              participate in the fabrication of the new instruments.


This award from the
              Major Research Instrumentation program supports scientists at Penn State
              University to develop new atomic resolution scanning probe optical
              spectroscopies by combining the spatial resolution of the scanning tunneling
              microscope (STM) with well-established, readily interpreted near ultraviolet,
              visible and infrared spectroscopies.  A vital missing piece in the vast
              majority of scanning probe measurements is the ability to make unambiguous
              interpretations of images and chemical assignments of adsorbates. The
              researchers focus on adding spectroscopies that are already well established
              for ensemble-averaged measurements that can accomplish these assignments,
              specifically ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) and infrared (IR) spectroscopies. By
              coupling IR and optical spectroscopies with a local probe, the researchers will
              gain the ability to characterize and to identify individual nanostructures and
              even individual molecules and atoms based on their optical and electronic
              properties. This work will advance the state of the art in nanometer-scale
              science, measurement, and analysis. These instruments will then be transitioned
              to the broader scientific community after development and optimization. Two
              talented graduate students and an undergraduate will participate in the
              fabrication of the new instruments.

