Title       : Collaborative Research: Development and Identity of Sexually Dimorphic
               Reproductive Signals and Responses by African Elephants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0216862

Award Number: 0216862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96056              (Estimated)
Investigator: L.E.L. Rasmussen betsr@bmb.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1091      COLLAB RSCH AT UNDERGRAD INSTI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1091,1160,1185,9178,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative Research: RUI - Development and Identity of Sexually
              Dimorphic
Reproductive Signals and Responses by African Elephants

In the
              spirit of the BIO C-RUI program, this proposal crosses disciplinary,
              departmental, and institutional boundaries. The project will answer five
              questions regarding the proximate mechanisms of reproductive communication
              using innovative techniques at the interface of biology and chemistry.  African
              elephants will be used to test hypotheses on developmental patterns of sexually
              dimorphic reproductive signals and responses. This is not only for the distinct
              advantages elephants offer as a research model, but also because basic
              scientific research can provide knowledge about these ecologically important,
              endangered animals that may aid in their long-term survival. This research team
              includes an animal behaviorist (Dr. Schulte) and an organic chemist (Dr.
              Goodwin), each with a track record of successful elephant-related research at
              predominantly undergraduate institutions.  Dr. Rasmussen, who characterized the
              pre-ovulatory pheromone in Asian elephants and has made substantial
              contributions to the understanding of elephant biochemistry, behavior and
              olfaction, joins the team. These scientific collaborators are educators who
              believe that undergraduates learn science best by doing science, i.e. by
              research participation with scientists, presentation of results at scientific
              meetings, and co-authoring manuscripts. Undergraduate collaborators will
              actively participate in this research on sexually dimorphic reproductive
              signals and responses.
Polygamous animals often display extreme sexual
              dimorphism, where males and females may live in very different social
              structures. In mammals, females typically raise the offspring often with little
              or no male assistance. African elephants (Loxodonta africana) illustrate this
              pattern very well.  Intersexual interaction is especially prevalent during the
              breeding season when individuals use a variety of communicative behaviors to
              compete for and select mates as well as maintain social bonds. Chemical signals
              and related tactile behaviors are primary means of evaluating reproductive
              condition and attracting mates. The development of chemical signal production
              and sex-specific responses has received little attention. In fact, sexually
              dimorphic communication patterns related to reproduction have rarely been
              compared within the same species simultaneously in a single study.  Focal
              questions in these arenas are posed in three sets:
SET I: What are the
              specific chemical signals in pre-ovulatory urine that:  A. Elicit male
              reproductive behavior?    B. Elicit heightened female social
              responsiveness?
SET II: During the differential development of males and
              females are there recognizable stages of:  A. Male responses toward
              pre-ovulatory urine and its specific chemical signal(s)?  B. Female responses
              toward pre-ovulatory urine and its specific chemical signal(s)?
SET III: Based
              on the results in the first two sets, what are the comparative ontogenetic
              patterns of male and female responses toward known chemical signal sources and
              to specific signal compounds and more generally in the display of
              reproductively related behaviors? 
These questions are investigated first by a
              study of female-to-male signals (IA and IIA), then female-to-female signals (IB
              and IIB) and finally by comparing the two developmental pathways (III).
              Specifically, answers are sought by: (i) Collecting urine from captive and wild
              female African elephants; (ii) Performing behavioral bioassays of urine samples
              for the responses of both male and female conspecifics; (iii) Chemically
              analyzing bioactive urine fractions to identify organic compounds; (iv)
              Bioassaying selected urinary components with captive and then wild African
              elephants; (vi) Observing wild African elephants for reproductive chemotactile
              communication.
The proposed research will identify proximate chemical causes
              of reproductive behavior and elucidate sexually dimorphic developmental
              patterns of communication. This study will lay the groundwork for future
              investigation on male based signals and of ultimate questions on this topic.
              The findings may assist in the conservation of endangered elephants in practice
              and other species.

