Title       : IMR: Acquisition of Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Organic
               Magnetic Materials Research and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0216788

Award Number: 0216788
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152390             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrzej Rajca arajca1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the purchase of a continuous wave electron paramagnetic
              resonance (EPR) spectrometer, which is essential in the synthesis of novel
              organic magnetic materials and is valuable in the characterization of other
              magnetic materials. The EPR spectrometer system will replace the current 20+
              year-old X-band EPR instrument that is no longer functional. The superior
              capabilities of this new EPR spectrometer will be tailored to materials
              research in magnetism, which will complement existing bulk magnetic measurement
              capabilities based upon superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID)
              magnetometry/susceptometry. This new spectrometer will have a significant
              impact on the following projects: (1) synthesis of organic polymer magnets with
              stability at ambient conditions; (2) coordinating organic ligands with a few
              unpaired electrons (high-spin organic molecules) for new organometallic magnets
              with improved ordering temperatures; (3) organic molecules for potential
              magnetic resonance imaging contrast agents and radical ions of molecules and
              polymers with chiral p -conjugated systems; and (4) inorganic metal-based
              magnets, transition metal complexes, magnetic nanostructures and films. 
The
              results of the indicated projects will be disseminated in the peer review
              journals, conference presentations, and web-based publications. In particular,
              the significant progress toward practical organic polymer magnet is expected to
              attract wide attention, promoting better understanding of basic research in
              materials. 

These research activities will advance fundamental understanding
              of magnetic materials and may have a significant impact on the future
              electronic technology through the development of soft magnets based upon
              conjugated organic polymers. The EPR spectrometer is indispensable in the
              training and education of students and postdoctoral associates in the
              interdisciplinary area of organic magnetism. The spectrometer will make
              possible a more advanced computer-controlled operation that will facilitate the
              training of undergraduate and graduate students. The overall infrastructure for
              materials research at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln will be enhanced,
              which will benefit other researchers studying magnetic films, nanostructures,
              and metal-based inorganic magnets and complexes. 



