Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Thermal Analysis System for Multidisciplinary Research and
               Educational Projects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0216000

Award Number: 0216000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85975              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Cocke cockedl@hal.lamar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ku-Yen Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Ho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel H. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Fearnley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lamar University Beaumont
	      4400 Port Arthur Road
	      Beaumont, TX  777055748    713/838-7011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1415,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant will fund a multifunctional thermal analysis (TA) system that can
              support the interdisciplinary engineering, materials research and educational
              activities at Lamar University and its collaborative outreach program to
              industry and other universities in the region. The system is designed to
              provide the following capabilities: differential scanning caloremetry, DSC,
              thermal gravimetric analysis, TGA over a temperature range from 120 to 1600C
              and connectivity to FTIR and MS gas analysis systems. It will allow the
              determination of specific heats, melting temperatures, transition enthalpies,
              phase transformations, phase diagrams, crystallization temperatures, degrees of
              crystallinity, glass transition temperatures, decomposition effects, reaction
              kinetics, purity determinations, mass changes, dehydroxylation,
              corrosion/oxidation, thermal stability, reduction/oxidation studies, and
              composition changes. Lamar University is establishing a central engineering
              materials research facility for the University to be located in the College of
              Engineering with active participation of the departments of civil, chemical,
              mechanical, industrial, and electrical engineering. 

The major objectives of
              the Materials Science and Engineering Laboratory is to provide a productive
              environment for interdisciplinary engineering and materials research and an
              interactive learning experience for undergraduate and graduate students at
              Lamar and to encourage collaboration with off-campus engineering and materials
              research centers and individuals. In addition, the Departments of Chemistry,
              Physics and Geology will participate in the laboratory and have extensive use
              for the thermal analysis system in both teaching and research.

The research
              and education projects will be in the following areas: environmental science
              and engineering, polymers, nano-structured materials, structured thin films,
              high technology alloys, super conducting and magnetic materials, and geological
              and paleontological materials. The instrument will support the work of 20
              senior personnel, 70 graduate students and over 220 undergraduates and will
              initially have five industrial research collaborators. It will be used in
              graduate research education, undergraduate research education and in general
              thermodynamic and materials education in engineering, chemistry, geology and
              materials science. The senior personnel come from Lamar University, Prairie
              View A&M (a traditionally African-American university), Texas A&M University
              and the Technological Institute of Saltillo, Mexico, as well as catalyst,
              petroleum, steel and mining industries. The acquisition of the versatile
              thermal analysis system is justified by the difficulty numerous research and
              educational projects have in accessing a high quality broad temperature range
              thermal analysis system.

