Title       : Development of High Temperature Physical Property Measurement System for Probing
               Spin and Charge-Functionalized Thin-Film Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0216267

Award Number: 0216267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161463             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Norton dnort@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fan Ren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur F. Hebard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cammy R. Abernathy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Pearton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A physical properties measurement system for characterizing transport and
              complex impedance properties at elevated temperatures will be developed.  The
              primary function of this instrumentation is to elucidate the magnetic,
              electronic, and thermal properties of novel spin- and charge-functional
              materials through temperature and magnetic field-dependent measurements of
              transport and electromagnetic response. The proposed system will include a
              "micro-heater platen" technology to provide for the extended temperature range.
               Capabilities of the instrumentation will include AC susceptibility, dc
              magnetization, I-V, Hall measurements, thermal conductivity,  and complex
              impedance in magnetic fields up to 7 Tesla over a temperature range of 4 to 700
              K.  Together with parallel efforts in materials and devices, this
              instrumentation will serve as a vehicle to educate students and post-graduates
              regarding transport and electromagnetic response in these materials

In
              recent years, there has emerged a significant interest in the understanding and
              manipulation of charge and spin in a variety of electronic materials. In many
              cases, the spin/charge functionality extends well above room temperature. The
              instrumentation developed under this proposal will enable the magnetic,
              electronic, and thermal properties of novel spin- and charge-functional
              materials to be probed through an extensive temperature range. Together with
              parallel efforts in materials and devices, it will serve as a vehicle to
              educate students and post-graduates regarding transport and electromagnetic
              response in these materials.  


