Title       : SBIR Phase II: Mechanism of the Layer Transfer Process for Silicon-on-Insulator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0216676

Award Number: 0216676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex Usenko usenko@si-sandwich.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Silicon Water Tech., Inc.
	      240 King Blvd
	      Newark, NJ  071022100    973/297-1410

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovations Research (SBIR) Phase II project builds on
              demonstrated and patented new hydrogenation-based processes for producing
              silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafers for the semiconductor manufacturing industry.
              It has been demonstrated that this new techniques can be bonded for improved
              activation of the surfaces of silicon wafers. The innovation also serves to
              suppress layer transfer faults. The improvement in yield and the reduction in
              cost in the SOI production process have also been achieved. The process is
              expected to scale down to the formation of SOI surface films of thickness well
              below 0.1 micron. During Phase I, an RF plasma treatment was developed which
              optimizes the amount of adsorbed activating species on surfaces resulting in an
              improved layer transfer yield over previous wet chemical activation techniques.
              The process optimization was based on molecular dynamics simulation of the
              sub-monolayer hydroxylized surface. In Phase II the simulation-based process
              design continues with experimental characterization of the resulting
              probability of the layer transfer faults. The Phase II work plan includes more
              detailed process design and optimization leading to a characterization of best
              effort SOI wafers by the venture partners. 

The impact of the proposed
              commercialization activity on the existing $10B worldwide silicon
              starting-wafer industry is potentially huge. The increasing usage of SOI by the
              leading semiconductor manufacturers is optimistically projected to grow from 1%
              to 10% of the worldwide silicon market. If successful, a ramp up to
              commercialization SOI pilot production will begin immediately upon the
              completion of this Phase II contract. 

