Title       : Acquisition of a Proteomics System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0216654

Award Number: 0216654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $526437             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang Fischer fischer@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to The Salk Institute to acquire a proteomics
              system.
Proteomics, the rapid identification of large numbers of proteins in a
              short time frame, has been made possible by recent developments in mass
              spectroscopy equipment and by the development of powerful data interpretation
              software. The new Salk proteomics system consists of devices that allow the
              isolation and identification of small amounts of proteins involved in normal
              and abnormal events inside cells. The proteins are separated by two-dimensional
              gel electrophoresis. Fragments of the proteins are then identified by analysis
              in a mass spectrometer. The system includes robotic workstations that allow
              automated analysis of several hundred proteins per week.
Numerous projects at
              The Salk Institute rely heavily on the ability to identify small
amounts of
              proteins involved in cell growth and development. Changes in the level of
              specific proteins are associated with diseases such as cancer and nerve cell
              damage. Protein complexes regulate embryo development and gene activity
              throughout life. These complexes, often consisting of more than 50 proteins,
              can be analyzed in days with the new proteomics technology rather than years
              with previous methods. Plant development and plants' responses to parasites are
              also regulated by changes in the level of a variety of proteins. Understanding
              these events in plants not only has implication for agriculture but can also
              lead to discoveries about human biology.
The Salk Institute has been at the
              forefront of biological research for more than three
decades and the
              proteomics system will allow investigators to expand the scope of their
              investigation to pursue new avenues of research. The Salk Institute employs a
              highly diverse staff of scientists and support personnel. Students, both
              undergraduate and postgraduate, from many ethnic backgrounds are trained in its
              laboratories. The Salk Institute has an on-going outreach program designed to
              attract minority students and staff members. The addition of a proteomics
              facility will expand the research possibilities and attract new investigators
              to the Institute.

