Title       : Development of a System for Time-resolved Studies of Film Growth and Processing
               and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0216704

Award Number: 0216704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall L. Headrick rheadrick@uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports instrument development and student training at the
              University of Vermont. Faculty and students are developing a system that will
              enable study of the relaxation of surfaces as they are being bombarded by
              energetic particles in a set of processes known collectively as "energetic beam
              deposition." Using a very intense beam of x-rays from a synchrotron source, the
              atomic structure of surfaces will be investigated as these technologically
              important processes are occurring. The new system under development will
              enable, for the first time, microsecond time resolution during the in-situ
              study of materials' surface structures while undergoing crystal growth and
              etching. The system will make use of pulsed laser deposition and surface
              etching methods with pulse durations of <1 microsecond in order to study
              surface relaxation effects on this time scale. The system will permit extensive
              synchrotron x-ray access to the sample and incorporate standard
              characterization tools (e.g. RHEED) to better correlate the synchrotron results
              with in-house studies. Initial studies will concentrate on the fundamentals of
              processes that are vital for future electronics and information storage
              technologies. The first is pulsed laser deposition, which allows highly
              controlled growth of thin films by a single atomic layer at a time. The second
              is the erosion of surfaces with energetic ions, a process that can be used to
              produce nanoscale surface patterns. 

The basic understanding gained from
              these experiments could eventually lead to methods for growing new high quality
              materials for optoelectronics and to materials for information storage
              technologies such as magnetic and optical disk drives and quantum spin devices.
              This new instrument will provide research and educational opportunities for
              undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Vermont in the areas
              of crystal growth, surface processing and surface analysis. Students will also
              gain access to a synchrotron-based materials research program. 

