Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of a Digital Imaging System to Support Research and
               Research Training in Applications of Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0216557

Award Number: 0216557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk V. Cammarata Kirk.Cammarata@mail.tamucc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joanna Mott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory W. Buck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick D. Larkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lillian S. Waldbeser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TX A&M U Corpus Christi
	      6300 Ocean Drive
	      Corpus Christi, TX  784125503    361/825-2497

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of a Digital Imaging System to Support Research and Research
              Training in Applications of Molecular Biology

A grant has been awarded to
              Dr. Kirk Cammarata and colleagues at Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi
              (TAMU-CC) to acquire a digital imaging system for sensitive detection of
              multicolor fluorescence, radioactivity and chemiluminescence data generated by
              a variety of DNA- and protein-based research techniques.  The imaging package
              includes blue, green and red fluorescence excitation capabilities, bandpass
              emission filters, 10 um-resolution optics and microarray slide holder, storage
              phosphor cassettes and phosphor image eraser, and data analysis software. The
              instrumentation will support molecular biological studies on the health of the
              Gulf of Mexico coastal environment.  The research will explore the mechanisms
              by which aquatic organisms respond to environmental contaminants such as
              endocrine disruptors and toxic heavy metals, and how DNA- and protein-based
              molecular techniques can be used to monitor environmental impacts.  The Gulf
              coast hosts a diversity of uses including fisheries, wildlife, industry and
              recreation.  But it is also a sensitive collection point for environmental
              contaminants originating from approximately two-thirds of the continental
              United States.  Knowledge of how aquatic organisms respond to pollutants, in
              conjunction with molecular assay methods to measure these responses, will
              result in a cause and effect understanding that may support risk-based
              environmental assessment and regulation.   

 The research facilitated by the
              imaging system will support the empowerment of regulatory agencies to make
              rational, fact-based decisions regarding environmental impacts of pollution.  
              Moreover, the mission of the College of Science and Technology at TAMU-CC is,
              in part, to increase minority participation in the sciences.  The research
              training and teaching needs of Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI) in South
              Texas will be enhanced because the instrumentation will enable research
              projects not previously possible in the region.
