Title       : SBIR Phase II: New Elastomeric Microelectrodes for Improved Neuroprostheses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0216035

Award Number: 0216035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis L. Keohan fkeohan@capecod.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cape Cod Research
	      19 Research Road
	      East Falmouth, MA  02536    508/540-4400

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is to develop
              electrically conductive polymer-silicone composite materials for improving the
              performance of implantable neural prostheses. Prior Phase I study has
              demonstrated the feasibility of synthesizing electrically conductive polymer
              nanocomposites with mechanical properties of silicone elastomers. Polymer-based
              prototype electrical devices were found to be stable toward simulated
              physiological conditions and cyclic current pulsing. The Phase II program will
              extend the benefits of these systems to the fabrication of more complex devices
              such as multi-poled cuff electrodes for chronic peripheral nerve stimulation
              and recording. An expanded test plan would include development of advanced
              device fabrication methods and extensive testing of the prototype neural
              prostheses for electrical response, tissue compatibility, and durability in
              chronic implantation applications. The optimized elastomeric electrodes will be
              characterized for biocompatibility, stability and electrical properties.
              Methodology will be developed for fabricating prosthetic electrodes for
              extensive in vitro pulsing studies and acute animal testing. Finally, test
              protocols for the new electrode products will be established in an effort to
              obtain FDA approval.
     The commercial applications of this project will be
              in the area of biomedical devices and systems that serve the needs of disabled
              individuals following stroke or spinal cord injury.
