Title       : Development of a Single Electron Scanning Tunneling Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0216711

Award Number: 0216711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clayton C. Williams clayton@physics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This IMR award supports an instrument development of an electrostatic force
              based Single Electron Scanning Tunneling Microscope.  In previous work, single
              electron tunneling events from a special scanning probe tip have been clearly
              detected by electrostatic force.  However, no surface imaging with the single
              electrons has yet been achieved.  This research program focuses upon developing
              the methods needed to image individual, electrically isolated electron states
              at or near surfaces with atomic scale spatial resolution.  The methodology will
              include understanding the mechanical behavior of oscillating atomic force
              microscope (AFM) cantilevers under large force gradients, exploring the effects
              of charge transfer and voltage dependence, optimizing and developing a force
              detection system for the single electron measurements and developing a method
              for height control while imaging with single electrons.  The ability to image
              and characterize electrically isolated, localized, electronic states near
              surfaces (undetectable with the standard Scanning Tunneling Microscope) is a
              fundamental, new capability.  The approach is to provide a detailed
              understanding of the atomic scale electronic properties of electrically
              insulating materials and isolated nanometer scale systems.
%%%
This IMR award
              supports an instrument development of an electrostatic force based Single
              Electron Scanning Tunneling Microscope.  In previous work, single electron
              tunneling events from a special scanning probe tip have been clearly detected
              by electrostatic force.  However, no surface imaging with the single electrons
              has yet been achieved.  This research program focuses upon developing the
              methods needed to image individual, electrically isolated electron states at or
              near surfaces with atomic scale spatial resolution.  The methodology will
              include understanding the mechanical behavior of oscillating atomic force
              microscope (AFM) cantilevers under large force gradients, exploring the effects
              of charge transfer and voltage dependence, optimizing and developing a force
              detection system for the single electron measurements and developing a method
              for height control while imaging with single electrons.  The ability to image
              and characterize electrically isolated, localized, electronic states near
              surfaces (undetectable with the standard Scanning Tunneling Microscope) is a
              fundamental, new capability.  The approach is to provide a detailed
              understanding of the atomic scale electronic properties of electrically
              insulating materials and isolated nanometer scale systems.

