Title       : Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope and the Establishment of an
               Interdepartmental Microscopy Imaging Facility at the University of Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0216118

Award Number: 0216118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306920             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Stock David.Stock@Colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pei-San Tsai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Boswell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Friedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Stock, Dr. William Friedman, Dr. Pei-San
              Tsai, and Dr. Robert Boswell at the University of Colorado to establish a
              common-use confocal microscopy facility. The research of these investigators in
              the broad areas of developmental and/or evolutionary biology requires
              three-dimensional characterization of anatomical structures and domains of gene
              expression in relatively thick specimens. Traditional histological methods for
              such characterization are laborious, prone to artifacts, and cannot be applied
              to living specimens. Confocal microscopy is ideal for such applications, as it
              allows collection of data from single focal planes ("optical sections") which
              can then be assembled by a computer into a three-dimensional reconstruction.
              This technique does not require physical sectioning of samples and can
              therefore be used with living material. The major item of equipment to be
              purchased is a laser scanning confocal microscope. Two additional pieces of
              equipment, an epifluorescence compound microscope and a fluorescence
              stereomicroscope, will be purchased to facilitate the preparation of specimens
              for analysis with the confocal microscope. These microscopes, along with an
              existing scanning electron microscope, will be housed in a facility open to all
              researchers at the University of Colorado.
	 
	The common-use imaging
              facility to be established at the University of Colorado is expected to
              contribute to intra- and interdepartmental interactions. Developmental and
              Evolutionary Biology, the research fields of the users of this facility, are
              both split between two separate departments at the University of Colorado, with
              the majority of developmental biologists located in the Department of
              Molecular, Cellular & Developmental Biology and the majority of evolutionary
              biologists in the Department of Environmental, Population & Organismic Biology.
              Interactions between these departments have been minimal in the past, despite
              common interests highlighted by the recent rise of the subdiscipline of
              Evolutionary Developmental Biology. A facility bringing together researchers on
              the basis of shared technology is expected to encourage the exchange of ideas
              among developmental biologists of all types as well as between developmental
              and evolutionary biologists. In addition to representing a full spectrum of
              questions in and approaches to Developmental and Evolutionary Biology,
              potential users of this facility employ a diversity of organisms ranging from
              animals to plants. As these groups of organisms represent independent
              inventions of multicellular development, interactions among plant and animal
              biologists catalyzed by the planned facility may bring into sharper focus
              universal versus labile features of development and evolution. Students in
              particular should benefit from such interactions, as they are likely to be the
              ones spending the most time in the facility. Their educational experience will
              further be enhanced by the incorporation of confocal microscopy into an
              existing histology course, as well as by periodic training sessions aimed at
              attracting new users. In summary, in an era of increasing specialization in
              research and training throughout Biology, a common use confocal microscopy
              facility is seen as a means of exposing researchers in Developmental and
              Evolutionary Biology to a diversity of questions, approaches and organisms.

