Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Materials Characterization Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0216312

Award Number: 0216312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234380             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy J. Moll amoll@boisestate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold D. Ackler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Knowlton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boise State University
	      1910 University Drive
	      Boise, ID  837250001    208/385-1011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Boise State University (BSU) is located in a high tech region with numerous
              microelectronic industries. The College of Engineering was created in 1996 and
              offers B.S. and M.S. degrees in Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mechanical
              Engineering, Civil Engineering and Computer Science.  Faculty from Mechanical
              Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Physics, Chemistry,
              Geophysics, and Biology are creating a Materials Science and Engineering (MS&E)
              program at BSU.  The program consists of a minor for the Master's program in
              Engineering, a minor for undergraduates and a Master's degree in Materials
              Science and Engineering.  
As part of establishing the MS&E program and in
              support of MS&E research efforts, the team is establishing materials
              characterization capabilities at BSU.  This proposal is requesting the
              acquisition of a number of key pieces of equipment to improve the
              infrastructure for a materials analysis facility at Boise State University. 
              This grant will be used to purchase analytical tools that will be available to
              researchers on campus, in local industry, and at other universities and
              government labs around the region.  It will support the work of undergraduates,
              graduate students, post-doctoral students, and faculty.  As part of this
              effort, a mechanism to allow these tools to be used by local industry will be
              implemented.  
Over the last few years, Boise State University has been
              building research programs in several areas including engineering, physics,
              chemistry and biology.  Successful grants have been focused in microelectronic
              materials and processing including a DARPA grant for 3-D circuits, fabrication
              of chemical field effect transistors, and a new federal initiative to develop
              environmental sensors.  Several new research programs are emerging in high-k
              dielectrics, reliability of ultra-thin gate oxides, microelectromechanical
              systems (MEMs), ceramic MEMs, and optimization of microelectronic packaging. 
              
Funding of this proposal will enable the acquisition of expanded capabilities
              of the existing Atomic Force Microscope, add high frequency capabilities to the
              current semiconductor parameter test system, acquire a Fourier Transform
              Infrared Spectrometer with microscope attachment, and enhance the capabilities
              of a scanning reference electrode technology instrument.  The intent in this
              proposal is to add to the MS&E equipment set and to establish a structure by
              which to make these instruments readily available to researchers at BSU,
              researchers in the inland northwest region (Montana State, Northern Utah, WSU,
              U Idaho, INEEL), and local industry.  
These additional capabilities will be
              utilized in several ways to improve the undergraduate education at BSU.  In
              Materials Science coursework, students will obtain direct experience examining
              a wide array of materials properties in applications ranging from magnetic to
              microelectronic materials. Also, data from advanced materials characterization
              equipment will be used in class when relating theory and fundamentals to
              application specific examples. Undergraduates provide significant contributions
              in many research groups in the College of Engineering and will be using this
              equipment for their research.  Overall, exposure to materials characterization
              at the undergraduate level will provide graduating BSU engineers a unique and
              valuable advantage in the workplace. 

