Title       : Development of X-ray Diffraction Equipment for Research, Education, Training,
               and Outreach at a Synchrotron Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0216881

Award Number: 0216881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shefford P. Baker shefford.baker@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuri Suzuki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hector D. Abruna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program to Cornell
              University will allow several teams of investigators to develop x-ray
              diffraction instrumentation that will provide unique experimental capabilities
              and powerful general use equipment for use at the G2 experimental station at
              the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS). A six-circle
              diffractometer, two CCD area detectors, and a temperature- and
              environment-controlled sample stage will be built. The diffractometer will
              allow for a very wide range of experimental configurations and will be the
              basic diffractometer for the G2 experimental station. The area detectors will
              be used at G2 for a variety of different experiments, but will also be made
              available to users at other experimental stations easing a current very high
              over demand for such detectors at CHESS and at Cornell. The stage will be able
              to hold samples at any temperature between 20 and 900 degrees C in a range of
              atmospheres during diffraction experiments and will also be used at different
              experimental stations. Together, this equipment will be optimized for high
              resolution and time-sensitive x-ray diffraction work. Initial work includes: 1)
              studies of mechanical deformation, relaxation, and anelastic recovery, as well
              as interactions among microstructure development, phase changes, and solid
              state reactions in thin films and nanopattened structures, 2) studies of the
              evolution of strain and magnetic and electronic properties as a function of
              controlled oxidation in magnetic oxide thin films and nanostructures, 3)
              studies of formation and structure of highly ordered arrays by metal initiated
              self-assembly of ligand modified den-drimers, and 4) studies of the kinetics of
              interface growth of metal mono- and multilayers. This equipment will be made
              available to outside users and to students, and will be used in outreach
              programs such as the Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) and Research
              Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) programs sponsored by NSF through the
              Cornell Center for Materials Research (CCMR).
%%%
This award from the
              Instrumentation for Materials Research Program to Cornell University will allow
              several teams of investigators to develop x-ray diffraction instrumentation
              that will provide unique experimental capabilities and powerful general use
              equipment for use at the G2 experimental station at the Cornell High Energy
              Synchrotron Source (CHESS). This equipment will be optimized for high
              resolution and time-sensitive x-ray diffraction work. It will be used to obtain
              rapid high resolution measurements of thermally induced phenomena in
              nanostructured materials, including strain, deformation, phase transformations,
              magnetic and electronic properties, film formation, and solid state reactions.
              This equipment will benefit a large number of research groups at Cornell, and
              also external US and international collaborators. It will be made available to
              outside users, to students, and will be used in outreach programs such as the
              very successful Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) and Research
              Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) programs sponsored by NSF through the
              Cornell Center for Materials Research (CCMR).


