Title       : Acquisition of a Physical Properties Measurement Facility for Materials Research
               and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0216752

Award Number: 0216752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund R. Nowak nowak@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Q. Xiao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl M. Unruh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Ismat Shah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Klaus H. Theopold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              An IMR award is made to the University of Delaware to purchase a physical
              properties measurement system (PPMS) to support a number of complementary and
              multidisciplinary research programs in the areas of novel magnetic materials
              and superconductivity.  The PPMS is an automated variable temperature-magnetic
              field system that will provide a suite of new electro-transport and
              magnetometry measurement capabilities that include resistivity, Hall effect,
              current-voltage characteristics, noise, DC
magnetization, AC susceptibility
              and anisotropy.   The system will serve the diverse needs of several faculty
              members who require routine characterization and detailed studies of materials
              in magnetic fields ranging from 50 mOe to 90 kOe and at temperatures ranging
              from 1.9 K to 400K that are currently not attainable.   Active research
              programs that benefit from access to such a system include studies of:
              "spin-electronics", in particular spin-polarized transport in ferromagnetic
              tunnel junctions, permanent magnets and small magnetic particles, soft magnetic
              nanocomposites, magnetism of transition metal organometallics, linear
              magnetoresistance of silver chalcogenides, and electromagnetic properties of
              recently discovered superconductors.  These research programs address
              fundamental phenomena materials, as well as technological aspects related to
              materials synthesis, processing, and performance.

This IMR award is to
              establish a state-of-the-art physical properties measurement (PPMS) facility at
              the University of Delaware.  The facility will be used by a diverse set of
              faculty in the Departments of Physics and Astronomy, Materials Science and
              Engineering, and Chemistry and Biochemistry who require studies of the
              electrical and magnetic properties of materials under extreme temperatures and
              magnetic fields.  The research programs address fundamental phenomena in novel
              magnetic materials and superconductivity, as well as technological aspects
              related to materials synthesis, processing, and performance.  Some areas of
              research that will benefit from this new facility are related to magnetic field
              sensing and data storage, such as the unusually large and linear magnetic
              response found in silver telluride compounds and in the emerging field of
              "spintronics".  The latter is a revolutionary approach to electronics that is
              based on the spin of the charge carrier in addition to its charge. 
              Spin-electronic devices have
already found commercial application in the
              computer hard-drive industry and hold great promise for low power, non-volatile
              memory applications.  The PPMS facility will significantly expand the scope of
              materials characterization efforts at the institution. In addition to its
              impact on the scientific goals of the IMR program, the PPMS facility will be
              integrated into the educational activities of the Department of Physics and
              Astronomy.  These activities include curriculum development for graduate and
              senior undergraduate level courses (such as laboratory exercises for a course
              on Magnetic Materials), research opportunities for undergraduates, and
              established outreach activities that promote the benefits excitement of
              research to local high school students and parents.

