Title       : Acquisition of a 300 MHz NMR Console for Research and Training in Biochemistry
               and Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0216630

Award Number: 0216630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duarte M. Freitas dfreita@luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth W. Olsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick M. Henry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Crumrine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Albert W. Herlinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

	A grant has been awarded to Loyola University Chicago under the
              supervision of Dr. Mota de Freitas, Professor of Chemistry, for the purchase of
              a new 300 MHz NMR console for hydrogen atoms, a variable temperature control
              module, a 5 mm pulse-field gradient, an indirect-detection probe, and a 10 mm
              multinuclear broadband probe. The console will be used in conjunction with the
              superconducting magnet with a magnetic field strength of 7 Tesla from an
              existing, but inoperable, narrow-bore 300 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
              spectrometer.  The NMR facility also owns and maintains a second high-field
              instrument, a wide-bore 400S NMR spectrometer.  Prior to May of 2000, the
              multinuclear 300 MHz NMR instrument was used primarily for research whereas the
              400 MHz spectrometer was used for obtaining one- and two-dimensional NMR
              spectra of organic compounds by graduate students as well as in undergraduate
              education.  Since May of 2000, the 400S NMR spectrometer is accessible to all
              faculty, technical staff, postdoctoral researchers, graduate and advanced
              undergraduate students. Five principal research groups, including that of Dr.
              Mota de Freitas, have a series of projects in the areas of biochemistry,
              neurochemistry, and in biophysical, bioinorganic, organometallic and
              environmental chemistry that will benefit greatly from a dedicated, upgraded
              300 MHz NMR instrument.  
NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
              available to biochemists and chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
              molecules.  It is used in the identification of unknown compounds, the
              characterization of specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and in the
              investigation of dynamic aspects of the interactions between molecules in
              solution.  The equipment to be purchased will be used in several projects,
              including studies on the bioinorganic chemistry of lithium salts, synthesis of
              complex affinity crosslinking reagents for proteins, dicarboxylic acid linked
              gramicidin dimers, photochemically active dyes linked to hemoglobin,
              functionalized gem-bisphosphonic acid ligands for the extraction of metal ions
              using supercritical carbon dioxide, asymmetric synthesis by palladium (II)
              catalysis, and 33S and 17O NMR studies of sulfonic acids and sulfonate buffers.
               
With the upgraded 300 MHz spectrometer, the existing 400 MHz instrument will
              be used more extensively in both undergraduate and graduate classes. As the
              undergraduate research program within the department continues to expand, the
              addition of another NMR spectrometer will allow our students to gain "hands-on"
              experience with a high-field spectrometer. The Department of Chemistry hosts a
              summer REU program, which in the past few years has made extensive use of our
              400S NMR spectrometer.  This past summer, all REU students were exposed to a
              one-week overview of the use of an NMR spectrometer.  It is our hope that a new
              functional NMR spectrometer will allow the Department of Chemistry to continue
              to integrate undergraduate and graduate students, including women and
              underrepresented minorities, in a research setting that will benefit greatly
              from the upgraded instrumentation.

