Title       : Development of a Solid Immersion Lens Microscope for Optical Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0216601

Award Number: 0216601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose Menendez jose.menendez@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom D. Milster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeff S. Drucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neal W. Woodbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian D. Poweleit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports instrument
              development at to Arizona State University. The instrument is a solid-immersion
              lens (SIL) microscope for optical spectroscopy with a spatial resolution of at
              least 200 nm. The SIL microscope will feature an autofocus system and active
              control of the SIL-sample separation. These innovations will make optical
              spectroscopy with nm-scale spatial resolution routinely practicable. The
              proposed applications will emphasize Raman and fluorescence imaging. SIL-based
              micro- Raman spectroscopy offers a spatial resolution comparable or better than
              Near Field Scanning Optical Microscopy. The signal strength for SIL-based
              spectroscopy increases as the spatial resolution is improved. Furthermore, the
              SIL microscope makes it possible to collect spectroscopic images directly on a
              detector by using a global illumination technique. Initial areas of application
              include carbon nano-tubes, Ge and SiGe quantum dots on silicon, and the optical
              properties of photosynthetic membranes. The instrument will be build by
              graduate students who will gain valuable experience in instrument
              development.

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program
              supports a project to design and build a Solid Immersion Lens (SIL)microscope
              for spectroscopic imaging with a spatial resolution of at least 200 nm. There
              is a critical need for such an instrument because the wavelength of light can
              be measured with unmatched precision, so that optical spectroscopy is one of
              the preferred techniques for the study of materials. However, diffraction
              effects pose a fundamental limit to the spatial resolution of any optical
              technique, and for conventional instruments this means that it is generally
              impossible to obtain spatially resolved spectroscopic information from
              nanoscale objects.
An alternative technique to overcome the diffraction limit
              is the use of optical fibers with nanometer-size apertures. The SIL-microscope
              will have two fundamental advantages over this approach a much higher
              light-throughput and the ability to record spectroscopic images without
              physically scanning a fiber tip over a sample. The instrument will be build by
              graduate students who will gain valuable experience in instrument
              development.

