Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Physical and Numerical Geomechanics Laboratory Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0216244

Award Number: 0216244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466102             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. McNearny   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Donovan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Malgorzata Ziaja  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary MacLaughlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MT Tech of the U of Montan
	      1300 W. Park Street
	      Butte, MT  59701    406/496-4101

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Montana Tech has an unusual combination of academic and practical talent that
              is
uniquely suited to link the requirements of both laboratory and field
              testing with the increasingly important discipline of numerical modeling. Such
              a collection of individuals is rarely found in large universities, much less an
              institution the size of Montana Tech. Each of the four disciplines represented
              by the co-principal investigators investigate similar materials, but each
              conduct his or her investigation from a different perspective that is required
              by their respective disciplines.  However, the equipment purchased through this
              award will allow for a combination of these different perspectives into a
              comprehensive program that will have a synergistic effect into how research is
              conducted into geologic and related materials and designs. The equipment will
              be used to form an Integrated Physical and Numerical Modeling Geomechanics
              Laboratory.

The acquired equipment will be used to perform research into the
              triaxial testing of rock.
Montana Tech's triaxial test device will be utilized
              to its full potential for research and
instructional purposes as a result of
              the upgrade from this proposed research equipment grant.  The components of the
              upgrade are data acquisition & control, confining pressure, pore pressure, and
              thermal modules.  The acquired computers and numerical modeling software will
              be used to perform research into the behavior of geological and composite
              materials.  Finite difference and discrete element software programs are thus
              requested for both continuum and discontinuum numerical analyses. Numerical
              methods are especially suitable for modeling materials over a wide range of
              scales. However, they require exceptionally powerful computer workstations that
              should be networked together so that parallel-processing techniques may more
              efficiently solve the problem at hand. The research applications will range
              from underground mining to micro-mechanical analysis of particulate reinforced
              composites to rock drillability and rock/bit interaction. Most of the projects
              combine numerical modeling with physical testing of rock that is necessary to
              accurately determine material properties prior to the modeling.  

The
              laboratory will serve the research needs of all the respective programs
              within
Montana Tech as well as the research needs of interested industries and
              governmental research agencies.  An estimated 100 students/year will benefit
              from the acquired equipment, primarily via lab activities required for in their
              coursework.  Five undergraduate and nine graduate level courses would use
              various components of the equipment.  Furthermore, since Montana Tech actively
              involves undergraduate and graduate students in research, both groups will
              utilize the laboratory equipment and the numerical modeling facilities, in
              addition to personnel from the extractive industries and other government
              research agencies.  Co-PI Donovan is integrally involved in the Rocky Mountain
              Agile Virtual Enterprise Technical Development Center (RAVE-TDC) which is
              designed to match entities like the Integrated Geomechanics Laboratory that can
              provide services, with clients within Montana who need those services. Several
              tribal
organizations are participating in the RAVE-TDC.  The PIs have
              excellent records regarding encouraging students, particularly women, to
              participate in research activities. The Integrated Geomechanics Laboratory
              developed using the acquired equipment is expected to be an excellent
              recruiting tool.
 

