Title       : Development of a New In-Situ Near Infrared Raman Probe Laser Ablation System for
               Chemistry Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0216402

Award Number: 0216402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303432             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emanuel Waddell ewaddell@morgan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morgan State University
	      1700 East Cold Spring Lane
	      Baltimore, MD  21251    443/885-3200

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Prof.
              Emanuel Waddell of Morgan State University will develop an in-situ near
              infrared Raman probe laser ablation system for chemistry research.  This
              multi-wavelength pulsed UV laser ablation system with a controllable xy-stage
              will allow for the fabrication of microfluidic systems and analytical sensors
              in polymer substrates.  It will also be capable of performing in-situ
              investigations of the polymer surface via near infrared Raman spectroscopy. 
              The instrument will result in a clearer understanding of the surface chemistry
              that results as a function of laser ablation, and will provide insight into the
              effects of local atmosphere and ablation wavelength on the resulting moieties
              on the polymer surface. 

The in-situ near infrared Raman proble laser
              ablation system is a unique instrument as it will allow the in-situ, real-time
              investigation of the polymer surface during the ablation process.  The
              near-infrared Raman analysis will provide a nondestructive method to probe
              chemical reactions on the polymer surface.   Development of this instrument
              will significantly enhance research in the polymer sciences.  

