Title       : Development of a Facility for Ultrahigh Resolution Depth Profiling using Nuclear
               Resonances for Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0216802

Award Number: 0216802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Torgny Gustafsson gustaf@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa C. Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wolf Schulte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric L. Garfunkel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore E. Madey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Rutgers University will build a facility for very-high resolution (<1 nm) depth
              profiling of light elements in thin films using narrow nuclear resonances. 
              This facility will be installed at an existing accelerator at the Laboratory
              for Surface Modification (LSM) at Rutgers University and will complement
              several existing depth profiling techniques there.  It will be the first
              facility of its kind in the US.  The experiments will utilize several different
              extremely narrow (<10 eV) nuclear resonances.  By scanning the incident ion
              energy, the dept from the surface at which the nuclear reactions occur can be
              varied and information about the depth distribution of the species under study
              is obtained.  Examples of the diverse applications to be pursued include
              studies of diffusion, segregation and breakdown in ionic conductors, diffusion
              of sodium in minerals in interplanetary space, novel materials for high
              performance computer chips, and the long term stability of materials used for
              storage of nuclear waste.  Users outside the LSM, from Rutgers University and
              elsewhere, can also access this facility, primarily through collaborations. 
              The educational program includes weekend hands-on work in the laboratory by
              high school students; computer based experiments by undergraduates and summer
              workshops for senior materials scientists.  Research using ion beams is
              attractive to a wide range of students because of the technical sophistication
              of these experiments, the "straightforward" (classical, model independent)
              quantitative data analysis and the close coupling to very real modern technical
              applications.
%%%
Rutgers University will construct a novel facility for
              depth profiling of light elements by ion beam analysis using narrow nuclear
              resonances.  This will be the first facility for nuclear resonance depth
              profiling in the US.  In many scientific applications, one needs to quantify
              the number of atoms as a function of their distance from the surface.  Examples
              of such diverse applications, described in the proposal, include studies of
              diffusion, segregation and breakdown in ionic conductors, diffusion of sodium
              in minerals in interplanetary space, novel materials for high performance
              computer chips, and the long term stability of materials used for storage of
              nuclear waste.  The facility will utilize several different extremely narrow
              nuclear resonances.  Depth profiling will be accomplished by changing the
              incident ion energy, so that the depth at which nuclear reactions occur is
              varied continuously.  The educational program includes high school students,
              undergraduates and also senior materials scientists.  Research using ion beams
              is attractive to a wide range of students.  The technical sophistication of
              these experiments, the "straightforward" (classical, model independent)
              quantitative data analysis and the close coupling to very real modern technical
              applications makes it possible to attract promising students to science.

