Title       : MRI: Acquisition of CITI Terascale Cluster (CTC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0216467

Award Number: 0216467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1150000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Moshe Y. Vardi vardi@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don H. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ken W. Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Willy Zwaenepoel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Mellor-Crummey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1189,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0216467
Moshe Y. Vardi
Don H. Johnson; Ken W. Kennedy; John M. Mellor-Crummey;
              Willy Zwaenepoel
MRI:  Acquisition of CITI Terascale Cluster \(CTC\)

This
              proposal, requiring access to the kinds of experimental computational resources
              needed for scalability experiments, aims to support scalability to thousands of
              processors.  Achieving this goal requires experimentation of computational
              facilities of sufficient size to establish that solutions will scale to large
              systems.  A high-performance computational cluster with a peak performance of
              approximately one teraflop, supporting both compute- and data-intensive science
              and engineering, will enable researchers to make fundamental advances in
              diverse areas such as biochemistry, biology, chemistry, computational
              mathematics, computer science and engineering, earth science, economics,
              physics, political science, and psychology.  Experiments planned include:
a.
              Scalability of compiler techniques for systems with hundreds of processors and
              deep memory and communication hierarchies;
b. Development, simulation, and
              testing of scalable Web services on hundreds of processors;
c. Simulations of
              ad hoc multihop wireless networks scaling to thousands of nodes;
d. Scalable
              algorithms for Monte-Carlo studies of the physics of heavy ion collisions;
e.
              Design and evaluation of scalable optimization algorithms based on component
              frameworks;
f. Extraction and analysis of data on hundreds of millions of
              international events, to better predict and understand international conflicts
              (extend the Kansas Data System); and
g. Scalability tests and practical
              application of new algorithms for modeling and simulation of biomolecular
              interactions using several thousand flexibility parameters.

By integrating
              the equipment in the existing curriculum the educational impact is expected to
              be large, going beyond a course in parallel programming.  Several programs are
              already in place addressing diversity.

