Title       : RUI/MRI: Acquistion of Equipment to Establish an Aerogel Fabrication,
               Charaterization and Applications Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0216153

Award Number: 0216153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254457             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Anderson andersoa@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary K. Carroll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Wilk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Hagerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1415,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant will establish an interdisciplinary collaborative facility, the
              Aerogel Fabrication, Characterization, and Applications Lab (AFCAL), for
              faculty and student researchers in the Mechanical Engineering and Chemistry
              Departments at Union College. An aerogel is a fragile nanostructure consisting
              of approximately 90-99% air (volume ratio), contained in an intricate pore
              structure with pore sizes primarily in the 2 to 50 nm range. An aerogel is
              formed by a highly cross-linked polymerization reaction and drying phase. The
              polymerization process forms a solid network surrounded by a liquid (sol-gel).
              The drying process removes the liquid and leaves behind a delicate pore
              structure. This pore structure gives aerogels the lowest known density, index
              of refraction, thermal, electrical, and acoustical conductivities of any solid
              material.

The funds provided will purchase the equipment necessary to
              implement two aerogel fabrication techniques: an automated pressure and
              temperature controlled hydraulic press and a critical point drying system; and
              equipment to characterize those aerogels: a thermal constants analyzer, a gas
              adsorption system, an integrating sphere spectrophotometer, and a fluorescence
              spectrometer.

The AFCAL facility will be used by faculty and students in
              Mechanical Engineering and Chemistry to: (1) further develop a new aerogel
              fabrication technique and perform fundamental studies on the effects of
              chemical reagents and process variables on the aerogel nanostructure, (2)
              characterize the thermal and optical properties of silica aerogels, (3) use
              fluorescence spectroscopy to perform fundamental studies of aerogel structure &
              applications of aerogels to chemical sensing, and (4) develop inorganic-organic
              scintillator composites and perform fundamental studies of the inclusion
              chemistry of aerogels.

The Union College Mechanical Engineering and
              Chemistry Departments have a demonstrated history of excellence in introducing
              students to research at a formative stage of their academic careers, providing
              students with coursework that provides the necessary background for success in
              graduate studies, and placing these students successfully in graduate programs
              and industrial positions. As a result, these departments have had an impact on
              the scientific infrastructure of this nation. The four co-PI's will continue to
              involve undergraduate students in their research, including students from
              traditionally underrepresented groups, and to encourage their students to
              consider graduate studies in engineering- and science-related fields and
              careers in research.

