Title       : Regulation of Gene Expression in Fungi for Breaching the Plant Host Barriers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0216325

Award Number: 0216325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. E. Kolattukudy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The plant cuticle, being the outermost barrier, is the first point of contact in
              the interaction between plants and fungal pathogens. The cuticle is composed of
              an insoluble biopolyester, cutin, and a complex mixture of soluble, non-polar
              lipids collectively called waxes. Cutin is the first structural barrier that
              the fungal infection peg must penetrate in order to infect the plant. Prior
              support from NSF was primarily responsible for the basic information obtained
              about the chemistry and biosynthesis of cutin, as well as the role of the
              cuticle in plant-fungus interaction. Cutinase secreted by the invading fungus
              helps it to attach to the host and penetrate the outer barrier. According to
              previously obtained evidence, when fungal conidia contact a plant surface, the
              small amount of constitutively expressed cutinase present on the conidia
              releases hydroxy fatty acid monomers and oligomers from cutin, and these
              soluble products cause induction of high levels of cutinase that helps the
              infection process. With cloned cutinase genes and transcription factors, it has
              been shown that in Nectria haematococca one transcription factor, CTF1b,
              regulates a constitutively expressed cutinase gene (cut2), and another
              transcription factor, CTF1a, is involved in cutin monomer induction of another
              cutinase gene, cut1. The mechanism by which hydroxy fatty acids or their
              oligomers induce cut1 remains to be elucidated. Cut1 induction involves a
              palindromic promoter element that contains 2 overlapping palindromes.
              Palindrome 2 is required for cut1 induction by cutin monomers. Palindrome
              binding protein (PBP) binds palindrome1 of cut1 and acts as a repressor that
              prevents CTF1a binding to palindrome 2. Since palindrome 1 of cut2 has 2
              nucleotide substitutions, PBP cannot bind to it and suppress cut2 expression,
              and thus this gene is constitutively expressed. It is postulated that ctf1a
              induction by cutin monomers allows CTF1a to outcompete with PBP to bind cut1
              promoter and cause cut1 induction. Cutin monomer or oligomer-stimulated
              phosphorylation of this cutin response element binding protein (CREBP) allows
              it to bind CRE and transcriptionally activate ctf1a gene. It is also possible
              that phosphorylation of PBP might weaken its binding to palindrome1 of cut1 and
              thus help relieve the suppression. This project will test this hypothesis and
              define these regulatory processes at a molecular level. Disruption of ctf1a
              gene drastically reduces virulence of N. haematococca, but the drastic decrease
              in cutinase level resulting from this disruption cannot explain the loss of
              virulence because supplementation of the inoculum with cutinase or mechanical
              breaching of the cuticle does not recover virulence of the disruptants.
              Obviously, this Cys6Zn2 binuclear protein (CTF1a) also regulates other gene(s)
              required for virulence. This project will seek the identity of these virulence
              genes. The results expected from this project will elucidate novel molecular
              mechanisms involved in some of the fundamental processes in plant-fungus
              interaction, possibly suggesting novel approaches to control fungal diseases.
              Fungal infection causes by far the most damage to food and fiber production.
              This project could make a significant contributions to an understanding of this
              interaction that may help manage damaging fungal diseases of plants.
