Title       : Safe Science: Governing Green Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0216815

Award Number: 0216815
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan S. Silbey ssilbey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project studies the development and implementation of a new environmental,
              health and safety system (EHS) that resulted from a consent decree between the
              U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and a major research university. This
              agreement is an example of a relatively new form of regulation seeking to
              promote better management of private firms in ways that meet legislated public
              goals. Although most regulation attempts to manage some activities of private
              firms, this strategy supplants more familiar policies that mandate either the
              use of specific technologies or specific levels of performance. Instead, the
              consent decree uses a management-based strategy that locates the design,
              standard setting, and implementation of regulation within the regulated
              organization itself, creating a form of private management in the public
              interest, or regulation at a distance. While much research tries to determine
              if regulation works and whether it is cost effective, too few studies have
              looked at the ground level - inside the organizations, at the shop floor level
              - to trace the behavioral and cognitive threads between the routines of daily
              work and government regulation. By observing the invention of the new EHS
              organization, its implementation, and dissemination across very different
              organizational units, the research will unpack the black box of regulatory
              culture by mapping the ways in which local cultures influence health and safety
              practices and create the possibility of sustainable improvement in
              environmental conditions. How, and in what ways, do local organizational
              cultures instantiate or challenge legal norms and regulations? What forms of
              surveillance and control operate, and with what effects, in
              professional/collegial versus bureaucratic/hierarchical organizations? The
              research will also expand the already significant roster of ethnographies of
              laboratory practices while focusing on the creation and work of organizations
              that mediate the worlds of science, law, and politics. Participant observation,
              interviewing and ethnographic analysis will trace variations in the
              interpretations and responses to regulation, following the work of the
              committees and administrators designing the new system, a reorganization of the
              environmental health and safety office, as well as interviewing the lawyers
              from the University and the EPA who negotiated the consent degree. The major
              fieldwork will be a year and a half of daily observations in eight laboratories
              and four facilities that vary by authority structure, degree of risk, and past
              compliance with EP A and OSHA regulations. 
