Title       : Collaborative Research: Acquisition of a drilling rig to recover geological
               records from the Antarctic margin for the ANDRILL Consortium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0216522

Award Number: 0216522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482361             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Harwood dharwood1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Geological drilling to recover core for scientific investigations was
              successfully conducted in the
McMurdo Sound Region during 10 austral summers
              over a 28-year period since 1973. The sea-ice has been used successfully as a
              drilling platform for seven drill-holes in this area. Experience gained during
              these projects forms the basis for developing new drilling technology to
              advance this approach. The ANDRILL (ANtarctic DRILLing) Project considers
              future drilling from sea-ice, ice shelf and land platforms within its McMurdo
              Sound Portfolio. This Portfolio proposes more than ten individual drilling
              targets that will require varied drilling equipment and strategies. Most of
              these targets have several common requirements, including drilling through
              hundreds of meters of water (up to 1000 m), and to recover continuous core
              starting from the sea-floor to depths of as much as 1000 m. Most of the targets
              call for a drill rig with a greater capacity than that used for the highly
              successful international Cape Roberts Project (CRP from 1997-1999), to which
              ANDRILL is the successor. Although the CRP rig, as well as various other
              commercial drilling rigs and equipment are available to ANDRILL, the unique
              requirements (drilling in deep-water and through an ice shelf more than 300
              meters thick) require acquisition and development of a new, more powerful
              drilling system adapted to the Antarctic environment. The desired rig will
              handle the required length of drill rod and recover rock at an appropriate
              speed within the short windows of time allowed for Antarctic drilling.
              Development of this new system will enhance the drilling capability by
              providing faster core recovery and the ability to sample from previously
              inaccessible areas, thus expanding the scope of geological sampling into deeper
              water and through thick shelf ice. The study of sediment drillcores represents
              a key means to decipher Cenozoic climate and glacial history of Antarctica, a
              region where most rocks of this age are hidden beneath the ice sheet cover.
              ANDRILL is an international consortium with objectives to recover stratigraphic
              core records for use in interpreting Antarctica's past climatic, glacial and
              geological history over the past 50 million years and at varying scales of age
              resolution (0.1 to 100 thousand years). Understanding the past history of ice
              volume variation in Antarctica and associated physical changes in this region
              is critical to proper assessment of the global climate system and interaction
              of ice sheets with the ocean, atmosphere and biosphere. ANDRILL will proceed in
              three phases: geophysical and site surveys (2001-2004), drilling and core
              recovery (2003-2007), and climate and glacial modeling and integration of
              recovered data into global records of climate change (2005-2009). For the past
              40 million years the Antarctic Ice Sheet has played a critical role in
              regulating global climate and sea level. Climatic warming is expected to be
              most pronounced in polar regions; Antarctic temperatures may rise by the end of
              the century to levels that have not been achieved for several million years. It
              is therefore vital that we understand the past response of the Antarctic ice
              sheet to climatic change in order to provide constraints on models that predict
              the future. ANDRILL currently plans 4 seasons of drilling under the McMurdo
              Sound Portfolio, in the regions of New Harbour, Windless Bight, Mackay Sea
              Valley and on the Southern McMurdo Ice Shelf. Through subsequent Portfolios,
              the life of ANDRILL and this new drilling system will likely continue towards
              the year 2020. Support for programs of this scale must come from contributions
              of several nations. To date, the ANDRILL International Consortium includes as
              member nations the USA, United Kingdom, New Zealand, Italy and Germany, and it
              invites membership from any interested nation. Similar to the CRP, close
              interaction of a diverse team of research scientists, postdoctoral scientists,
              graduate and undergraduate students will provide excellent opportunities for
              education and on-site training. REU appointments will target underrepresented
              groups in the geosciences. ANDRILL plans to expand the
educational and
              outreach component beyond that of CRP by direct on-site and remote
              learning
opportunities through member-nation initiatives and ANDRILL sponsored
              outreach and education. An "on-ice" team of scientists would prepare the core
              and provide initial description and characterization. Samples would be shipped
              to "off-ice" scientists to study and present results at the first of two
              science workshops to be hosted at member-nations home academic institutions on
              a rotating basis. Publication of initial results would be followed by
              presentation of results in major scientific journals and at professional
              meetings.



