Title       : Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for Material Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0216033

Award Number: 0216033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163094             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yaw D. Yeboah yyeboah@cau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiu R. Bu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ishrat M. Khan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark B. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark Atlanta University
	      223 James P. Brawley Dr. S.W.
	      Atlanta, GA  303144358    404/880-8000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation award supports acquisition of an atomic
              force microscope (AFM). This instrument will upgrade the research, education
              and training in surface science and characterization within the biology,
              chemistry, engineering, and physics departments. Clark Atlanta University
              (CAU), a historically black college and university, has embarked on an
              extensive program to increase the total enrollment of science, engineering and
              mathematics (STEM) students, the annual STEM graduation rate, and the
              percentage of STEM students that continue to pursue advanced degrees. To
              accomplish these goals CAU needs research and instructional labs equipped with
              state of the art instruments, such as the AFM, for cutting edge research and
              research training in areas as nanoscience and technology. Several faculty
              members in biology, chemistry, engineering and physics plan to utilize the AFM
              for research and research training. Research areas of importance that will be
              studied with the AFM include polymers, composites, microelectronics, photonics,
              nanotechnology, catalysis, and molecular biology. 

The acquisition of the
              AFM will significantly enhance the faculty and student research activities in
              surface science and material characterization.  The AFM has wide application
              for the characterization of polymers, biomaterials, thin films and coatings,
              ceramics and glass, inorganics, optical storage, semiconductors, electronics,
              metals and insulators. Its use will impact virtually all the STEM students at
              CAU and other Atlanta University Center institutions. It will be available to
              an additional 100-250 STEM students from the other Atlanta University Center
              schools (Morehouse, Spelman and Morris Brown Colleges). 

