Title       : Development of a High Performance Offset Gregorian Antenna for the Colorado
               State University (CSU)-CHILL National Radar Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0216192

Award Number: 0216192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1406010            (Estimated)
Investigator: V. N. Bringi bringi@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Rutledge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              V. Chandrasekar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1525,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under this MRI, the Principal Investigator will develop, acquire, install and
              test a new high performance offset Gregorian antenna for the Colorado State
              University (CSU)-CHILL radar facility.  The CSU-CHILL radar facility has been
              operated for many years by CSU as a multi-user facility available to all
              qualified researchers.  The facility is supported primarily through a
              cooperative agreement between CSU and NSF. 

The specifications for the new
              antenna are stringent and push the antenna design and manufacturing technology.
               A substantial reduction in sidelobe levels over the current CSU-CHILL antenna
              is expected.  This improvement results from the offset Gregorian design that
              eliminates blockages by the feedhorn and feed support struts.  The
              cross-polarization levels are expected to be less than -35 dB in any plane. 
              The ratio of two dimensional integrated cross-polarized energy to copolarized
              energy over all planes is expected to be reduced by around 10 dB compared with
              the current antenna.  These correspond to significant reductions in expected
              (two-way) sidelobe clutter-to-mainlobe signal power (16-20 dB), and significant
              improvement in the radiated polarization purity offered by the dual-offset
              design relative to the prime-focus parabolic reflector antenna.

These high
              antenna performance levels are needed to accurately measure conventional
              Doppler data and the full polarimetric covariance matrix in the presence of
              strong spatial gradients of precipitation echo, especially in severe storms. 
              Currently, the relatively poorer sidelobe performance near the planes of the
              feed support struts tends to cause large errors in many of the key polarimetric
              measurements even in the presence of modest precipitation echo spatial
              gradients.  The new antenna performance is expected to nearly double the
              precipitation echo spatial gradient that can be tolerated without significant
              error in the polarimetric measurements.  It will also greatly improve the
              quality of conventional Doppler data especially in the context of data
              assimilation by numerical models.  The new antenna will permit cutting-edge
              research using the full covariance matrix to greatly improve the quantitative
              remote sensing of cloud and storm microphysics, and possibly in the future use
              of assimilation of polarimetric data by numerical models.  It will be the only
              such research weather radar of its kind in the world at S-band operating
              frequency.

Remote sensing using weather radar has been the impetus for many
              meteorological advances over the last few decades.  Such advances have included
              gaining fundamental understanding of severe weather phenomena such as
              thunderstorms, flash floods, tornadoes, hurricanes and microbursts.  Much of
              this knowledge has led to practical societal benefits such as radar warning
              systems that have been adopted by the operational weather agencies.  The
              CSU-CHILL facility has made substantial contributions to this knowledge base
              over the years.  The new antenna system will help keep what are robust, ongoing
              research and educational activities at the cutting edge of radar meteorological
              research.
