Title       : Acquistion of a Shared Microscopy Resource Center for the University of Southern
               Maine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0216097

Award Number: 0216097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170009             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent P. Markowski vincentm@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. Godard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel M. Duboise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen C. Pelsue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Vincent P. Markowski at the
              University of Southern Maine to equip a shared microscopy center. A critical
              element in developing a strong program of research and research training at
              publicly funded universities involves the acquisition of modern equipment
              available to faculty and their research trainees. The purchase of a confocal
              laser scanning microscope and a Fluorescence Research photomicroscope will
              greatly enhance the fluorescence microscopy capabilities of current University
              of Southern Maine faculty and will also serve the needs of new faculty being
              recruited into the recently formed multidisciplinary Bioscience Research
              Institute of Southern Maine. The confocal laser scanning microscope with its
              coherent light sources and the capability of rejecting out-of-focus
              interference will permit investigators to obtain clear images of optical
              sections and will permit three dimensional image analysis of specimens that
              would be impossible to effectively examine using conventional epifluorescence
              microscopy.  Advanced capabilities such as time-lapse observation of
              fluorescent events will also significantly extend currently available imaging
              resources. The versatile fluorescence system will complement the confocal
              system.  
Acquisition of this instrumentation will allow the laboratory of Dr.
              Vincent Markowski to identify immunohistochemical effects from the crop
              fungicide vinclozolin. The laboratory of Dr. Michael Godard will use the
              instrumentation to examine the contractile mechanics of skeletal single muscle
              fiber samples. The laboratory of Dr. S. Monroe Dubois will use the
              instrumentation to gain new insights into the biology of gamma-herpesvirus
              persistence. High resolution optical sectioning of tissues will allow studies
              aimed at cellular localization and molecular interactions of viral gene
              products, temporal and cell type specificity of viral gene expression, and
              cellular signaling in virus infected cells. The laboratory of Dr. Stephen
              Pelsue will use the instrumentation to study the cellular localization and
              molecular interactions of a transcription factor.  Analysis of translocation
              and activation of other transcription factors as well as B lymphocyte apoptosis
              will also be examined with confocal microscopy.
A significant goal of the
              University of Southern Maine is to become one of the top-ranked, regional
              comprehensive universities in the nation by 2010. In this endeavor USM is
              working to significantly expand academic programs in science and technology. 
              In keeping with these two institutional goals, faculty are committed to prepare
              the next generation of American scientists in a modern scientific setting and
              to stress to our students, through active research, the importance of
              scientific inquiry. The acquisition of the desired instrumentation will
              substantially increase research productivity, research training and the success
              of external research support and funding. Furthermore, through the use of the
              proposed instrumentation, students who receive research training under the
              supervision of a particular Bioscience faculty member will have the opportunity
              to collaborate with undergraduates, graduate students, and faculty from other
              departments, thus extending the breadth of student research training and
              promoting the concept of interdisciplinary research in the next generation of
              scientists.

