Title       : The Interpretation of Contemporary Gauge Theories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0216918

Award Number: 0216918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Healey rhealey@U.Arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 0216918 -- The Interpretation of Contemporary Gauge Theories
Richard
              Healey, University of Arizona

The proposed project is to analyze the
              conceptual foundations and implications of gauge theories in physics with a
              view to answering the central interpretative question:  What is the world like
              if a gauge theory is true of it? Gauge theories are of fundamental importance
              to contemporary physics. Three of the four basic physical interactions
              acknowledged today are currently best described by quantized gauge theories,
              and the concept of gauge has also been fruitfully applied to the fourth,
              gravity. But the conceptual foundations and implications of gauge theories
              remain unclear. It is up to the philosopher of science to analyze these and
              make them clear to scientists, philosophers and interested laymen who seek a
              deeper understanding of the content and significance of contemporary physics.
              Besides contributing to the philosophy of science, it is hoped that conceptual
              clarifications resulting from the proposed research will broaden the education
              and facilitate the thinking of theoretical physicists in their attempts to go
              beyond the Standard Model of elementary particles, and to arrive at a
              successful quantum theory of gravity. 

Previous research by the proposed PI
              has yielded an interpretation of a class of classical gauge theories, including
              electromagnetism. The conclusion was that these theories are best understood as
              ascribing properties not simply at each point of space at each instant, but
              rather directly on closed paths in space-time. Arguments for this conclusion
              rest on an analysis of the behavior of quantum-mechanically described particles
              interacting with a classical gauge field. Do similar conclusions emerge from a
              fully quantum mechanical analysis which treats both "particles" and
              interactions by means of quantized fields? Recent
loop-space quantizations of
              Yang-Mills fields suggest this may be so.  A major goal of the project is to
              pursue this suggestion, and to explore the implications of this kind of
              non-locality for natural philosophy.  The project then investigates the
              possibility of an interpretation of loop-space quantum gravity as a gauge
              theory that attributes properties non-locally on closed paths in space-time. 
              Smolin (2001) takes the loops themselves as basic, with space-time emerging
              from appropriate structures of loops in some classical limit. This suggests a
              more radical form of non-locality in which properties are ascribed to objects
              more fundamental than space-time (though space-time itself emerges as an
              approximate construction out of such
objects). The project will evaluate the
              coherence, credibility, and implications of this suggestion.

The project is
              to be conducted over the course of two summers as well as the academic year
              2002-2003. The proposed PI intends to accept an invitation to spend several
              months during 2003 in London, England as a Visiting Fellow of the Centre for
              the Philosophy of the Natural and Social Sciences at the London School of
              Economics. This should  facilitate consultations with both philosophers and
              physicists interested in the topic of the proposed research.
