Title       : Acquisition of Moored Water Sampling Equipment to Assess the Regulation of
               Phytoplankton Productivity in the Ross Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0216151

Award Number: 0216151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266654             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walker O. Smith wos@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              During the past few decades of oceanographic research, oceanographers have
              observed significant interannual variations in physical, biological, chemical
              and geological processes. The best-known example is the ENSO phenomenon in the
              equatorial Pacific.  Interannual variations in the Southern Ocean are also
              known to occur in ice extent and concentration, in the composition of herbivore
              communities, and in bird and marine mammal distributions and reproductive
              success.  Yet little is known about the interannual variations in production of
              phytoplankton or the role that these variations play in the food web. 
              Furthermore, nothing is known concerning the potential interannual variations
              in the controls of phytoplankton production.  This proposal seeks funds to
              augment a presently funded project which examines interannual variability in
              the Ross Sea and to collect time-series data on variables influencing the
              seasonal production of phytoplankton in the southern Ross Sea, Antarctica.  
              This project will involve adding three instruments each to two independent
              oceanographic moorings in order to develop a mooring system capable of
              providing data to address the issue of interannual variability in the Ross Sea
              ecosystem. These new instruments include a fast repetition rate fluorometer, a
              whole water sampler, and an in situ silicic acid analyzer. These instruments
              will allow for the determination of the timing and extent of iron limitation
              (using an assessment of photochemical efficiency, which is a sensitive index of
              iron limitation), the measurement of dissolved silicate uptake rates to assess
              the role of diatoms in the southern Ross Sea, and the microscopic determination
              of the composition of the phytoplankton assemblage.    Thus, insights will be
              obtained into the biological changes that occur continuously in such a rapidly
              changing, non-equilibrium environment.  Furthermore, it will assess the
              interannual variations of the production of the two major functional groups of
              the system, diatoms and Phaeocystis antarctica, a colonial haptophyte. The new
              instruments will be added to two existing taut-line moorings with in situ
              nitrate analyzers moored in the surface mixed layer. These will collect for the
              first time in the Antarctic a time-series of euphotic zone nutrient
              concentrations over the late spring-summer period.   By integrating the new
              instruments into the mooring systems, information on the period of transition
              between irradiance limitation and iron limitation will be obtained.  
              Additional data from the new instruments will allow for a detailed temporal
              record of the role of diatoms in this region.  Diatoms are critical, as they
              are considered to be the major talon contributing to the effect transfer of
              energy and organic matter through the Antarctic food web as well as
              significantly contributing to the vertical flux of biogenic matter to the
              sediments. Interannual variations of production are potentially significant the
              growth and survival of higher trophic levels of the Ross Sea.  They are also
              important in order to understand the natural variability in biogeochemical
              processes of the region.  Because polar regions such as the Ross Sea are
              predicted to be impacted by future climate change, biological changes are also
              anticipated. Placing these changes in the context of natural variability is an
              essential element of understanding and predicting such alterations.  
