Title       : Acquisition of a Time-of-Flight SIMS System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0216639

Award Number: 0216639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Johnson davej@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
              University of Oregon with the acquisition of a Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion
              Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) instrument. The instrument will be actively used
              in research programs in physics and chemistry under the auspices of the
              Materials Science Institute at the University of Oregon, as well as by research
              groups in the Departments of Geological Sciences and Neuroscience. It will also
              represent an important component of a unique University-based facility in
              Oregon and will be made available to other researchers in the state. The
              spectrometer will significantly impact a broad base of research programs. One
              of these involves developing and understanding the properties of a distinct
              class of complex semiconducting materials. A second area involves understanding
              a broader range of materials synthesis issues of metastable phases of ternary
              and quaternary superconducting, semiconducting, and thermoelectric materials. A
              third research project which will benefit from the requested instrument is the
              study of self-assembled inorganic/organic multilayer thin films. The instrument
              will have enormous potential range of applications at the University of Oregon:
              (1) characterization of Er-doped glasses for photonic device applications; (2)
              measurement of boundary-layer compositional gradients around melt inclusions in
              naturally formed glasses; (3) characterization of a new family of
              peptide-containing alkanethiol adsorbates that form highly ordered monolayers
              on gold, and (4) characterizing the distribution of subcellular Ca2+ in sensory
              hair cells in the ear, and (5) characterization of an insulating layer at in
              InP  doped conjugated polymer interface.
The spectrometer, Trift III (Phi
              Model TFS-3100), will be purchased from Physical Electronics. It includes a
              pulsed and bunched liquid metal (Ga) ion gun, a dual microchannel plate
              detector and includes the associated vacuum pumps, electronics, and computer
              hardware and software. An oxygen ion source will also be purchased to ensure
              optimal depth-profiling capability and enhanced sensitivity in depth profiles.
              The gallium source will allow chemical imaging with a lateral resolution of 0.3
              microns.


This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program
              supports the University of Oregon with the acquisition of a Time-of-Flight
              Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) instrument. The instrument will be
              actively used in research programs in physics and chemistry under the auspices
              of the Materials Science Institute at the University of Oregon, as well as by
              research groups in the Departments of Geological Sciences and Neuroscience. It
              will also represent an important component of a unique University-based
              facility in Oregon and will be made available to other researchers in the
              state. The spectrometer will significantly impact a broad base of research
              programs. One of these involves developing and understanding the properties of
              a distinct class of complex semiconducting materials. A second area involves
              understanding a broader range of materials synthesis issues of metastable
              phases of ternary and quaternary superconducting, semiconducting, and
              thermoelectric materials. A third research project which will benefit from the
              requested instrument is the study of self-assembled inorganic/organic
              multilayer thin films. Availability of the requested instrumentation will also
              improve research training at the advanced undergraduate, graduate and
              postdoctoral levels, first and foremost because of the importance of hands-on
              experience.

