Title       : Genetic Consequences of Pre-Columbian Agave Cultivation in Central Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0216832

Award Number: 0216832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen C. Parker   (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Hamrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert K. Kuzoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Although its ethnobotanical importance in Mesoamerica has long been recognized,
              agave cultivation by indigenous peoples north of the present international
              boundary separating the U.S. and Mexico was not documented until the 1980s. 
              Since then, agave cultivation by pre-Columbian cultures in the northern Sonoran
              Desert has been studied by several scholars, but many questions remain.  This
              research project will examine the genetic effects of pre-Columbian cultivation
              on three agave species that were grown by several prehistoric cultures in
              central Arizona from about 600 to 1350 A.D..  Because two of these species
              (Agave murpheyi and A. delamateri) are only found in association with
              archeological sites, they have been considered to be cultigens, or crop plants.
               They were most likely transported north from Mexico along prehistoric trade
              routes, although the identity of their ancestral species remains a mystery. 
              The third species (A. parryi) exists in both wild and cultivated populations,
              with some of the latter constituting an area of purported human-induced range
              expansion.  Thanks to their longevity and vegetative reproduction, coupled with
              the absence of agave cultivation in this area after roughly 1450, these three
              agave species provide a unique opportunity to study the pre-Columbian
              domestication process, as well as the effects of prehistoric cultivation
              practices on the genetic variability and structure of wild plants.  The
              investigators will use molecular techniques (a combination of allozyme,
              microsatellite, chloroplast DNA, and ribosomal DNA analysis) to examine both
              cultural and evolutionary aspects of agave cultivation in this region. 
              Specific objectives of the project are (1) to determine levels of genetic
              variability within the two cultigens, (2) to clarify the number of times they
              were independently introduced into central Arizona from Mexico, (3) to identify
              the ancestors of the cultigens, (4) to determine whether human selection for
              different traits in A. murpheyi differed with cultural context, (5) to compare
              levels and partitioning of genetic diversity within wild and cultivated
              populations of A. parryi, and (6) to determine whether cultivated populations
              of this species were all derived from the same founder.  Leaf samples for these
              molecular analyses will be collected from populations of the three target
              species and their close relatives in Arizona and Mexico.

This project will
              break new ground in a virtually unexplored area of crop evolution.  Because
              most research has focused on modern crops that are part of either a commercial
              or traditional agricultural system; much less is known about prehistoric plant
              domestication.  Molecular markers have been used successfully to examine the
              domestication process in other crops, and to determine taxonomic relationships
              among genera within the Agavaceae (agave) family.  Their use in this study will
              clarify poorly understood taxonomic relationships within the Ditepalae group of
              that family, and it will assess the genetic consequences of pre-Columbian
              cultivation on these two cultigens and A. parryi.  Both A. murpheyi and A.
              delamateri are very rare plants that range over a small area of Arizona. 
              Protection has been sought for both species under the Endangered Species Act,
              the Antiquities Act, and the Historic Preservation Act, but many populations
              have already been destroyed through urban development and reservoir
              impoundment.  This project will advance fundamental knowledge of these
              important prehistoric cultigens and the cultural context within which they were
              cultivated, and it will assist efforts to ensure their preservation.

