Title       : Geomagnetic Position Fixing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0216957

Award Number: 0216957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383687             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Phillips jphillip@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Summary

The proposed research will investigate the ability of a vertebrate to
              use gradients in the inclination or 'dip angle' of the earth's magnetic field
              (defined as the angle between the magnetic field lines and gravity) to
              determine geographic ("map") position.  Previous studies of homing orientation
              have shown that magnetic inclination may be used to derive one coordinate of a
              navigational map.  To provide a more rigorous test of magnetic inclination's
              role in providing map information, the effects of small changes in magnetic
              inclination on homing orientation will be used to estimate characteristics of
              the local gradient of magnetic inclination within an animal's home range, e.g.,
              the "home value" of inclination and the alignment of the gradient.  These
              behaviorally derived estimates will then be compared with actual measured
              values obtained by mapping the spatial gradients of magnetic inclination around
              the sites where animals were collected.  A comparison of the response of
              animals collected at sites along the north-south and east-west axes relative to
              our testing site will also be used to help distinguish "map" and "non-map"
              effects resulting from changes in magnetic inclination, and to determine
              whether a true bicoordinate map is being used to determine geographic position.
               The proposed experiments will contribute to a better understanding of the
              magnetic field's role in the map component of homing.  These experiments will
              also help to determine the lower limits of the sensitivity of biological
              systems to variation in the geomagnetic field and, at a more general level, to
              determine the precision with which the vertebrate nervous system can measure
              the absolute values of physical stimuli.

