Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Instrumentation for High Resolution Light Microscopy and
               Image Processing at Mount Holyoke College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0216242

Award Number: 0216242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82095              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue Ellen F. Gruber segruber@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah Bacon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan R. Barry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig T. Woodard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon A. Stranford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Proposal 6113720
PI:  Sue Ellen F. Gruber
Acquisition of Instrumentation for
              High Resolution Light Microscopy and  Image Processing at Mount Holyoke
              College

ABSTRACT

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Sue Ellen F. Gruber and
              five other biologists at Mount Holyoke College to acquire instrumentation for
              high resolution light microscopy and image processing.  Light microscopy is
              core to the analysis of diverse biological questions under investigation by
              these faculty and their undergraduates in the Biology Department.  The
              instruments to be obtained, including a research-quality fluorescence
              microscope coupled to a high resolution cooled CCD camera and computer hardware
              and software appropriate for image processing, will augment the research needs
              of these researchers, and in each case will permit experimentation and analysis
              not possible with existing equipment.  This grant will, at the same time,
              enhance the research training of students in the Biology Department, as well as
              in the two allied programs of Biochemistry, and Neuroscience and Behavior.  The
              new instrumentation, to become part of an integrated microscopy facility, will
              complement the existing electron microscopes with up-to-date sophistication in
              the several modes of light microscopy.

Projects under investigation by the
              six participating biology faculty members are wide-ranging.  One examines the
              immunological interactions between a mother and fetus that influence the
              success of pregnancy.  A second explores the action of antimalarial drugs in
              microorganisms.  A third, unique in North America, aims to document the
              biodiversity of neglected invertebrate groups.  The remaining projects dissect
              the events giving rise to programmed cell death in plants, sort out the
              identity of cell surface features that may be responsible for AIDS-related
              immunodeficiency in mice, and examine the role of steroid hormones in the
              development of fruitflies.  In all instances, the enhanced ability to obtain
              and process high quality microscope images will open up new avenues of
              experimentation.

Mount Holyoke College is an institution dedicated to
              preparing women to be leaders in every part of productive society and has an
              especially outstanding record in training women scientists.  Its mission is to
              train students to think and act as practicing scientists, by working with
              accomplished faculty who emphasize hands-on research with modern equipment. 
              Thus, the benefits of the new instrumentation will extend beyond the particular
              faculty research accomplishments, as they nurture the research training of a
              generation of future scientists.

