Title       : Acquisition of a High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope for
               Nanomaterials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0216084

Award Number: 0216084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Winter chw@chem.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xin Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory W. Auner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guangzhao Mao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie L. Brock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports Wayne State
              University with the acquisition of a 200 kV Transmission Electron Microscope
              for interdisciplinary materials research and education at the institution.  The
              proposed instrument will have wide accessibility to campus researchers and will
              be used as a central analytical tool for many NSF-funded nanomaterials research
              projects in the departments of Chemistry, Engineering, and Physics and the
              Institute for Manufacturing Research.  Research areas that will be supported by
              the proposed instrument include discrete nanoparticle synthesis, nanostructure
              by design, and materials processing and manufacturing.  The instrument will
              impact areas as diverse as solid state physics, materials science, electrical
              engineering, chemistry, and medical science.  All of the Principal
              Investigators are currently supported by NSF (and other) grants.  Furthermore,
              this instrument will be an important resource for the training and education of
              undergraduate and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral researchers. 
              Finally, this instrument will be accessible to local high technology startup
              companies and industry, and should play a key role in economic development and
              new job creation in southeast Michigan.

This award from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program supports Wayne State University with the acquisition of
              a transmission electron microscope for interdisciplinary materials research and
              education.  An electron microscope is required to allow visualization of
              nanometer-sized materials that are prepared in many research projects that are
              being conducted at Wayne State University.  The instrument will have wide
              accessibility to campus researchers and will be used as a central analytical
              tool for many NSF-funded nanomaterials research projects in the departments of
              Chemistry, Engineering, and Physics and the Institute for Manufacturing
              Research.  Furthermore, this instrument will be an important resource for the
              training and education of our undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
              postdoctoral researchers.  Finally, this instrument will be accessible to local
              high technology startup companies and industry, and should play a key role in
              economic development and new job creation in southeast Michigan.

