Title       : ITR: Internet Disintermediation of Food Delivery - Spanning the Last Mile
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0216839

Award Number: 0216839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Boyer boyerk@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tomas Hult  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1321,1353,1657,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal 0216839
ITR: Internet Disintermediation of Food Delivery - Spanning
              the Last Mile
Kenneth K. Boyer, Michigan State University
Tomas Hult,
              Michigan State University

During the eBusiness frenzy of 1998-2000, numerous
              new, pure-play Internet grocers promised consumers they could buy groceries at
              prices equal to or lower than from bricks-and-mortar stores, while enjoying
              unparalleled convenience without having to leave the house.  The most prominent
              of these companies was Webvan, which reached a stock market value of $7.9
              billion at the end of its IPO. Webvan, Home Grocer, PeaPod and several other
              grocers made huge bets that selling groceries online was both a growth market
              and a new way of doing business.  Unfortunately, the widely publicized
              collapses of these high profile Internet grocers have illustrated the
              substantial gap between theory and practical application  bridging the last
              mile to grocery consumers' homes represents a substantial challenge.  At the
              outset, many difficulties experienced by online grocers can be fundamentally
              attributed to a lack of alignment between marketing and operations strategies. 
              In contrast, several examples also exist of grocery and other food delivery
              companies that appear to be making effective use of the Internet as a link to
              customers.  In particular, both Tesco (a British grocer) and Albertson's (a
              U.S. grocer) currently have Internet channels for selling groceries that are
              profitable.  Whereas many of the failed Internet grocers seemed to be hoping
              for a large market share, Tesco and Albertson's view Internet ordering of
              groceries more as a value-added complementary marketing channel.

Our
              research project examines four cutting edge companies via case studies of their
              marketing and operations strategies, and via cross-sectional surveys of their
              Internet customers.  Approximately 1,000 Internet customers of each of the four
              organizations are to be surveyed to assess their experiences with online-based
              grocery home delivery.  Field studies of each organization will also be
              conducted via structured interviews and analysis of on-site data to assess
              operational components of food delivery.  As an outcome of the study, the
              project scope is to document best-practice marketing and operations strategies
              and activities in applying Internet ordering to food delivery.  As such, the
              data generated will provide important guidance to other companies regarding the
              best ways to match proactive and responsive marketing and operations
              strategies.  The benchmark data should be generalizable to a wide range of
              companies with characteristics similar to the grocery industry.
