Title       : SBIR Phase II: Latent-Reactive Surface Modification Reagents for Biofilm Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0216532

Award Number: 0216532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $496893             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick E. Guire pguire@surmodics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SurModics, Inc.
	      9924 West Seventy Fourth Street
	      Eden Prairie, MN  55344    612/829-2707

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1630,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project continues the
              development of new thermally activable reagents for bonding microbicidal
              polymers to inner surfaces of a variety of opaque tubing materials, initiated
              in Phase I under the Advanced Materials and Manufacturing (AM) topic, Surface
              Engineering subtopic (F). Materials have been developed with bulk physical
              properties needed for transport of aqueous mixtures; however, the development
              of biofilm on the wet surfaces is a continuing serious problem in the dental,
              pharmaceutical, food processing, and marine transport industries. Surface
              modification of waterlines could decrease the formation of biofilm while
              retaining the desired bulk properties of the tubing. Photochemistry has been
              proven commercially successful in enhancing the surface properties of medical
              devices with radical-based surface modification initiated by RF plasma or
              ultraviolet light. However, these energy sources are not effective for
              modifying the inner surfaces of opaque tubes such as waterlines used with
              dental units and plumbing in pharmaceutical plants. This project is designed to
              develop latent-reactive radical generators activatible with thermal energy
              which penetrates these opaque devices. This innovative approach to scheduled
              activation of radical generators will provide a method to modify inert surfaces
              which cannot be activated with external light or plasma sources.
    
              Microbial colonization and biofilm formation remain a major cost and threat to
              human health and product quality for dental and pharmaceutical industries,
              health care and public lodging, and marine vessel utilization. Successful
              development of microbicidal and antifouling coating technology for the luminal
              surface of opaque transport and storage vessels for aqueous liquid ingestible
              products, constitute an incremental market size of tens of millions of dollars,
              not subject to current commercial coating technology.

