Title       : Acquisition of Affymetrix GeneChip Microarray Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0216183

Award Number: 0216183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger P. Wise rpwise@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Reecy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Whitham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Tuggle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Iowa State University to acquire instrumentation for
              the analysis of DNA oligonucleotide microarrays that allow the parallel
              evaluation of up to 22,500 genes in a single experiment.  This system will
              enable researchers at ISU to employ state-of-the-art genomics technology to a
              variety of plant, animal, and human research topics including; the molecular
              characterization of genes coincident with disease, response to biotic or
              abiotic stresses, or cellular development.

Oligonucleotide-based microarrays
              can already be purchased which have been designed for genome analysis of a
              number of different species.  Research programs at Iowa State University that
              will be most advantaged by this system are those investigating questions in
              development, metabolic networking, biotic and abiotic stresses, and that
              involve Arabidopsis, Triticeae (barley/wheat), yeast, Drosophila, C. elegans,
              mouse, rat, cattle, or human microarrays.  A typical experiment could involve
              an organism infected with a pathogen compared to a control sample that was not
              infected.  Messenger RNA would be extracted from both samples and then used to
              probe the oligonucleotide microarrays.  This RNA contains the genetic code for
              the specific genes that are active during pathogen infection.  The new
              instrumentation facilitates highly quantitative assessment of the expression
              levels of each of the 22,500 genes in the two samples, thus, comparison of the
              two sets of data would point out genes that are correlated with disease
              responses.

The use of this technology will make it possible to
              systematically study how genes contribute to complex phenotypes ranging from
              disease, response to external stimuli, and normal growth and development.  The
              rapid discovery of new genes associated with such complex traits is expected to
              lead to novel discoveries in medicine and agriculture.  Another mission of ISU
              is to train graduate students and undergraduate students in contemporary
              biology, and it is essential that they become proficient in the theory and use
              of modern genomics tools.  This instrument will be made available to graduate
              students conducting research in the departments of Agronomy, Animal Science,
              Biochemistry, Botany, Plant Pathology, and Zoology & Genetics as well as in the
              interdepartmental graduate programs in Genetics, Plant Physiology, Ecology &
              Evolutionary Biology, and Molecular, Cellular, & Developmental Biology.  In
              addition, several students from a NSF-funded REU (Research Experience for
              Undergraduates, Undergraduate Research Experience in Molecular Biotechnology
              and Genomics) program will have access to this advanced technology each summer.
               The REU program focuses on students from traditional minority universities and
              students from small Midwestern liberal arts colleges.  Half of the students are
              members of under-represented groups and half are women.  Thus, the
              instrumentation system will be integrated into both the graduate and
              undergraduate education programs at ISU.


