Title       : Acquisition of a Low Temperature Near-Field Scanning Optical Microscope/Scanning
               Probe Microscope (NSOM/SPM) for Spectroscopic Studies of Structures Down to the
               Nanometer-Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0216681

Award Number: 0216681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clive H. Perry c.perry@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J T. Sage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Heiman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan E. Israeloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Srinivas Sridhar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program is for the
              acquisition of a low temperature Near-field Scanning Optical
              Microscope/Scanning Probe Microscope (NSOM/SPM) for light emission
              spectroscopic studies of structures down to the nanometer-scale. Such a
              powerful combination will allow the simultaneous recording of topographical and
              spectroscopic data, with conventional far-field imaging, confocal microscopy,
              atomic force microscopy (AFM), and near-field optics in a single system.
              Examples include NSOM imaging/spectroscopy of nanowire arrays, quantum dots,
              and related III-V and magnetic semiconductor heterostructures, NSOM
              fluorescence of disordered polymers, glasses, super-cooled liquids, and single
              molecule fluorescence studies of proteins. Novel experiments are also proposed
              to explore issues in quantum chaos at optical wavelengths using suitably
              fabricated structures. The Nanonics Imaging Ltd. NSOM/SPM-100 confocal system
              is able to perform simultaneous NSOM and AFM imaging. Metal-coated tips will be
              used for the development of ballistic electron emission microscopy of
              semiconductor samples simultaneously with light emission spectroscopy. The
              instrument has the potential of satisfying many diverse users including
              identifying and building basic skill sets for undergraduate and graduate
              students and to train talented technicians. It will be a complementary tool to
              the ultra high vacuum Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM/AFM) and a micro-Raman
              systems currently available in the physics department at Northeastern
              University that are devoted to the promotion of research and educational
              programs in nano- and biomolecular-science.
 
This is an instrument award to
              Northeastern University for a Near-field Scanning Optical Microscope/Scanning
              Probe Microscope (NSOM/SPM) with analytical light emission spectroscopic (LES)
              capabilities. The new facility provides a complimentary platform for the
              universal integration of several other forms of frontier microscopies, such as
              an ultra high vacuum scanning tunneling microscope/atomic force microscope and
              micro-Raman systems, that are currently in use in their physics department
              today. The instrumentation will enable the user to make direct comparisons
              between the topographical and optical/spectroscopic properties of samples down
              to the nanometer scale. The instrument is equipped with a variable temperature
              capability from room temperature to10K and the proposal calls for future
              development of ballistic electron emission spectroscopy (BEES) using
              metal-coated tips for complementary BEES/LES studies of semiconductor
              heterostructures.
The facility has two central goals: 
1) Collaborative
              research using NSOM imaging/spectroscopy to explore issues in quantum chaos at
              optical wavelengths; studies of quantum dots, and magnetic semiconductors for
              "spintronic" applications; and NSOM fluorescence of disordered polymers,
              glasses; and single molecule fluorescence studies of proteins.
2) Education
              and hands-on training of undergraduate students, graduate students, and
              talented technicians in nanometer-scale characterization techniques. 
The
              instrument request includes 33% matching funds provided by Northeastern
              University and a substantial discount by the instrument manufactures.

