Title       : Establishing A Computer Laboratory for Student/Faculty Economics Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0216112

Award Number: 0216112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96843              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Handy jhandy@morehouse.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Eagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenwood Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Gissy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morehouse College
	      830 Westview Drive S W
	      Atlanta, GA  303101427    404/681-2800

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
              award, the economics faculty at Morehouse College will develop a research
              computer laboratory to improve the quality and scope of research activities in
              economics and other related disciplines. The research computer lab will enhance
              the economics department's capacity to model and investigate substantive
              economic and social issues using national and international data sets employing
              well-designed econometric models. The department also will rely on this
              broadened instrumentation to augment student research within specific courses. 
              Faculty and student researchers will carry out econometrics projects in urban
              economics, international economics, macroeconomics, public finance, economic
              development, environmental and health economics, labor economics and other
              socioeconomic research.  
	
The effort to significantly improve the number of
              computer applications for both student and faculty research is central to the
              department's strategic plan to strengthen economics and business education at
              Morehouse College, and to increase the number of Morehouse graduates pursuing
              graduate training in economics, public policy, and international affairs. 
              Thus, in addition to strengthening the economics curriculum, this effort will
              significantly expand the amount of computer-based student research vital to
              increasing the pool of undergraduates applying to graduate programs.  

The
              lab also will be available to students and faculty in the political science
              department's Brisbane Institute, which will utilize the facility to conduct
              voting and political behavior research.  In addition, the computer research lab
              will help the Division of Economics and Business address important social
              issues across the entire economics and business curriculum.  Within the
              division, the marketing research course will utilize the econometrics research
              lab, as will the management faculty and students who do behavioral and social
              research.  This lab, therefore, will be an important tool for the growth and
              development of the economic research program, related divisional business
              research, and political behavior research efforts.   

The MRI funding will
              underwrite a new effort aimed at addressing the needs and interests of
              students, the economics faculty, and other related faculty to expand the
              college's policy research capacity.  The department is proposing an ambitious
              and forward looking program to begin an expansion of their infrastructure over
              three years to take advantage of data downloads from the University of Michigan
              Inter-University Consortium of Political and Social Research, to expand the
              climate of serious faculty/student research, and to improve the traditional
              lecture learning approach with something more interesting, important and useful
              for cognitive development.  

The project is important for many reasons.  It
              will increase the opportunities for Morehouse College faculty and students to
              engage in policy research, presentations, and programs.  It will increase the
              depth and relevance of economics and business-related courses in their coverage
              of national and international issues through improved computer-based student
              projects and papers.  Over time, it is expected that these activities will
              increase the number of students applying to Ph.D. programs in economics and
              public policy, thereby helping to expand the pool of highly trained African
              American economists and policy analysts. 




