Title       : Acquisition of a Virtual Presence Surface Profiling Microscope for
               Nanomanipulation and Nanoassembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0216347

Award Number: 0216347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153553             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Cohn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce W. Alphenaar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mahendra K. Sunkara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis P. Zamborini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Since the invention of the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) in
              1982 and the atomic force microscope (AFM) in 1986 there have been many vivid
              demonstrations of nanometer, molecular and even atomic -scale manipulation.
              Performing such experiments usually is non-trivial, tedious and labor
              intensive. Probably the most critical limitation to the wider use of
              nanometer-scale manipulation with commercial scanning probe microscopes (SPM)
              is their lack of real-time, interactive feedback. With current SPM's an object
              is found by scanning the surface to produce an image. Then the tip is
              positioned on or near the object. Mechanical forces are applied to move the
              object by typing in a tip motion command. The result of the operation is
              evaluated by re-imaging. This tedious procedure may need to be repeated
              countless times to achieve the objective (of say. bringing two nanoparticles on
              a surface into contact.) The SPM electronics do provide signals that could be
              used to make this process more interactive: however, traditional SPM interfaces
              are designed primarily to scan and collect an image, which can delay access to
              a single image data set by a few minutes. A related problem is that sight is
              not the best sense to use for all applications. For instance, even when two
              nanoparticles appear to be touching in the scanned image, they might instead be
              separated by a gap smaller than the width of the probe tip. Using the sense of
              touch it might be possible to feel when the particles are engaged. The
              increasing value and importance of nanometer-scale manipulation and assembly,
              both in fundamental and applied research, requires SPM interfaces that provide
              real-time interactivity.

A University of North Carolina research group
              developed the first such commercial interface to a SPM, which in now being
              marketed through 3rdTech. Inc. The interface provides the operator a "virtual
              presence" on the surface of the sample. The operator views the surface
              topography in three dimensions from a chosen perspective, illumination and
              shading. A six degrees of freedom joystick is used to position the tip and
              manipulate objects on the sample surface. The operator can scan the tip over
              the surface in a non-perturbing "tapping mode" and feel the topography through
              the joystick. Then the SPM is switched to "contact mode" to apply prescribed
              forces (again, through the joystick) to move or modify the object. Force versus
              position of the manipulation is recorded to provide a quantitative
              understanding of the effect of (either in-plane or out-of-plane) forces applied
              to the object. Thus, the force-feedback or "haptic" interface enables the
              operator to find objects on the surface, to correct for thermal drifts and
              hysteresis in the piezoscanner in-real time, and to immediately determine the
              positional change after a manipulation. This tactile sense, in particular,
              greatly enhances the capabilities of the SPM as a nanomanipulation tool.
              Accelerated three-dimensional image rendering further assists the operator in
              viewing objects as they are moved or modified.

The virtual presence SPM has
              been used to find the seam between two nanotubes and then to separate the
              nanotubes by pressing on the seam. Also, this SPM has been used to
              qualitatively feel (and also quantitatively measure) differences in how
              smoothly a nanotube rolls as it is pushed in different directions on a graphite
              surface. This result reflects the degree to which the atomic lattices of the
              graphite and the nanotube mesh. The virtual presence interface greatly enhances
              intuition, which is essential for using the SPM for fundamental discovery and
              for simplifying the custom assembly and fabrication of nanostructures.

A
              3rdTech virtual presence SPM will be acquired and installed. It will be used
              regularly in several ongoing research studies, in a hands-on laboratory class
              in nanotechnology practice, and in outreach presentations to secondary schools
              and the general public. The instrument will significantly enhance the
              capabilities of the proposers to measure electronic and mechanical properties
              of nanotubes, nanowires, nanoparticles and biological materials, and to
              construct networks, clusters and suspended structures with these materials.
              General interest demonstrations of the instrument will vividly illustrate the
              current abilities of man to probe, interact with, and manipulate the nanoworld.
              These outreach activities can profoundly influence more students to pursue
              education in scientific disciplines and promote increased public support of
              science.

