Title       : Acquisition of a High-Resolution Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope for
               Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0216492

Award Number: 0216492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $800000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norbert F. Scherer nfschere@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Josephs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Heinrich Jaeger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,9184,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Norbert F.
              Scherer and colleagues at the University of Chicago will acquire a
              high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscope (S/TEM) for
              interdisciplinary nanoscience research.  The STEM will be used to study systems
              in nano-physics, nano-chemistry, and nano-biology.  Some of the applications
              include characterization of nanocrystals; diblock copolymer used for making
              nanoparticle array wires; phase separation and structure studies for
              electroactive diblock copolymers; hemoglobin fiber formation and sickle cell
              anemia; genome-scale genetic analysis and fabrication of nano-structured
              materials with novel properties; biomembranes; high resolution e-beam writing
              using photoresists; and new direct methods of pattern formation.  

Much of
              the research at the forefront of structural and cell biology and nanoscience
              requires routine characterization of specimens by a combination of transmission
              electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning transmission electron microscopy
              (S/TEM).  High-end TEM is unsurpassed in terms of image resolution and ease of
              interpretation.  In addition, with new capabilities such as tomography,
              electron microscopy is entering a new era in which its application can
              visualize molecular structure with (near-) atomic resolution.  
