Title       : MRI/RUI: Instrumentation for Sequencing and Genomic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0216618

Award Number: 0216618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170330             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merrill A. Peterson peterson@biol.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig L. Moyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffery C. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

A grant has been awarded to Western Washington University
              under the supervision of Drs. Peterson, Moyer and Young of the Biology
              Department to support the acquisition of
core instrumentation and software
              required for DNA sequencing, genotyping,
and analysis.  The ease with which
              DNA can now be sequenced, coupled with
advances in molecular biology and
              computer science has revolutionized the
biological sciences. This technology
              is now central to basic research in
many disciplines, as well as integral to
              the training of future researchers
and science educators.

Funding from this
              proposal will facilitate primary research in eleven
different labs with
              current and pending funding.  A broad array of fields
will be supported by
              this instrumentation, including Conservation Biology,
Microbial Diversity,
              Evolutionary Biology, Plant Functional Genomics,
Developmental Genetics, and
              Protein Biochemistry. State of the art
instrumentation will further enable
              grant procurement and renewal by
allowing us to perform rigorous research
              using modern techniques. This core
instrumentation will also enhance our
              ability to attract and retain capable
professors/researchers.

In addition
              to establishing and maintaining externally-funded research
programs, we are
              dedicated to the integration of research and training
through the mentoring of
              undergraduates in faculty research labs. This
training will allow our students
              to continue to be recognized regionally
and nationally with jobs in the
              biotechnology industry, admission to
graduate and professional schools, and
              pre-doctoral awards.  Furthermore,
we are revising our core biology curriculum
              with a primary focus on the
integration of molecular biology approaches at all
              class levels.  In all,
over 500 undergraduate students per year will directly
              benefit from this
instrumentation through instruction in the Biology
              Department. Through
WWU's Integrated Laboratory Network the equipment
              supported by this grant
will be accessible to affiliated programs in the
              College of Arts and
Sciences and the Huxley College of Environmental Studies,
              as well as to
future K-12 science educators enrolled in the Woodring College
              of
Education. In all, a broad spectrum of people, ranging from faculty
              and
undergraduates to K-12 science students will benefit. Access to
              automated
DNA sequencing and genotyping technologies will enhance student
              education
and professional opportunities while furthering fundamental
              science
research.


