Title       : Acquisition of Instruments for Environmental Research and Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0216812

Award Number: 0216812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72234              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pauline Lindo linpv@aamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernst Cebert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zachary Senwo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Teferi Tsegaye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alabama A&M University
	      P O BOX 285
	      Normal, AL  357620285    205/859-7011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:      
	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Pauline Lindo at Alabama A&M
              University towards the purchase of an ICP-MS instrument for conducting
              environmental research and training in the Dept. of Plant and Soil Science. The
              Inductively Coupled Argon Plasma-Mass Spectrophotometer (ICP-MS) is extremely
              useful in quantifying trace concentrations (ppb, ppt) of heavy metals in
              various media and will be used to identify and quantify the various species
              jeopardizing environmental quality, human and animal health, any seasonal peaks
              of these species, and to issue health alerts to the general public based on
              models to be developed from the research data generated. The research will
              include cropping of contaminated soils to a number of hyperaccumulators, plants
              capable of extracting large quantities of soil heavy metals.  At specific
              intervals, soil and percolating water will be sampled at 6 depths to
              monitor/track movement of heavy metals to groundwater supplies.  Runoff water
              will be sampled almost immediately after each storm event and tested for
              transported heavy metals and species - sources of contamination for surface
              water.  Runoff samples will be evaluated for sediment content, to determine the
              transport rate of heavy metals (in adsorbed, exchangeable, or soluble state)
              across the soil surface.  All soil, water, and plant tissue samples will be
              analyzed for metals and species.  Uptake by plants will be correlated with
              reductions in soil concentrations, to calculate a remediation rate for these
              soils by various plant species.  This project will be repeated in the fall and
              winter to evaluate seasonal effects on heavy metal loadings and speciation, so
              that a model can be developed to predict toxicity levels in soil, plant, and
              water as affected by seasonal variability.  Since sorption of metals from
              aqueous solution onto solid surfaces is an important process that influences
              accumulation and transport in the environment, fate and transport studies will
              include kinetics and mechanisms of heavy metal retention/release on soil
              mineral clay surfaces as affected by inorganic anions.  The data generated from
              this study will assist in designing practical and economical remediation
              strategies to effectively clean up toxic heavy metal-contaminated sites.  
              Measurement of heavy metal species is necessary to determine
              adsorption/desorption mechanism(s), and the instrument will be indispensable
              for this purpose.   

	   The instrument will offer research training and
              development of research skills to faculty, staff, and minority students at the
              BS, MS, and PhD levels through summer programs and internships (for BS
              students), and research projects (MS and PhD students).  This study will offer
              minority students (many of them female), the future scientists, the opportunity
              to learn, grow, and develop the skills they need to launch their careers. This
              instrument will also be used for teaching several curriculum courses at Alabama
              A&M University as an integral part of training.  Collaborators from nearby
              colleges will have access to this instrument primarily for faculty and graduate
              student research and training.

