Title       : Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0216150

Award Number: 0216150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335853             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Howard Berg rhberg@danforthcenter.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erik Nielsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark P. Running  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger N. Beachy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph S. Quatrano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Danforth Plant Sci Center
	      975 N. Warson Rd.
	      St. Louis, MO  63132    314/587-1048

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT

    A grant has been awarded to Dr. Howard Berg at the
              Donald Danforth Plant Science Center, St. Louis, to acquire a confocal
              microscope.  An essential component of molecular biology research at the
              Danforth Center is to analyze the function of protein molecules within the
              context of the living cell.  The microscope to be funded by this grant, a Zeiss
              LSM 510 NLO Meta, is a powerful instrument for imaging proteins and their
              function in living cells. The confocal microscope produces images of much
              higher contrast and improved resolution, critical for the analysis of cellular
              biology.  Another indispensable feature of the confocal microscope is its
              ability to acquire "stacks" of optical sections through a living cell, which
              then can be used to  reconstruct three dimensional images, allowing the study
              of proteins in three dimensional space of the cell. The Zeiss LSM 510 also does
              spectral imaging, giving the added dimension of analyzing the kind o f light
              emitted from molecules. This is a sophisticated tool for simultaneously
              tracking the behavior of many spectrally similar fluorescent proteins and dyes 
              simultaneously, and for quantitatively measuring the interaction of proteins
              and also physiological processes in cells.  The equipment will be housed in the
              Danforth Center's Integrated Microscopy Facility, a leader in applying new
              microscopy technology to the study of plant cells.   
      The Danforth
              Center is a non-profit plant science research institute home to several hundred
              plant scientists and from these there will be undergraduates, graduate
              students, post-docs, and senior personnel bringing projects that will use the
              instrumentation.  The current projects from Danforth personnel that will use
              this equipment include:  investigation of the cell and molecular biology of 
              plant pathogenic viruses (tobamoviruses and geminiviruses) during infection of
              plant cells; investigation of Rab protein-mediated membrane trafficking in
              plant cells;  analysis of proteins involved in regulating plant development in
              the shoot apex;  membrane biology of  giant cells induced by nematodes; study
              of the development of soybean allergen in soybean tissue; investigation of the
              binding sites  of plant pathogenic viruses in their aphid vectors; 
              investigation of enzyme complexes involved in nucleic acid metabolism; and
              study of antigens produced by plant vaccines to investigate their targeting in
              mammalian tissue.  Scientists from regional institutes studying plant biology,
              including Washington University, Missouri Botanical Gardens, and the University
              of Missouri-Columbia, will make use of the instrument.  
     The Danforth
              Center is a leader in using modern tools of molecular science to improve
              agriculture and human health and nutrition.  The confocal microscope funded by
              this grant will be critical in our goal to understand the molecular biology of
              plant cells.

