Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Equipment for Purdue Envision Center for Data
               Perceptualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0216131

Award Number: 0216131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $862011             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christoph Hoffmann   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed H. Sameh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Ebert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ananth Grama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Bottum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1189,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0216131
Christoph Hoffmann
James Bottum; Davis S. Ebert; Ananth Grama;
              Ahmed H. Sameh
Purdue University

MRI:  Acquisition of Equipment for Purdue
              Envision Center for Data Perceptualization

This proposal, developing
              techniques to effectively utilize the information capacity available to human
              comprehension, aims at acquiring the visualization, sensing, and haptics
              infrastructure required for a new center.  The center, connected to ultra
              high-speed network hubs, cable broadcast and high performance computing
              facilities, and on-campus technology incubators, will support applications'
              needs by a spectrum of research graphics, visualization, and systems
              infrastructure, as well as provide development, technology transfer, education,
              and outreach.  The infrastructure includes 3D and next generation ultra-high
              resolution displays, and sensing and haptic devices.  The project addresses the
              challenges posed by the devices with respect to perceptualization techniques,
              infrastructure for supporting data and processing rates for effective use, and
              integration of applications into the environment.  Educational and outreach
              efforts include a comprehensive graphics curriculum built around the facility,
              minority recruitment, and retention efforts, national visualization fore,
              series of symposia and workshops, development of online educational material,
              public domain software, and use of Access grid as a vehicle for dissemination
              and collaboration.  Moreover, the I-Light high-speed optical fibre
              infrastructure (10Gb/sec) will be connected with the facility.

