Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Tunneling Microscope for Development and Analysis
               of Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0216171

Award Number: 0216171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana Huffaker huffaker@chtm.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sang M. Han  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0216171
Huffaker

The PIs propose the addition of an ultra-high vacuum (UHV)
              scanning tunneling microscope (STM) to the materials growth and
              characterization facility located at the University of New Mexico (UNM) Center
              for High Technology Materials (CHTM). The STM is capable of unprecedented
              resolution in probing nanometer scale atomic organizations and their local
              electronic structures. The high level of stability and positioning accuracy
              also makes the STM a capable nano-scale surface patterning tool.  The UNM has a
              strong infrastructure for advanced materials research, including extensive
              growth and analysis facilities described below. The microscope will complement
              the PIs existing capabilities by allowing them to quantify materials structures
              and surface dynamics.

Advanced materials for nanotechnology is one of their
              key interest areas at UNM.  Very broad support for purchasing the STM
              capability is indicated by the level of cost-sharing from their Vice-Provost
              for Research, the Office of the Dean for the School of Engineering and the
              Director of CHTM. The UHV-STM facility will be physically located at CHTM,
              where they have excellent, permanent staff for system calibration and
              maintenance. Any UNM faculty will have access to increase participation of
              students and faculty in the emerging field of nanotechnology and advanced
              materials. To ensure the University-wide impact, the STM will be a multi-user
              facility for several departments (e.g., Electrical & Computer Engineering,
              Chemical & Nuclear Engineering, Physics & Astronomy, and Chemistry) and
              research centers (e.g., Center for High Technology Materials and Center for
              Micro-Engineered Materials). The new surface science capability will increase
              the PIs participation in nanotechnology and broaden their basis for attracting
              subsequent grants and collaborations.

The proposed instrumentation will be
              the 1st UHV-STM at UNM with expansion ports to accommodate vacuum diagnostics
              and growth/deposition chambers. The instrumentation will facilitate research
              efforts at UNM that range from crystal growth to inorganic synthesis. The
              proposal highlights several applications of the variable-temperature UHV-STM at
              UNM such as selective growth of SiGe on nanometer size silicon structures,
              cross-sectional and atom-tracking STM, incorporation of magnetic atoms into QDs
              and nano-scale positioning of QDs. One of the immediate areas of impact is
              strain-driven, self-assembly of quantum dots (QDs) using both molecular beam
              epitaxy (MBE) and metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD).

The
              proposed acquisition of the UHV-STM contributes to the School of Engineering
              initiative to launch a degree program in nanomaterials science and engineering
              (NSE). The School recognizes that this emerging field bodes rapid growth and
              increased demand for trained labor. Education in NSE will foreseeably translate
              to students' increased career potential. Within the scope of the School
              initiative, the proposed instrumentation will produce a knowledge base for
              course development and an attraction to recruit underrepresented students. The
              research education provides a direct vehicle to prepare undergraduate and
              graduate students for a career in NSE.

