Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Raith 150 Electron Beam Lithography System for a
               Nanofabrication Education, Research Training and Exploration Consortium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0216518

Award Number: 0216518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $502768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Feinerman feinerman@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Milan Mrksich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rashid Bashir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory L. Snider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Ketterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              



0216518
Feinerman

This grant will allow UIC to purchase a high
              resolution e-beam lithography equipment (Raith 150) with a minimum of 50nm
              patterning capability guaranteed and sub-10nm patterning has been demonstrated.
              UIC will set it up in a class 100 clean room bay devoted exclusively to
              lithography. The reasons for the selection of this particular machine will be
              elaborated on in section 3c "Description of Research Instrumentation and
              Needs," and are the patterning performance, metrology capability, ease of use
              by a diverse population, purchase price, and annual maintenance cost. This
              machine will benefit 6 other members of the UIC consortium (Notre Dame, NWU,
              Purdue, UC, IIT, and NIU) as well as a large corporate base around UIC and a
              national laboratory. Basic science and engineering research are entering a new
              era where fundamental knowledge of nanoscale materials including magnetic,
              semiconductors, superconductors, electronic devices, bio-materials, fluids, and
              related interface phenomena will be essential for the design of advanced
              devices and engineered systems. A great deal of basic research and innovation
              will be needed as devices shrink below the natural length scales like the size
              of the minimum ferromagnetic domain (100-1000 nm), the superconducting
              coherence length (~ 1-100 nm), or the characteristic size of bio molecules. The
              equipment will enable these programs and many more that can not be described
              here due to space limitations:

UIC, Nanomagentism studies, and
              nanopatterning
Note Dame, Nanoelectronics and high-speed circuits and
              devices
lIT, Nanoelectronics
NIU, Nanoelectronics
Purdue, NEMS for the
              Direct DNA Characterization and Sequencing at the Molecular Level
NWU, Two
              dimensional Photonoic band gap materials for biomolecular
   detection        
                               
UC, Electronically controlled substrates for mechanistic
              studies of cell adhesion and migration.

The additional applications
              mentioned are the 23 letters of support received to support e--beam lithography
              development at UIC that are in the supplementary documents section. These are
              letters of interest and intent from 10 companies, and from 9 non-profit
              institutions. The nano-lithography system will be a part of University of
              Illinois at Chicago's Micro/Nanofabrication Applications Laboratory (MAL). The
              MAL has become a regional user facility for the Chicago area and in the last
              3.5 years it has increased its user base 7 fold with over 50% of the users
              coming from outside of UIC. This rapid growth is due to the MAL offering open
              and inexpensive access, training, and guidance on a versatile set of
              fabrication and characterization equipment. The addition of e-beam lithography
              to the PIs facilities will allow them to greatly increase the participation of
              UIC and the surrounding community in the national nano initiative.





