Title       : Acquisition of an Integrated Network Server System for Research and Education in
               Chemistry and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0216713

Award Number: 0216713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93362              (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Schatz SCHATZ@chem.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chad A. Mirkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Ratner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark C. Hersam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tobin J. Marks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This IMR award provides Northwestern University with funds for the acquisition
              of a cluster of SMTP servers, having a 64-bit operating system, with a large
              memory subsystem and with Myrinet (medium speed) interconnects.  This cluster
              will be used for computational chemistry and materials science research at
              Northwestern University, particularly applications in electronic structure, in
              computational electromagnetics, and in Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics
              calculations where large memory capabilities are essential. Distributed
              parallel applications will also be emphasized.  The cluster will also be used
              in graduate and undergraduate courses in engineering and sciences, and in REU,
              REST, MRSEC and other initiatives which use software that require large memory
              capabilities.

This IMR award provides Northwestern University with funds for
              the acquisition of a cluster of computers that will be used for computational
              materials research in chemistry and engineering, and for related educational
              programs.  The computers in this cluster will have specialized performance
              characteristics which make it possible to run programs that require an
              exceptionally large amount of computer memory, and which in addition allow for
              several computers to run in parallel on the same program.  Research
              applications to be considered include the modeling of a wide range of
              properties of materials, including structures, energies, interaction with
              light, motions of atoms, making films and patterns, and thermal properties. 
              The computer cluster will be used in a wide variety of educational programs,
              including computational modeling courses, laboratories and summer research
              programs.

