Title       : Development of a Nondestructive Microprobe for Research and Education on
               Multiscale Materials Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0216927

Award Number: 0216927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $468041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen P. Mills allen.mills@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry W. K. Tom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Instrumentation Program provides support to 
              scientists at the University of California, Riverside who are developing a
              microprobe that can take pictures revealing the spatial distributions of
              various atomic-scale defects that may be present in an object. Nanoscale
              imperfections in solids can interact to produce macroscopic effects in response
              to applied stress, such as aging, weathering and cracking. Understanding the
              mechanisms for the transformation of isolated defects into significant
              imperfections is crucial to predicting and ultimately preventing failure in
              many materials of key importance to society.  An essential element to
              correlating macroscopic events with their precursors would be the availability
              of images that could show the spatial distribution and organization of atomic
              defects on many length scales. The positron microprobe has an unrivaled
              sensitivity for detecting open volume defects at the parts-per-million level of
              concentration in many materials. The objective is to develop an instrument that
              includes a scanning positron microprobe that can capture images of material
              defects with a high data rate and resolution such that centimeter size samples
              can be viewed with micron resolution. The microprobe will be useful across many
              scientific disciplines, leading to advances in diverse fields including
              environmental science and geology where the examination of rocks could reveal
              pathways for the transport of pollutants and elucidate important evidence for
              the earliest life forms. 
The microprobe instrument will combine (a) a
              positron microprobe for crystalline imperfections and porosity; (b) a
              picosecond laser probe for introducing thermal gradients and acoustic shocks
              and for measuring surface reflectivity; (c) a scanning electron microprobe for
              measuring features at 20 nm resolution on precisely the area of interest
              without disturbing a sample; and (d) a sample preparation and surface
              spectroscopy station. The scanning positron microprobe will have a two orders
              of magnitude greater data collection rate than any existing positron probe and
              would for the first time allow obtaining images at 1 micron resolution over
              macroscopically interesting distances in useful laboratory timescales, ie.,
              several hours. The combination of this unique positron probe with two
              well-established tools, ie., SEM and optical imaging, would enable structure
              studies on spatial scales extending from atomic defects to macroscopic fracture
              on the mm scale and temporal studies from picoseconds to days.  The object of
              having all instruments combined in the same sample chamber is to ensure that
              the atomic scale defects are not changed by remounting and handling of the
              sample and that the stresses on the sample remain the same for all 3
              characterizations.  The proposed instrument will thus have all the advantages
              of SEM/laser/optics combined with a unique positron contrast image linked to
              atomic-scale defects.
Several students will be trained in the details of the
              principles, construction and operation of the proposed instrument. The
              availability of the microprobe will be the basis for the formation of an
              interdepartmental group of researchers focused on understanding the well known
              tendency of systems driven by stress or energy gradients to organize at many
              length scales. 

A new type of microscope combining positron, electron, and
              laser microprobes will be developed that will allow scientists to study how
              atomic-scale defects affect the physical properties of solid materials and how
              neighboring atomic-scale defects are gradually organized into much larger
              imperfections such as cracks.  The core of the instrument is a positron
              microprobe, which has an unrivaled sensitivity for detecting defects in which a
              handful of atoms are missing from their usual location.  By combining the
              positron microprobe with a conventional electron microscope that can resolve
              structures on the scale of 100's of atoms and a pulsed laser microscope that
              can resolve structure on a micron scale, it will be possible to directly
              resolve how individual atomic defects evolve into larger and larger structures.
               With the new understanding made possible by such an instrument, materials
              scientists may one day be able to predict where cracks will form in a strained,
              aging, or weathered object.  This will allow to test and design stronger and
              more durable materials for semiconductor devices, airplane turbines, and
              nuclear waste storage containers.  The new microprobe will be useful in all
              scientific disciplines where solid material properties are important.  For
              example, it may lead to advances in environmental science and geology where the
              examination of rocks could reveal pathways for pollutants to move and provide
              evidence for the earliest forms of life. 

several students will be trained
              in the details of the principles, construction, and operation of the proposed
              instrument.  Once available, the microprobe will be the basis for the formation
              of an interdepartmental group of researchers focused on understanding the
              general tendency of all complex systems to respond on many length scales when
              they are strained.  The ultimate goal would be to find new physical principles
              which would allow us to predict the behavior of a wide variety of seemingly
              unrelated complex systems ranging from systems of atoms in a solid to systems
              of astronomical bodies in a galaxy, molecules in a cell, or organisms in a
              colony.   

