Title       : Acquisition and Development of Two ICP Instruments: Continuous Ice Core
               Elemental Analyses and Other Environmental Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0216552

Award Number: 0216552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. McConnell jmcconn@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
OPP-0216552
McConnell


Faculty, scientists, and students of the Desert
              Research Institute (DRI) routinely need to quantify trace elements and isotopes
              in their research in atmospheric, hydrologic, earth, ecosystem, and
              anthropological sciences. DRI's quadrapole inductively coupled plasma mass
              spectrometer (ICP-MS) is widely used for such measurements, but the detection
              limits of this instrument are inadequate for many projects.  Therefore, the
              Principal Investigators have requested funding for two new ICP instruments: a
              Finnigan MAT Element2 high-resolution, double focusing ICP-MS and a Varian
              Vista-Pro axially viewed inductively coupled plasma optical emission
              spectrometer (ICP-OES) under the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program. 
              Additional funds are requested for instrument development to incorporate the
              two ICP instruments into DRI's recently developed method for continuous trace
              element and isotope analyses in ice cores. 

Continual improvement of
              high-resolution capabilities specifically was identified by the NSF-sponsored
              U.S. Ice Core Working Group as a priority requirement for the continuation of
              U.S. ice core research. Given the high cost of collecting and storing ice cores
              and their potential to provide highly detailed information on past atmospheric
              chemistry, atmospheric and oceanic circulation, and anthropogenic pollution
              across a wide range of temporal and spatial scales, it is clear that the best
              possible analytical procedures and instrumentation for ice core analyses are
              warranted. DRI faculty has recently developed a novel, efficient method using
              ICP-MS to make continuous, high-resolution and exactly co-registered
              measurements of trace elements and chemical species on ice cores. Measurements
              of 15 chemical species and elements on a ~135 meter (M) core from Summit,
              Greenland, and pilot data developed using cores from Siple Dome, Antarctica,
              demonstrate the potential of this new approach as well as the limitations of
              DRI's quadrapole ICP-MS. In ice cores, the concentrations of some important
              elements and isotopes are below the detection limits of the quadrapole ICP-MS.
              This problem also hinders other environmental science applications where
              elemental and isotope data are fundamental to answering critical questions. 
              

While a major objective of this proposal is to significantly advance the
              level and scope of U.S. ice core research, the availability of a
              state-of-the-art ICP-MS and ICP-OES will improve and expand research
              capabilities for DRI and University and Community College System of Nevada
              (UCCSN) faculty working in other fields (e.g., impact of pollution aerosols on
              precipitation, groundwater fingerprinting, determination of sources of
              colloidal material in surface waters, trace element analysis in archeology). In
              particular, as the only ICP-MS in Nevada capable of dedicated, high-resolution
              elemental and isotopic analyses, the acquisition of the Element2 ICP-MS will
              attract new faculty to DRI and the UCCSN system (with a goal of increasing
              diversity) as well as improve and expand opportunities for graduate and
              undergraduate student training throughout the state.  

