Title       : BE/CNH: Agrarian Landscapes in Transition: A Cross-Scale Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0216560

Award Number: 0216560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1792440            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Redman charles.redman@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann P. Kinzig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Myron P. Gutmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Kareiva  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,9169,9186,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Agrarian transformations represent the most pervasive alteration of the Earth's
              terrestrial environment during the past 10,000 years.  Many current
              conceptualizations of these transformations assume a simple linear model,
              however, positing that change is driven by present-day economic, demographic,
              and technological conditions. This interdisciplinary research project will
              trace the effects of the introduction, spread, and abandonment of agriculture
              at six sites in the U.S., with comparisons also made with comparable sites in
              Mexico and France.  The U.S. sites are members of the Long-Term Ecological
              Research (LTER) network.  This project incorporates an integrated, long-term
              cycle that includes land-use change affecting landscapes, altered landscapes
              affecting ecological processes, and both influencing the ways in which humans
              monitor and respond to their surroundings, which engender further cycles of
              change.  The central objective of this research is to identify and quantify the
              ways in which these integrated cycles differ across cultures, across
              biogeographic regions, and across time.  A suite of quantitative and narrative
              analyses will be used to identify the prime determinants of long-term dynamics,
              present-day patterns, and reservoirs of ecological and social resilience in
              these systems.  Analytical approaches will include structural-equation
              modeling, analysis of spatial and causal effects, and cross-site comparisons of
              case studies.  As a practical test of the project's results, approaches and
              insights that includes an emphasis on eco-regional planning and scenario
              building will be examined in the context of conservation planning at The Nature
              Conservancy (TNC).

This project will contribute to both science and society
              in many ways.  It will demonstrate the importance of social science information
              and approaches in ecosystem investigations, expanding the results of the LTER
              network and breaching the divide between social and natural science.  The data
              protocols developed will also benefit other communities of social and natural
              scientists through the involvement of the Inter-University Consortium for
              Political and Social Research (ICPSR), a major national repository of social
              science data.  This project will help to develop general theories on how
              socio-ecological legacies, as well as lags in the recognition of and response
              to change, vary across space and time.  Through detailed case histories and
              quantitative analyses, the project expects to provide convincing evidence that
              humans act not only to disturb ecosystems but also monitor ecosystem values and
              respond to maintain stability and minimize crises.  Project results will
              provide information of direct use to policy makers, TNC, and land managers by
              using an approach that explicitly relates socio-ecological processes to varying
              levels of political organization.  The cross-scale data collection and analyses
              are expected to demonstrate that some patterns of human-ecological interactions
              are surprisingly long term, vary across space and time, and are non-linear. 
              The project's most significant long-term contribution may prove to be through
              education; as this project will train new interdisciplinary scientists at all
              levels of the educational spectrum, inform public officials, and contribute to
              more effective land-management practices.  This project is an award resulting
              from the FY 2002 special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment
              focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.

