Title       : Acquisition of a Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0216174

Award Number: 0216174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clyde L. Briant Clyde_Briant@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Paine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program will allow Brown
              University to purchase a field emission scanning electron microscope.  The
              instrument will have new capability currently not available at Brown
              University. It will provide information about chemical composition and
              structural information. Furthermore, the LEO Model 1530VP Variable Pressure
              Scanning Electron Microscope will enable researchers at Brown University to
              examine materials used in research on such topics as liquid crystals and
              reactive mesogens, biological cells, fuel cells based on microfluidics, organic
              crystal growth, carbon nano-tubes, and upper mantle rocks.  Furthermore, the
              EDS capabilities will allow obtaining X-ray dot maps indicating chemical
              composition, and this is a new capability at the institution. Through the
              NSF-sponsored Materials Research Science and Engineering Center the PI's will
              provide outreach programs to three Historically Black Colleges and
              Universities.  These colleges will have remote access to the instrument and use
              it in their teaching and research.  This program will be piloted through
              Hampton University and then extended to two other colleges. This scope will be
              made available to industrial partners and will be used it in teaching at both
              the undergraduate and graduate levels.

This award from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program will allow Brown University to purchase a field
              emission scanning electron microscope.  The instrument will have new capability
              currently not available at Brown University. It will provide information about
              chemical composition and structural information. Furthermore, the LEO Model
              1530VP Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope will enable researchers
              at Brown University to examine materials used in research on such topics as
              liquid crystals and reactive mesogens, biological cells, fuel cells based on
              microfluidics, organic crystal growth, carbon nano-tubes, and upper mantle
              rocks.  Furthermore, the EDS capabilities will allow obtaining X-ray dot maps
              indicating chemical composition, and this is a new capability at the
              institution. Through the NSF-sponsored Materials Research Science and
              Engineering Center the PI's will provide outreach programs to three
              Historically Black Colleges and Universities.  These colleges will have remote
              access to the instrument and use it in their teaching and research.  This
              program will be piloted through Hampton University and then extended to two
              other colleges. This scope will be made available to industrial partners and
              will be used it in teaching at both the undergraduate and graduate levels.

