Title       : Acquisition of Multiple Instruments for Genomics-related Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0216389

Award Number: 0216389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415553             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda D. Strausbaugh strausba@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	A grant has been awarded to the University of Connecticut under the direction
              of Dr. Linda Strausbaugh to acquire multiple instruments for genomics-related
              research and education.
Recent years have witnessed milestones in genetics
              research as the scientific community has developed advanced methods for the
              sequencing and analysis of the genomes of humans and other model organisms. 
              These collective accomplishments herald a new era in genomics-related research
              and training, providing unparalleled opportunities for new avenues of
              investigation.  It is the goal of this project to transport genome project
              paradigms to the study of a wide range of important research topics and
              organisms, and to train students at all levels in the theory and practice of
              genomics research.  The instruments acquired in this project will provide the
              framework necessary to accomplish these goals.

	Specific research problems
              to be addressed fall into three current areas of interdisciplinary research
              strengths and one newly emerging area that builds upon these three foundations.
               Scientists from Genetics and Animal Sciences will address problems in
              Chromosomes and Mechanisms of Expression that focus upon how structural
              features of the genome influence expression in the context of development,
              aging, and genome changes.  Scientists from Microbiology, Engineering and Plant
              Science will conduct research in Environmental Biotechnology by using genomic
              information and genetic engineering to study the complex interactions between
              microorganisms and their environments.  Researchers in Evolutionary Biology,
              Molecular Biology, Civil Engineering and Computer Science will conduct research
              projects in Molecular Evolution and Comparative Genomics to better understand
              the molecular changes that accompany adaptation and evolutionary histories of
              organisms.  In an emerging, highly interdisciplinary area, scientists from
              these three areas of research will join forces with Forensic Scientists to
              advance DNA typing research by innovative applications of genomics and new
              technology.  

	The genomics-related accomplishments in research and training
              made possible by this project have significance on many levels.  At the most
              basic level, knowledge of the structure, function and expression of relatively
              poorly understood components of the genetic blue prints of many plants,
              animals, and microorganisms will be gained.  This knowledge will be applied to
              several pressing problems facing contemporary society, such as: the need to
              understand the responses of living systems to environmental or genomic stress
              and aging; the requirements for remediation of contaminated sites; and the
              necessity of expanding the spectrum of environmental conditions under which
              plant growth may be sustained.  Equally important to its role in research, this
              project is also a key part of a research-intensive learning environment for
              undergraduates, students in two new and innovative professional master's
              programs in genomics and microbiology, and doctoral candidates. Ties to more
              practical applications should attract students from diverse populations.  The
              advanced, state-of-the-art training possible under this project will help meet
              the demands for a highly skilled workforce required in a multitude of
              genomics-related applications from pharmaceuticals to agriculture to forensics.
                        

