Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for the Institute of Ecosystem Studies' Central
               Analytical Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0216161

Award Number: 0216161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154337             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen C. Weathers weathersk@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                           
              Abstract

0216161
Weathers, Kathleen C.

A grant has been awarded to Dr.
              Kathleen C. Weathers of the Institute of Ecosystem Studies (IES) to upgrade
              IES's central Analytical Laboratory through the replacement of instruments that
              are both used heavily and outdated.  Their manufacturers either have, or will
              soon cease to provide replacement parts or support for these instruments.  The
              instruments are a carbon-nitrogen-sulfur analyzer, a continuous flow analyzer,
              and an inductively coupled plasma spectrometer.  All of these instruments are
              critical for generating data for core ecological research programs at IES, and
              all are used by students.  
Many individual research projects will be
              supported through the use of these instruments.  For example, the instruments
              will be used to generate data: 1)  on the baseline chemistry for both of IES's
              Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites (Hubbard Brook and Baltimore), which
              are components of the NSF's LTER network.  The Baltimore Ecosystem Study is one
              of only two "urban" projects in this network of nearly 25 sites; 2) for the
              Hudson River research group, who investigate many aspects of the function of
              the River, including the effect of an invading bivalve, the zebra mussel, on
              the Hudson ecosystem; 3) for a project testing the global hypothesis that
              earthworm invasion of north temperate forests will have large consequences for
              nutrient retention and uptake in these ecosystems; 4) for research on the loss
              of nitrogen (N) from forest ecosystems after insect defoliation and the role of
              N availability in controlling that loss; 5) for a project investigating the
              effect of beech bark disease invasion on the functioning of the Catskill
              Mountain ecosystem (whose streams are the source of drinking water for New York
              City); 6) and for the IES Environmental Monitoring Program, which has generated
              an extremely valuable record of precipitation chemistry, air quality,
              meteorology, wet and dry deposition, forest growth, forest nutrient cycling,
              and stream chemistry at a protected 800 ha location in the Hudson Valley.
The
              IES Analytical Laboratory is a shared resource: on average 80% of its
              scientific staff and a large number of graduate students, postdoctoral
              associates, REU students, collaborators and visitors use its facilities for
              analysis of ecological samples, ranging from precipitation and throughfall to
              soils and saline waters.   The IES Analytical Laboratory currently performs
              between 50,000 and 60,000 analyses a year for major inorganic and organic ions,
              including sample analysis for many of the 33 (currently funded) National
              Science Foundation (NSF)-sponsored projects.  These projects include PIs from
              IES, as well as collaborators outside of IES whose affiliations vary widely and
              include colleagues from countries throughout the world.  In addition, the IES
              Analytical Laboratory serves as the primary analytical facility for projects
              funded by the National Institutes of Health, the US Department of Agriculture,
              the Environmental Protection Agency, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Mary
              Flagler Cary Charitable Trust, the Hudson River Foundation, and others. 
              Extensive postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate (through an NSF Research
              Experiences for Undergraduates grant) student research is also done in this
              laboratory.

