Title       : SBIR Phase II: No Preparation, Flexible, Dry Physiological Recording Electrodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0216284

Award Number: 0216284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick J. Lisy lisy@orbitalresearch.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Orbital Research Inc
	      673 G Alpha Drive
	      Cleveland, OH  441432140    440/449-5785

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research  Phase II project is to complete
              the development of a low-cost, no preparation required, flexible dry
              physiological recording electrode. These electrodes have the potential to
              significantly improve quality of care and reduce total cost of biopotential
              signal analysis by reducing the time and preparation required to obtain a good
              signal and reducing the total cost of fabricating high quality electrodes. The
              Phase I results showed feasibility of fabricating dry electrode structures on
              rigid substrates onto low-cost flexible substrates. However, further work is
              necessary to optimize the fabrication processes and to ensure that the lowest
              cost and highest performing flexible dry electrode systems and fabrication
              processes are chosen to establish a solid foundation for future use. The key
              objectives of this Phase II project include parallel development of two
              particularly promising fabrication techniques, selection of a single
              fabrication technique for further development, and testing and evaluation of
              the capabilities of the  dry electrodes in clinical environments. 
     The
              commercial applications of this project will be  in the area of physiological
              monitoring of patients in a clinical setting. Physiological measurements such
              as ECG (electrocardiogram), EMG (electromyogram), and EEG
              (electroencephalogram) are expected to benefit from the use of dry electrodes,
              in part due to the reduced time and preparation needed to apply the electrodes
              and in part, due to the elimination of abrasive skin prepping and electrolytic
              gels in the measurement procedure.

