Title       : Acquisition of Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer for Molecular Thin Film
               Research and Education.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0216899

Award Number: 0216899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107341             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilya Koltover ilya@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark C. Hersam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              SonBinh T. Nguyen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Annelise E. Barron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Van Duyne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program in the
              Division of Materials Research will allow Northwestern University to acquire a
              new Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (FTIR) Instrument for research and
              education in the Departments of Materials Science and Engineering, Chemical
              Engineering, and Chemistry.  The proposed FTIR instrument will replace the
              current outdated equipment and will be housed in the Polymer Characterization
              Facility of the Materials Science department.  The instrument will consist of
              two modules: a conventional turn-key FTIR spectrometer with an array of
              attachments for standard spectroscopic techniques, and a highly customizable
              module specifically designed for measurements of molecular structure in
              ultra-thin films of organic molecules.  The former will make the instrument
              easily useful to a broad audience of Northwestern researchers, while the latter
              will allow measurements of molecular conformations in more difficult samples,
              especially in biomaterials and nanomaterials research.  The instrument will
              facilitate the training of undergraduate and graduate students in all three
              departments, by being utilized in laboratory sections of polymer materials
              class offered to the engineering undergraduate students, and a spectroscopy
              class offered through the chemistry department.  The more advanced capabilities
              of the spectrometer will greatly advance the ability of students involved in
              the interdisciplinary bio- and nanomaterials research at Northwestern to
              elucidate and understand the molecular-level details of structure in their
              samples.
%%%
The award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
              Program in the Division of Materials Research will allow Northwestern
              University to acquire a new Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (FTIR)
              Instrument for research and education. The instrument will be housed in the
              Polymer Characterization Facility in the Materials Science and Engineering
              department, and will be used to characterize new polymeric, biological and
              nanomaterials prepared by researchers at Northwestern.  In particular, it will
              enable measurements of the orientation, shape, and arrangement of molecules in
              extremely thin (just a few molecules thick) films deposited on the surfaces of
              solids and liquids.  Such films are often critical in creating the new
              materials for biotechnology and nanoscience applications, governing, for
              example, the interactions of biomaterials with biological tissues, or the
              workings of nanoscale sensors capable of precisely measuring minute quantities
              of substances present in a gas or a liquid.  The instrument will be used in
              instruction for several classes currently taught to science and engineering
              students at Northwestern.  Moreover, students of the undergraduate and graduate
              levels will use the instrument for their research, improving the quality and
              scope of their training as future members of the science and engineering
              workforce.

