Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Cathodoluminescence System for Research in III-Nitride
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0216055

Award Number: 0216055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101723             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Chernyak chernyak@physics.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfons Schulte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0216055
Chernyak

The PIs propose the acquisition of a state-of-the-art
              cathodoluminescence instrument which will enable nano-scale resolution optical
              measurements in-situ in a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). The Gatan MonoCL3
              system for high-resolution cathodoluminescence (CL) imaging and spectroscopy
              will be integrated into a Philips XL3O TMP SEM operating in the PI's
              laboratory. The SEM by itself has been extensively employed in Electron Beam
              Induced Current (EBIC) and in-situ electrical measurements of III-Nitride
              nanostructures. The cathodoluminescence setup is critical, since it provides
              nanoscale information on optical properties, composition, and defect
              distribution.

The CL instrument is equipped with a high efficiency
              collector, which is optimized for the SEM, and transfers light to an integrated
              spectrometer. Therefore, CL signals at the single photon level can be detected
              and low electron beam currents be used. The spatial resolution in CL
              measurements is determined by the range (penetration depth) of electrons from
              the SEM beam in the material, which depends on the accelerating voltage. Thus,
              a sampling range of 10 nm is achieved in III-Nitrides with a voltage of  ~ 1
              keV.

The cathodoluminescence spectroscopy system will significantly enhance
              cross-departmental research projects focused on III-Nitride semiconductors and
              novel materials. These include studies of the fundamental effects, induced by
              electron injection in GaN and related compounds, as well as device
              applications. For instance, the efficiency of GaN photodetectors is determined
              by minority carrier transport, which will be investigated by combining in-situ
              electrical and cathodoluminescence measurements in the SEM.

The broader
              impact of the new equipment will be the deeper understanding of electron
              interaction with semiconductors and nanostructrures as well as the integration
              of research and education in the graduate and undergraduate learning
              environment. Acquisition of the CL system will foster several research programs
              in advanced materials, which are currently funded or under consideration for
              funding, as well as partnership with industry. Drs. Chernyak and Schulte have
              established major activity [I -9] related to the "UV-Florida" program, which
              unites efforts of Uniroyal Optoelectronics and several Florida Universities,
              including the University of Central Florida, in the development of efficient
              A1GaN-based multiple quantum well light emitting diodes. Since Uniroyal has
              specifically expressed an interest in the proposed cathodoluminescence setup,
              there are clear benefits for this academia-industry partnership.

The new
              instrumentation enables outstanding research and education opportunities for
              students in nanoscale experimental techniques. The "UV-Florida" program
              currently supports 5 graduate students whose rotations have been coordinated by
              the PI. It is anticipated that at least 15 more faculty and students (including
              undergraduates) will use the equipment. Knowledge of the state-of-the-art
              cathodoluminescence applications will broaden the students' career options with
              the high-tech companies in the Central Florida 14-corridor.



