Title       : Stochastic Models in Financial Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0216979

Award Number: 0216979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Kou kou@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              A new area of operations research is financial engineering, whose origin goes
              back to the landmark papers of Markowitz, Merton, Black and Scholes (which were
              awarded two Nobel prizes in Economics). It uses mathematical, statistical,
              computational methods and algorithms, along with economic principles and
              intuition, to study complex problems in the financial service industry and to
              help other industries to better manage their financial risks. The research,
              which focuses on the development of stochastic models in financial engineering,
              consists of three projects: (1) Using jump diffusion processes to model asset
              (e.g. stocks, bonds, etc.) prices.  The goal is to improve the empirical
              performance of the classical Black-Scholes model based on the normal
              distribution, while still retaining analytical tractability. (2) Using renewal
              theory to price discrete path-dependent options, such as discrete barrier and
              look back options. The goal is to get accurate analytical approximations and
              fast algorithms to price complex financial contracts. (3) Using birth-death
              processes to model growth stocks (e.g. biotechnology and Internet stocks). The
              goal is to explain an empirical puzzle reported in the Wall Street Journal, and
              to try to understand the recent burst of the ``internet bubble''.

The United
              States holds a leadership position in financial services industry, an important
              sector of the service economy; future preeminence in this industry will rely on
              innovation in financial services and in the technology that supports these
              services. This research aims at developing mathematical tools that can be
              implemented by the financial service industry to better understand complex
              financial products, and to better manage financial risks for both financial and
              non-financial companies. The emerging field of financial engineering is
              attracting many bright students and professionals in engineering, mathematical
              and physical sciences. The field presents interesting new research challenges
              and many opportunities to see academic research impact industry practice. The
              research is integrated with the PI's educational activities at both the
              doctoral and master level, and seeks to meet a high academic standard while
              addressing issues of practical importance and providing graduate training that
              will prepare students for research careers in either a university or industry.
