Title       : Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Liquids Material Research and
               Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0216849

Award Number: 0216849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce M. Law bmlaw@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant is for the acquisition of a scanning probe microscope (SPM)
              possessing both good temperature control and a sealed sample cell for the study
              of liquid samples. The instrument will be used to provide the first SPM study
              of surface behavior of liquids near either a wetting transition or a bulk
              critical point. These measurements will complement ongoing optical studies of
              these phenomena and provide a new perspective on these topics. Some subjects to
              be studied include droplet shapes, line tensions, and surface interaction
              potentials. Droplets on both homogeneous silane-coated and
              hydrophilic/hydrophobic silane-patterned silicon substrates will be studied to
              ascertain the interactions between the line tension and the surface potential.
              Other factors considered include the influence of molecular-scale surface
              roughness and heterogeneity on the contact angle and line tension. The study
              will significantly enhance understanding of the wettability of
              surfaces.

Surface phenomena, such as adsorption and wetting, play extremely
              important roles in many physical, chemical and biological processes. Important
              information about the processes of adsorption and wetting, and how they are
              influenced by surface interactions and by processes occurring simultaneously in
              the bulk, can be deduced by studying these phenomena near either a surface or
              bulk transition point, such as a wetting transition or a bulk critical point.
              The SPM should have significant impact on the education and training of
              graduate and undergraduate students by enabling them to conduct both optical
              and SPM measurements of the same or similar phenomena.


