Title       : Acquisition of a Time of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0216102

Award Number: 0216102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Lyding j-lyding@casper.beckman.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jinju Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ivan G. Petrov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
              University of Illinois Urbana Champaign with the purchase of a time-of-flight
              secondary ion mass spectrometer (TOF-SIMS). The TOF-SIMS system will be capable
              of ultra-sensitive surface and in-depth analysis at high mass resolution, high
              lateral resolution and high molecular weight detection. The instrument will be
              equipped with a UHV sample preparation chamber to perform in-situ experiments
              of film growth and surface treatments. The proposed instrument will be equipped
              with a cold stage to meet the needs of users in the expanding research area of
              biomaterials. The TOF-SIMS will be located in the Center for Microanalysis of
              Materials (CMM) which is part of the Frederick Seitz Materials Research
              Laboratory (FSMRL) located on the Urbana-Champaign campus of the University of
              Illinois. The FSMRL is an interdisciplinary research unit that has been very
              successful in enabling cross-disciplinary research and collaboration involving
              about 130 faculty research groups distributed among seven academic departments.
              The TOF-SIMS is critical to many research programs active at the University of
              Illinois such as: (1) Nanobiology Assays; (2) Molecular Engineering; (3) Growth
              of Individual Neurons in a Living, Cultured Neural Network; (4) Silicon
              Nanotransitors; (5) quantum wire structures; (6) Nanoscale Quantum Dot
              Heterostructures; (7) Alternative Gate Dielectrics; (8) p-doping of GaN-based
              Nitride Semiconductors with Mg; Failure mechanisms in transition-metal (TM)
              nitride diffusion barriers and corrosion-resistant layers; (9) Microchemistry
              of large area solar cell materials. In addition to the above programs, the new
              instrument will see widespread use in many other graduate research and
              education programs. It is estimated that annually 50-75 researchers will
              directly utilize the TOF-SIMS in their programs.

This award from the Major
              Research Instrumentation program supports the University of Illinois Urbana
              Champaign with the purchase of a time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometer
              (TOF-SIMS). The TOF-SIMS system will be capable of ultra-sensitive surface and
              in-depth analysis at high mass resolution, high lateral resolution and high
              molecular weight detection. The instrument will be equipped with an ultra high
              vacuum sample preparation chamber to perform in-situ experiments of film growth
              and surface treatments. The instrument will be equipped with a cold stage to
              meet the needs of users in the expanding research area of biomaterials. The
              TOF-SIMS will be located in the Center for Microanalysis of Materials (CMM)
              which is part of the Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory (FSMRL)
              located on the Urbana-Champaign campus of the University of Illinois. The FSMRL
              is an interdisciplinary research unit that has been very successful in enabling
              cross-disciplinary research and collaboration involving about 130 faculty
              research groups distributed among seven academic departments. In addition, the
              new instrument will see widespread use in many other graduate research and
              education programs. It is estimated that annually 50-75 researchers will
              directly utilize the TOF-SIMS.

