Title       : MRI: Development of a Focused Ion Beam System with Multi-Ion and
               Direct-Write/Implantation Capability for Fabrication of Mesoscale Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0216297

Award Number: 0216297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bill R. Appleton applet@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Aziz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jene A. Golovchenko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports Harvard
              University and UC Berkeley with the development of a focused ion beam system
              with multi-ion and direct-write/implantation capability for fabrication of
              mesoscale structures. Harvard University and UC Berkeley-LBNL will develop a
              new Focused Ion Beam (FIB) system that is capable of producing a variety of ion
              species for direct implantation, maskless patterning, and ion beam sculpting,
              with nanometer resolution. Key Harvard and UC Berkeley faculty and staff will
              establish design specifications based on research needs. Postdoctoral
              appointments and senior technical staff will follow the project through
              completion and into operation. Ion sculpting research by the Golovchenko group
              at Harvard will be applied to fabricate critical ion source extraction
              apertures for the system. The primary ion source, ion beam manipulation, ion
              optics, and fabrication capabilities will be provided by Professor Ka-Ngo
              Leung's group at UC Berkeley. Selected specialized components will be
              fabricated under sub-contract at LBNL, where Professor Leung holds a joint
              appointment. The system will consist of an integrated, multiple-beam facility
              housed in a high vacuum processing and analysis chamber. A compact Scanning
              Electron Microscope (SEM) will be configured for in situ imaging. A high
              resolution Focused Ion Beam (FIB) system will be designed that can be used for
              nanofabrication and direct write/implantation. Ion sources will be easily
              interchangeable with the FIB column for maximum flexibility, including the use
              of negative ions. Systems with controllable, multiple apertures (multiple
              beams) will be explored to increase processing speed and versatility. In situ
              diagnostics will be designed into the chamber to facilitate future fabrication
              and research applications. The completed system will be installed, operated and
              maintained by technical staff of Harvard's Center for Imaging and Mesoscale
              Structures (CIMS) as a new shared equipment facility available to all faculty
              and collaborators for research and education.  


Current research to
              understand the science associated with mesoscale structures has shown the need
              for new approaches to the fabrication of future small-scale structures. For
              example, conventional Focused Ion Beam (FIB) systems utilize Gallium liquid
              metal ion sources and Gallium is an undesirable contaminant that severely
              limits many applications and fundamental studies. A second example of current
              limitations is the need to selectively dope/modify small regions in nanoscale
              device structures. At present this requires complex masking, implantation,
              evaporation, diffusion, annealing, and lift-off steps that become increasingly
              difficult as device dimensions shrink. A third limitation is the lack of
              integrated diagnostics in conventional systems which limit research
              applications. Harvard University and the University of California (UC)
              Berkeley/LBNL will collaborate to develop a new Focused Ion Beam (FIB) system
              capable of utilizing a variety of ion beams/species for direct implantation,
              maskless patterning, and ion beam sculpting, all with nanometer resolution.
              This system will not only provide unique capabilities for research, but
              improvements made in the course of the development will also be of interest in
              the U.S. processing and equipment industries. By operating the new system as a
              shared equipment facility within Harvard's Center for Imaging and Mesoscale
              Structures (CIMS), existing Harvard programs such as the NSF Materials Research
              and Engineering Center (MRSEC), the NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              Center (NSEC), and other faculty and students can make immediate use of the new
              system for research, training, and education. Close ties will be maintained
              with UC Berkeley and interested industries to ensure optimum future development
              and applications of the system.

