Title       : Acquisition of an LC/MS/MS System for Chemistry and Medical School Departments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0216038

Award Number: 0216038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255445             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Borgerding   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jody Rada  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Picklo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roxanne Vaughan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Irina P. Smoliakova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
              Chemistry and Medical School Departments at the University of North Dakota will
              acquire a high-resolution tandem mass spectrometer (MS/MS, QQTOF geometry) with
              an atmospheric pressure ionization (API) source.  The system will be interfaced
              to liquid chromatography (LC/MS/MS). This equipment will enhance research in a
              number of areas including a) the identification of selenium-containing proteins
              and related compounds in plants and in biological functions once they have been
              consumed; b) studies on the dopamine transporter protein; c) analysis of the
              biochemistry of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE) and its metabolites; d)
              characterization of suprachoroidal fluid in chick eyes; and e) synthesis of
              C-glycosides, C-disaccharides, and related compounds.  

Liquid
              chromatography with mass spectrometric detection (LC-MS) is an extremely
              powerful technique used for the separation and analysis of complex mixtures. 
              This will be the first instrument with high resolution MS and tandem MS
              capabilities in the entire state of North Dakota.  These studies will have a
              strong impact in biochemistry.  
