Title       : Leveraged acquisition of a Seattle fault GPS network: Four dimensional
               constraint on seismic and aseismic strain accumlation and release in the
               urbanized Puget Lowlands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0216626

Award Number: 0216626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Meghan Miller meghan@cwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Washington Univ
	      400 E. 8th AVE
	      Ellensburg, WA  98926    509/963-2111

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0216626
Miller

Continuous observations using Global Positioning System (GPS)
              geodesy yield high-precision determination of horizontal and vertical
              deformation rates and their variation in time and space.  This project builds
              on the stunning advances that data from the regional Pacific Northwest Geodetic
              Array (PANGA) has yielded over the last year.  In partnership with the
              surveying community in Puget Sound, PANGA scientists will install a continuous
              GPS network that is optimally designed to determine the kinematics and locking
              of the Seattle fault zone, a major fault within the North America plate.  In
              addition, this network provides important new constraints on the periodic
              recurrence of slow or silent earthquakes, which have been recently discovered
              along the transition zone of the Cascadia plate interface.  Both studies have
              fundamental importance to characterizing the geodynamics of plate interaction,
              they also have broader impacts on quantifying seismic strain energy
              accumulation on a crustal fault that lies in the heart of the urbanized Puget
              Lowlands.  This network will add new constraints to the relative balance
              between seismic and aseismic strain release mechanisms on the plate boundary
              fault that is known to generate great earthquakes (approximately magnitude 9)
              at frequencies of about 500 years.  Finally, this project will foster the
              nascent collaboration between regional professional and academic
              communities.

The Puget Sound surveying community has formed a consortium to
              support coordination of new GPS technology to the urbanized Puget Lowlands. 
              This collaboration of cities, counties, state agencies, and engineering firms
              is committed to installing a "virtual reference system" GPS network known as
              the Puget Reference System Utility (PRSU) that can provide cm-level positioning
              in real time.  Fortuitously, this network is optimal for the earthquake and
              geodynamics studies outlined above, with the caveat that the solid earth
              deformation community has the highest standards for monumentation in order that
              GPS antennas track real earth motion rather than the effects of soil,
              gourndwater or man-made structures.  The Puget Lowlands present the greatest
              first-order challenges to stable monument design:  thick soil horizons, deep
              sedimentary basins in the foot wall of the Seattle fault and a mantle of debris
              left behind in the last glacial retreat require use of the deeply anchored
              drilled braced monument.  Such monumentation is thus critical to making
              geophysically meaningful observations of great precision required by the
              problems posed here. This project funds geodetic quality monuments in order to
              leverage the PRSU GPS network for solid earth deformation studies in a highly
              leveraged fashion. 
***

