Title       : Development of an Autonomous Real-time Remote Observatory (ARRO)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0216279

Award Number: 0216279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1617152            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc R. Lessard marc.lessard@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. LaBelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This work will develop an Autonomous Real-time Remote Observatory (ARRO), which
              will be designed to accommodate an integrated suite of at least a dozen
              instruments, with the goal of enabling reliable multi-instrument observations
              from extremely cold polar sites, such as the Antarctic plateau and the interior
              of Greenland.  It will include a power system and heated space sufficient for
              the experiments, as well as the capability for data acquisition, data storage,
              and real time data transmission via satellite.  As part of the proposed work,
              two prototypes of this observatory will be built and tested for extended
              periods of time in cold chambers, on Mt. Washington, and at the South
              Pole.
	Significant outstanding science issues in several diverse fields drive
              the need for a network of reliable autonomous observatories capable of
              operation in polar regions.  In solar-terrestrial physics, the geomagnetic
              polar cap forms a key window on the interaction between the solar wind and the
              Earth's magnetosphere.  In the field of atmospheric science one vital object of
              study for this new technology is the Type 1a (nitric acid trihydrate) polar
              stratospheric cloud, implicated in the annual austral springtime destruction of
              stratospheric ozone over Antarctica.  For terrestrial seismic studies, a
              central goal is determining the crustal and mantle structure from analysis of
              seismic signals received following earthquakes, a methodology which requires a
              network of receiving stations over the area of study.  The seismic character of
              Antarctica is not well-known, and furthermore, the lack of seismic stations at
              very high latitudes translates into ignorance of the polar regions of the
              Earth's core, since acoustic ray paths penetrating this region can only be
              received at extremely high latitudes.
	While one of the immediate applications
              of the proposed ARRO development is to replace the current generation of
              Automatic Geophysical Observatories (AGO's) in the Antarctic interior, the ARRO
              design is sufficiently agile to incorporate additional instrumentation and
              enable pursuit of a broad science agenda by a large and growing group of
              institutions and individual investigators.
	Finally, ARRO development includes
              several different layers of research and research training.  Students will be
              directly involved in the development, from the initial design stages to
              deployment of the units to Mt. Washington and the South Pole.  The eventual
              establishment of a network of observatories over the polar cap will involve a
              much larger number of students in a broad scientific agenda.  ARRO also
              includes significant connections to industry and government units outside of
              the academic science community, and their participation will sharpen the
              capabilities of these companies to serve the nation in applications of
              technology to challenging environments of cold weather and high altitudes.

