Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Semiconductor Technology Lab for Undergraduate
               Reseasrch/training at Utah Valley State College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0216598

Award Number: 0216598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102068             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex Panin paninal@uvsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Mills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Weber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Wasserbaech  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Brent Barageron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah Valley State College
	      800 West 1200 South
	      Orem, UT  840585999    801/222-8000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary aim of this proposal is to establish a semiconductor technology
              laboratory in the department of physics for students and faculty. We anticipate
              the participation of at least 5 faculty members as researchers, advisors and
              mentors for about 10 physics students per year. Our aim is to serve not only
              professional track students who will continue on to graduate school, but to
              provide training opportunities for those majors who will leave school with a
              terminal bachelor's degree to directly seek career employment. We propose here
              to obtain the equipment necessary to engage in silicon wafer fabrication and
              experiments. We propose to obtain a spin coater, argon laser, a sputter coating
              device, optics table, and optical accessories, ultraviolet spectrograph,
              oscilloscopes, photoresist polymers, and computer interfaces and software.

A
              variety of appropriate undergraduate research projects spanning solar cell
              research to thin film optical elements will be available in our semiconductor
              technology lab. Hands on experience in silicon wafer technologies such as
              photoresist coating and exposure/development techniques, sputtering methods,
              and vacuum deposition technologies will be learned as a matter of course. We
              believe that experience in fabrication techniques for wafers will also be
              invaluable to those physics students who do not continue to graduate studies,
              but will require familiarity with these techniques in industrial careers.

We
              anticipate that our semiconductor technology lab will be versatile enough for
              some of our advanced students to develop research projects in areas as diverse
              as UV and soft X-ray optics, and perhaps in MEMS or nano-type devices. We also
              anticipate collaborations with other departments, such as electrical
              engineering and chemistry, providing students and faculty increased research
              opportunities

This proposal outlines the benefits of establishing a
              semiconductor technology lab at Utah Valley State College to both prepare
              physics graduate students for university programs, and to produce industrial
              physicists, engineers and supervisors and managers for the local high-tech job
              market. This will be accomplished with projects and research in thin film
              deposition, thin film optics, surface physics, multilayer optics, silicon
              semiconductor technology, with possible future investigations into micro- and
              nanostructures manufacturing, integrated optics and other unforeseen new
              directions.

The UVSC physics baccalaureate degree requires each recipient to
              engage in a senior thesis project. We anticipate that many seniors will choose
              to perform thesis work through our proposed laboratory.

