Title       : MRI/RUI Proposal for Acquisition of Laser and Microscope for Optical Trapping
               and Manipulation of Large Numbers of Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0216631

Award Number: 0216631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115904             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabriel C. Spalding gspalding@titan.iwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Wesleyan Univ
	      
	      Bloomington, IL  61701    309/556-3151

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation RUI grant supports acquisition of a 5-watt,
              532 nm, CW laser and research-grade microscope so that the research on new
              particle trapping methods and on the interactions between particles in
              optically-bound structures can advance. Holographic techniques significantly
              extend the capabilities of laser tweezing, making possible optical manipulation
              of matter into complex two- or three-dimensional patterns and shapes containing
              large numbers of particles. This will also provide essential, on-campus
              research opportunities and will result in greater undergraduate research
              involvement. This instrumentation makes possible new course modules geared
              toward research training that will be shared with the larger community.
              Illinois Wesleyan University (IWU) students have helped to develop two
              techniques for non-lithographic means of assembly. The new instrumentation is
              essential to allow this research team to continue to develop further
              techniques. Moreover, this instrumentation offers novel opportunities for
              initiative in the undergraduate curriculum, affecting biology and physics
              majors, as well as pre-engineering students. 
%%%
Organizing micro-and
              nano-components into larger structures or assemblies is crucial to many
              activities and disciplines. The technologies which the IWU research team has
              demonstrated have the potential to impact research in biology and
              bio-engineering, the field of micro-electro-mechanical devices, and many other
              fields where progress has been restricted by the need to configure
              non-lithographic structures at the microscopic level. The most noticeable
              impact may come in the field of Photonics: fiber-optic communication networks
              may benefit from the ability to engineer "photonic-bandgap" devices, which
              could play the same role in optics that semiconductors have played in the
              electronics industry. 
***

