Title       : Software for Measurement of Crop Water Use and Control of a Water-Delivery
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1996      
File        : a9419446

Award Number: 9419446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119116             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Lascano r-lascano@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R L. Baumhardt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In a project submitted to the National Science Foundation, Drs. Robert  J.
              Lascano and R. Louis Baumhardt propose to develop software that  integrates the
              measurement and calculation of crop water use with a  water delivery system as
              a research tool for scientists evaluating the  fate of water in the
              soil-plant-atmosphere system. Their objective is  to develop a software
              platform that integrates calculations of soil  (Es) and crop (Ec) water
              evaporation from measured weather parameters  using a mechanistic model, with
              independently obtained soil water  content and stem flow data. Results will be
              accessible through a user  friendly graphical interface that will also be
              configured to activate a  water delivery system. The software, modular in
              design and written in  Microsoft Visual for MS-Dos and Windows environment,
              first obtains  weather data and calculates Es and Ec with the mechanistic model
               ENWATBAL. Second, the software compares calculated and the measured, if 
              available, values of Ec and Es. Crop evaporation is measured by the  stem-heat
              balance method using commercially available gauges and Es is  measured from
              changes in soil water content using time domain  reflectometry (TDR)
              technology. Third, the software compiles the data  in both tabular and
              graphical formats that maybe accessed through a  user friendly interface that
              also activates a water delivery system to  replenish the soil water according
              to the researchers' requirements. A  prototype software/water delivery system
              will be developed and tested  for an irrigated cotton crop using a drip system.
              Software development  and testing are proposed for two years. They will do a
              field experiment  to evaluate hardware performance and install instruments to
              measure  stem flow, soil water content and temperature, and weather parameters.
               This data will be sent via cellular phone to a computer that executes  the
              ENWATBAL model providing the user with crop water use information  on
              real-time. The advantages of the proposed software/water-de livery  system
              include the integration of real time Es and Ec calculations  using a
              mechanistic model with the unique feedback loop of real time  measurements of
              Es and Ec and the automation of water application.      Lascano and Baumhardt
              contend that the proposed software will be a  valuable tool to researchers
              working on variable frequency and/or  deficit irrigation. Currently. these
              projects use an estimate of  potential (grass) total water evaporation and an
              empirical crop  coefficient to calculate actual water use and schedule
              irrigation that  could otherwise be directly calculated and validated with the
              proposed  software. Furthermore, other researchers working, for example, on 
              optimizing water use efficiency of various crop cultivars, relating  soil
              fertility to water use efficiency, determining the effects of  insect damage on
              crop water use, may use the proposed software to  evaluate their hypothesis and
              field experiments.
