Title       : RUI - Phylogenetic Analysis of the Cetacean Basal Cranium and Inner Ear and
               Study of the Cetacean Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9419898

Award Number: 9419898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhe-Xi Luo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College/Univ of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9419898  Luo   The phylogenetic relationships of cetaceans (whales, porpoises
              and dolphins) provide the basis for understanding their great diversity and
              unique aquatic adaptations. Recent molecular and paleontological studies of
              cetaceans have posed very different hypotheses for cetacean relationships that
              would lead to different evolutionary interpretations of their aquatic
              specializations. To test these competing hypotheses, the proposed  research
              will examine the morphological characteristics of the cranium and the ear.
              Although the basicranium is a very useful source of systematic characters in
              studies of other mammals, it has been relatively under-explored in cetaceans.
              Therefore, a thorough phylogenetic analysis of the basicranium has a good
              potential to generate new data for inferring relationships of cetaceans.     
              Two groups of modern cetaceans, the odontocetes (toothed whales) and the
              mysticetes (baleen whales), have very different underwater hearing mechanisms.
              Modern toothed whales have some inner ear structures specialized for hearing
              high frequency sound that is crucial for their echolocation (sonar). By
              contrast, extant baleen whales rely entirely on the low frequency sounds. The
              anatomical data that are related to these functional differences between modern
              odontocetes and mysticetes are very limited. Little is known of the ear
              structures of fossil cetaceans. As a result, several issues on the structural
              evolution of cetacean ears have not been resolved. This study will examine the
              inner ears of fossil and extant odontocetes, mysticetes and the extinct
              archaeocetes, using accurate techniques of serial grinding, the industrial CT
              scanning, and computer graphic reconstruction. A detailed study using these
              techniques will contribute new data to cetacean evolutionary biology, and test
              hypotheses on the structural evolution of the cetacean ear.
