Title       : Microscale and Mesoscale Structures in Convective Marine Boundary Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  1996   
File        : a9419927

Award Number: 9419927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345693             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest M. Agee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9419927  Agee         This grant will address the dynamic and thermodynamic 
              properties and characteristics of convective marine boundary  layers, through
              both observational study of special field data and  theoretical model
              simulations.  These cloud-topped boundary layers  form in response to cold
              continental air masses that advect out  over relatively warmer water, resulting
              in convective mixing and  the formation of large polygonal arrays of mesoscale
              cellular  convection that reside within the first one of two kilometers of  the
              atmosphere.  This convective pattern may exist as two-  dimensional bands or
              streets, but often (downstream) resolves  itself into three dimensional cells. 
                   During the past three decades a wealth of observational data  for
              atmospheric convection studies has been accumulated from  measurements by
              various means, including radar, aircraft, and  satellites in special field
              observation programs.  From the data,  statistical parameters were obtained
              describing the structure and  dynamics of the planetary boundary layers (PBL). 
              These parameters  are commonly computed in the form of temporal or spatial
              averages  from a few (often from one) records of limited length, while 
              theoretical studies operate with ensemble averages which assume  averaging over
              an infinite number of realizations of random  functions.  Ensemble averages can
              be approximated by the averages  taken over sufficiently large time or space
              segments only if the  underlying random function is stationary (homogeneous). 
              Current  meteorological studies often result in statistically unreliable 
              inference because of nonstationarity or inhomogeneity of data and  inadequate
              averaging distances.  For these reasons, under this  project, data sets
              collected during several field programs will be  revisited by employing a
              recently developed comprehensive  statistical method that provides estimates of
              both statistical  parameters and their statistical reliability.         Large
              eddy simulation (LES) modeling is anoth er powerful tool  that helps provide a
              theoretical understanding of the intricate  fluid mechanics of atmospheric
              convection.  Once again there is a  problem of obtaining statistically reliable
              results, which will be  addressed in this project by extending the above
              statistical method  from random processes to random fields, and by
              approximating  ensemble averages using Monte Carlo techniques.  New LES model 
              development of mesoscale convection in PBLs and proper statistical  analysis of
              the LES model data will also be performed.  The focus  will be on the physical
              properties of convective PBLs with ice  particles and snow precipitation. 
              Model results will be compared  with statistically reliable findings from field
              programs.
