Title       : Basal Lamina Determinants of Luteovirus Transmission: Role in Evolution of
               Virus-Vector Specificity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1997  
File        : a9419807

Award Number: 9419807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana L. Cox-Foster dxc12@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick E. Gildow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419807  Cox-Foster    Luteoviruses are small RNA viurses that infect all major 
              food crops causing severe economic losses worldwide, yet  they receive
              relatively little attention.  To be transmitted  by the insect vector, the
              aphid, the virus must enter the  circulatory system through the gut and enter
              the salivary  gland. The work in this proposal builds on the observation  made
              by the principal investigators that the extracellular  glycoprotein matrix of
              the basal lamina surrounding the  aphid salivary gland regulates, in part,
              luteovirus  transmission and vector specificity.  The first objective of the
              work is to determine whether  species-specific components of the basal lamina
              associate  with transmissible viruses, but not with nontransmissible  ones. 
              The second objective is to identify specific surface  domains on the virion
              protein capsid that interact with the  basal lamina and function as
              virus-specific recognition  sites permitting virus attachment and pentration
              into the  salivary gland.  Since almost nothing is known about virion 
              penetration of the extracellular matrix components which  comprise the basal
              lamina, the proposed work may give  fundamental insight into the mechanism by
              which large  protein aggregates, such as virions, actively move across  these
              semipermeable barriers which would otherwise exclude  them on the basis of
              size.  %%%  If the underlying hypothesis on basement membrane  recognition is
              correct, the research is likely to make a  major impact on our understanding of
              luteovirus biology and  basement membrane fucntion.  It would, furthermore,
              likely  lead to new strategies to interfere with luteovirus life  cycle,
              impacting on a significant agricultural problem.  ***
