Title       : Feeding Lateral Line Sensory Ecology of Lake Baikal Sculpins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9419167

Award Number: 9419167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Janssen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419167    Fish  use special sensory organs called lateral line systems  to 
              detect  water motion and  pressure changes  produced  by  underwater   sounds. 
                The   sensory   receptors,    called  neuromasts,  are usually sheltered in
              canals  but  sometimes  exposed  on the surface.  The canals are thought  to 
              filter  low frequency noise, like that produced by water motion from  stream 
              flow or active swimming, and improve the ability  of  fish  in  noisy
              environments to detect signals  produced  by  other  swimming  animals.  Lake
              Baikal  in  Siberia  is  the  world's deepest and oldest freshwater lake.  Its
              fish  fauna  is  dominated by sculpins which have evolved unusual lateral  line
               systems  that  include mostly  superficial  neuromasts  except  for  a  few 
              species with  neuromasts  primarily  in  canals.   The  abundance of species
              with mostly  superficial  neuromasts  is  a unique feature of this ancient 
              lake,  and  provide  a  special  opportunity  for  the  study  of  canal 
              function.   The  lake  has  29  species  of  closely-related  sculpins,  most
              of which live in the quiet and dark  depths,  but  some  of  which come to the
              surface to feed  at  night.  This  research will examine the search behavior
              and  ability  to  detect  prey  of  the  Baikal  sculpins,  and  test  the 
              hypothesis  that  sheltering  neuromasts  in  canals  is  an  adaptation   to  
              foraging  in  noisy  environments.    Fish  responses  to  prey will be
              videotaped in  noisy  and  quiet  environments,  and reaction distances will 
              be  used  as  an  index  to  prey  sensitivity.  Anatomy of the  lateral  line 
              organs  will be documented using plastic casts of the  canal  systems  and 
              scanning  electron microscopy  to  count  hair  cells.   The  research  will
              determine  the  functional  and  adaptive significance of lateral line
              architecture.  It  may  ultimately lead to an understanding of the design  of 
              canal  structure  in filtering noise and increasing sensitivity  to  certain
              underwater signals.
