Title       : Aquisition of a DNA Sequencer for Plant Molecular Biology Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1994  
File        : a9419876

Award Number: 9419876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Sussman msussman@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Underpinning much of the current research in plant molecular  biology is the
              ability to routinely sequence genes of  biological and economic interest. 
              These genes are being  cloned as genomic and cDNA fragment from higher plant 
              species, as well as from the many microbes that act as plant  symbionts and
              pathogens.  The ability to isolate Arabidopsis  mutants and sequence the genes
              underlying specific altered  phenotypes has introduced a powerful new means of 
              deciphering the molecular mechanisms by which plants grow  and develop. 
              Unfortunately, much of the actual research  time spent by graduate students and
              postdoctoral associates  in plant molecular biology laboratories is occupied
              with the  rote, laborious procedure by which DNA sequencing `ladders'  are
              electrophoretically separated, detected and analyzed.  We estimate that at
              least 30% of their time is occupied with  this procedure, which takes time away
              from the more critical  and intellecutually demanding design of biological 
              experiments.    The purpose of this proposal is to obtain federal matching 
              funds to purchase an automated DNA sequencer.  This machine  will be supervised
              by Prof. Sussman and operated in his  laboratory by a full-time technician with
              salary provided by  state of Wisconsin funds.  These automated, fluorescent- 
              based sequencers are widely used in genome sequencing  projects, and have been
              shown to be a cost-effective means  of saving time and labor.  In addition to
              time savings,  other advantages of the automated technique include the  absence
              of radioactive nuclides and a decreased financial  burden associated with their
              safety and disposal.    Major users of this equipment include 8 faculty with 
              federally funded basic research program s in the area of  plant molecular
              biology.  The laboratories of these faculty  are in close physical proximity
              but are administered through  5 different academic departments (Departments of 
              Horticulture, Agronomy, Biochemistry and Plant Pathology in  the College of
              Agricultural  and Life Sciences; Department of  Botany in the College of
              Letters and Science).  Minor users  include several newly hired `applied'
              geneticists with  active research programs using recombinant DNA techniques 
              for more efficient breeding of improved crop plants.
