Title       : Plant Biology Postdoctoral Fellowship Starter Grant Study: To Investigate the
               Genes and Processes Involved in Meristem Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1994    
File        : a9419457

Award Number: 9419457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Clark clarks@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The apical and root meristem are the most important  structures of the plant
              embryo responsible for further  development.  These meristems give rise to the
              aerial and  underground portions of the mature plant.  Two aspects of  apical
              meristem development are central to its function.  First, the apical meristem
              must maintain a pool of  proliferating, undifferentiated cells.  This pool 
              continually provides new cells for organ generation.  Equally important is
              maintaining the balance between the  proliferation of the meristem cells and
              their subsequent  differentiation.  As meristem cells become distal to the 
              apical meristem tip as a result of cell division, these  distal cells must be
              allowed to enter a specific  developmental pathway leading to eventual
              differentiation.  Thus the apical meristem can be thought of as having two 
              zones, a central zone containing meristem cells in an  undifferentiated state
              (or uninduced towards a  differentiated state), and a surrounding peripheral
              zone  where cells are entering a specific developmental pathway  toward a
              differentiated state.  As a first step toward  determining the genes
              controlling meristem development,  mutations with defects in these two
              processes must be  identified.  CLV1 mutants develop excess undifferentiated 
              meristem cells and may be required to maintain the balance  between cell
              proliferation and cell differentiation in the  meristem.  Two other loci, CLV2
              and CLV3, also appear to be  involved in the same process based on their
              similar  phenotype.  This investigator proposed to investigate  meristem
              development by addressing several questions:  (1)  What is the gene product
              encoded by the CLV1 locus; and does  this give any clues to its function?;  (2)
              What is the mRNA  expression pattern for CLV1?; (3) Does CLV2 function in the 
              same pathway as CLV1 and CLV3, and is there any evidence for  direct
              interactions between these loci?; and (4) Are there  other genes that interact
              with CLV1 and CLV3?  These studies  should provide exciting n ew information
              about some of the  genes and processes involved in meristem development.
