Title       : A DNA Sequencing Facility for Interdisciplinary Biological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9419487

Award Number: 9419487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93711              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willem F. Vermaas WIM@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Valerie Stout  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Dowling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard N. Trelease  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Blankenship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                DNA sequence determinations are of fundamental importance for studies  in many
              areas of the biosciences. including functional biochemistry,  cell and
              molecular biology, population genetics, and molecular  systematics. The purpose
              of this proposal is to streamline DNA  sequencing at Arizona State University
              by seeking funds to establish a  DNA sequencing facility. The major piece of
              equipment for this facility  will be an automated DNA sequencer, which
              currently is not available at  our University and which is requested in this
              proposal. About 20 groups  at Arizona State University routinely use DNA
              sequencing in their  research, and a large number of graduate students,
              undergraduates,  postdoctoral fellows, staff, and faculty will benefit from the
               establishment of a DNA sequencing facility with an automated sequencer.    The
              sequencer requested utilizes an infrared laser diode to excite 
              fluorophor-labeled DNA that is size-separated by gel electrophoresis. 
              Fluorescence from the fluorophor is detected, and simultaneous scanning  of
              four sequencing lanes over time can provide a DNA sequence of 800  nucleotides
              or more with over 99% accuracy in a highly cost-effective  manner. With the
              equipment requested, 22 samples can be sequenced  simultaneously. Apart from
              providing a 30% cost-share in purchasing  this equipment, the University also
              will create a staff-level position  for an individual to run the DNA sequencing
              facility and will bear most  of the personnel cost involved. A Ph.D.-level
              research scientist  (already on staff) will supervise the facility. Nominal
              user fees  (about $5 per sequence) will be charged to cover the cost of
              chemicals,  the DNA sequencer service contract, and a small part (about 20%) of
              the  technician's salary. This facility will provide a highly effective and 
              economic mechanism to obtain and analyze DNA sequence information. An 
              additional benefit is that DNA sequencing becomes accessible to a large  number
              of graduate students who work in research areas (for examp le,  systematics and
              population biology) that would benefit from DNA  analysis, but for whom DNA
              sequencing facilities currently are not  readily available. Also, many
              undergraduate projects, which usually  preclude use of radioactivity, could
              include DNA sequencing. Another  significant advantage of acquisition of an
              automated DNA sequencer is  that when DNA sequencing becomes more efficient,
              students will be able  to gather and analyze sequence information more
              expediently, leaving  more room for emphasis on training in other important
              areas.
