Title       : Radial Water Exchange Between Roots and Soil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9419841

Award Number: 9419841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Park S. Nobel psnobel@biology.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419841  Nobel  The primary goals of the proposed research are to  investigate
              water movement across the root-soil interface  and from the root surface to the
              root xylem.  The focus will  be on how the constraints on radial flow in each
              component  of the pathway change in concert with changes in soil  moisture
              availability.  Structural modifications in the root  and at the root-soil
              interface during drought and subsequent  rewetting will be analyzed with
              respect to their  consequences for water uptake or loss by roots of the 
              monocotyledon Agave deserti and the dicotyledon Opuntia  ficus-indica.  The
              pathway across the root is composed of  several tissues, each with its own
              hydraulic conductivity  that can change in response to moisture availability
              and as  a consequence of root development.  The limitations on  radial water
              flow imposed by individual root tissues will be  investigated by measuring
              hydraulic conductivity for intact  and dissected root segments; the
              contribution of the  apoplast to the radial pathway will also be assessed by 
              fluorescent tracers.  Anatomical changes that occur in roots  during short-term
              drought (less than one month) will be  assessed along with possible changes in
              tissue osmotic  pressure; the importance of such changes in limiting water 
              flow will be anlyzed with respect to two driving forces,  hydrostatic versus
              osmotic pressures.  The responses of  roots to prolonged drought (four to six
              months) will also be  examined, with the focus on anatomical and morphological 
              changes that restrict water loss yet allow rapid water  uptake upon rewetting. 
              Roots of these and many other  species shrink during drought, as perhaps does
              the soil,  leading to the development of air gaps between roots and  soil. 
              Physical verification and measurement of air gaps  around roots will be
              obtained from soil thin-sections  surrounding roots, accompaied by experimental
              assesment of  the effects of air gaps on water movement across the root-  soil
              interface.  In summary, the proposed  research will  investigate how the
              limitations on the movement of water in  the root-soil system change with soil
              moisture availability,  with particular emphasis on the capability of roots to 
              function in drying soil.
