Title       : Mineral Processing Reagents, Iron Oxide-Titania Separation Indo-U.S.
               Collaborative Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9419512

Award Number: 9419512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22577              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brij M. Moudgil bmoud@eng.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Description:   This project supports a cooperative project by a US scientist,
              Dr. Brij Moudgil, and Dr. Michael L. Free, a Post doctoral Research Fellow, at
              the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, at the University of
              Florida, Gainesville, and Dr. N.C. Chaudhuri and Dr. Pradip, of the Tata
              Research Development & Design Centre (TRDDC) in Pune, India.  The objective of
              this research is to understand the basic mechanisms involved in selective
              adsorption of hydroxamate and fatty acid reagents in the iron oxide-titania
              systems.  Physical and surface chemical characterization would involve x-ray,
              SEM, pore size distribution and electrokinetic measurements.  Adsorption, FT-IR
              and microflotation tests would be conducted to identify the conditions for
              achieving the desired separation.  Selectivity observed would be explained on
              the basis of conditional stability constants, crystal structure specificity and
              molecular orbital considerations.  It is expected that the fundamental
              knowledge base generated in this study would be useful in scientific design of
              reagent schemes for processing of low grade complex ores.  Scope:  This project
              allows cooperation of two well known scientists whose capabilities complement
              each other and who work in institutions with complementary facilities for the
              proposed research.  Dr. Moudgil is the director of the newly established
              Engineering Research Center for Particle Science and Technology at the
              University of Florida.  He has had extensive list of research publications,
              including some with Pradip.  The collaboration with Dr. Chaudhri is new and is
              likely to benefit both institutes. This project meets a number of important
              objectives of the Division of International Programs, especially in bringing in
              new participants to the international colaboration, and in the international
              exposure of a new U.S. Post Doctoral Fellow.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
