Title       : Optimum Industrial Complexing, Fertilizer-Cement Plants, Indo-U.S. Collaborative
               Project, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1996   
File        : a9419692

Award Number: 9419692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22851              (Estimated)
Investigator: P Khanna   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ntl Environmtl Engr Res
	      
	      Nagpur, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0313030   Solid Waste Disposal                    
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5919,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9419692  Khanna    Description:  This project supports research  collaboration
              between a U.S. team headed by Dr.  T.N. Veziroglu and Dr. Nelson Nemerow, of
              the  U. of Miami, and a team from the Indian  National Environmental
              Engineering Research  Institute (NEERI) in Nagpur, India, headed by  Dr. P.
              Khanna.  The objective of the research  is to determine the feasibility of
              locating,  building and operating a two-industry complex,  consisting of a
              phosphate fertilizer and a  cement plant, within an environmentally  balanced
              industrial complex at one site.  An  analytical model will be developed from
              data  obtained to produce an optimum mass balance for  the fertilizer-cement
              plants complex during the  first phase of the project, and laboratory  bench
              prototypes will be built to test the  modeling results during the second phase.
               The  focus will be on relating the various  parameters to a cost-effective,
              waste-reducing,  and environmentally satisfactory model for the  production of
              these two materials.    Scope:  This project deals with an idea that is  simple
              and also attractive, but which has not  been implemented yet.  The reason is
              the  existence of unknown variables and their impact  on the viability and
              efficiency of the  procedure.  In this research, involving experts  from the
              U.S. with industrial concerns and  environmental engineering specialists from 
              India, it is expected that these variables and  their impacts will be defined.
              This information  should lead to the selection of optimum  conditions for
              implementation.  The project  will benefit from the complementary resources  in
              the U.S. and India, and the benefits are  likely to accrue to the two
              countries.  ***
