Title       : LTREB: Long-term Studies of Herbivore and Pathogen Damage to Tropical Trees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9419543

Award Number: 9419543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177316             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phyllis D. Coley coley@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Kursar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              They propose to collect long-term data on the rates of damage to young leaves by
               herbivores and pathogens for 35 species of plants in a tropical rainforest. 
              For tropical shade-  tolerant species, over 70% of the lifetime damage to a
              leaf occurs during the short window of  leaf  expansion.  To understand plant
              defenses in the tropics, they must therefore focus on the young  leaves.  Few
              studies have quantified herbivore damage to young leaves, and none have
              followed damage  for more than 1 year.  Even fewer studies have included
              pathogens, despite the fact that, in the humid  tropics, they may be almost as
              destructive as herbivores.  Long-term, multi-species studies are  critical for
              understanding the leaf defenses.  Plant defenses depend on whether a given
              plant species  is attacked by many species or only a few, by specialists or
              generalists, by pathogens or by  herbivores.   How much variation is there in
              damage from year to year?  Do the few bad years account  for most of the
              damage?  Are the major players the same each year, or is there annual variation
              in the  damage attributed to each spe cies of pathogen or herbivore?  To answer
              these questions, they will  monitor damage rates and identify the culprits. 
              Much of the damage can be attributed to individual  species of herbivores or
              pathogens, we will also quantify plant phenology to obtain a measure of 
              synchrony and to identify when major periods of leaf production occur for each
              species.  The work will  be carried out in a lowland rainforest on Barro
              Colorado Island (BCI), in Panama.  Their extensive  research experience on BCI
              coupled with several long-term studies enhance the value of their proposed 
              project.  The 35 study species represent 20 different families to ensure that
              they sample the  diversity of damage patterns.  As the rate of expansion of
              young leaves is the best correlate with  damage, they will include species with
              both fast- and slow-expanding young leaves.   And finally, so  that their data
              are as useful as possible to other investigators, they will include the 14 most
              common  species in the Forest Dynamics Plot on BCI.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
