Title       : Developmental Analysis of a Putative Juvenile Hormone Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1997        
File        : a9419774

Award Number: 9419774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Wilson twilson@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Juvenile hormone (JH) is critical for insect development and  reproduction. 
              Although numerous whole-organismal studies of  JH have been carried out, little
              is understood of the  molecular action of this hormone.  Using a genetic
              approach,  this PI has been studying how JH acts at the molecular level  in
              Drosophila melanogaster.  Previous work led to the  isolation of a mutant,
              Methoprene tolerant (Met), which has  high resistance to JH or to methoprene, a
              JH insecticidal  analog.  Met flies were shown to have an intracellular JH 
              binding protein, perhaps a JH receptor, possessing a reduced  affinity for JH
              III.  There is good evidence that this  change in affinity is responsible for
              the resistance.  Both  the phenotype of Met resistance and the JH binding data 
              suggest that the Met+ gene may encode the receptor.  The DNA  region containing
              the Met+ gene has been cloned, two  transcripts have been identified, and cDNA
              molecules have  been isolated and 80% sequenced.  The work is now poised for  a
              molecular developmental study of this gene and its  product.  Met+ cDNAs will
              be expressed to generate both  fusion and non-fusion Met+ protein. Met+ fusion
              protein will  be used to raise a polyclonal antibody specific for Met+ 
              protein.  This antibody will be used to identify Met+  protein in biochemical
              preparations as well as determine its  intracellular localization.  Particular
              attention will be  given to possible interaction of the antibody with polytene 
              chromosomes to determine if the Met+ protein interacts with  chromosomes,
              presumably as a transcription factor.  Authentic Met+ non-fusion protein will
              be generated for each  of the two Met+ full-length cDNAs following expression
              in a  baculoviral expression system.  The ability of each of these  proteins to
              bind JH III and JH bisepoxide will be evaluated.  The hypothesis that Met+
              encodes a JH binding protein will  be directly tested in these experiments. 
              Finally, in work  designed to bridge to future studies of JH action in 
              Drosophila, novel  methoprene-resistant mutations on the  second and third
              chromosomes will be isolated following FRT-  FLP screening.  The screen will be
              designed to identify loci  whose gene product may act independently or may
              physically  interact with the Met+ protein to confer resistance.  This  work
              will have significance in several ways:  (1) the  intracellular localization
              and JH binding of the Met+ gene  product will be evaluated, leading to a better
              understanding  of JH action; (2) novel loci involved in JH action may be 
              identified; and (3) since Met mutants are resistant to JH  insecticidal
              analogs, a better understanding of this  resistance mechanism to these
              compounds will be gained.  This knowledge may be applicable for resistance
              management  of pest insects under control with JH insecticidal analogs.
