Title       : Exhalation Mechanics and the Evolution of Aspiration Breathing in Tetrapods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9419892

Award Number: 9419892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth L. Brainerd brainerd@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Brainerd  9419892    The  mechanism by which complex biological systems with
              many  interacting  parts  evolve  has  engaged  biologists   since  Charles 
              Darwin.  The goal of this research is to  determine  how  one such complex
              system, the respiratory pump used  for  breathing,   has   changed  during  
              vertebrate   evolution.  Reptiles, birds, and mammals ventilate their lungs 
              with  an  aspiration pump in which ribs, and in some cases a diaphragm  muscle,
              expand the chest cavity and suck air into the lungs.  Air-breathing  fish  lack
              the rib and  diaphragm  structures  that are necessary for aspiration
              breathing.  They take  air  into the mouth cavity and compress it, forcing air
              into  the  lungs.   Mouth  pumps use only muscles of  the  head  region  while 
              aspiration pumps use only muscles of  the  chest  and  abdominal  regions.  The
              transition between  the  two  is  a  significant  change in a complex system.  
              Some  amphibians,  however,  appear to be intermediate, using head muscles  for
               inhalation  and body muscles for exhalation.  This  research  will   determine
               whether  the  use  of  body  muscles   for  exhalation is common to most
              species of amphibians, and thus  is  a  probable  evolutionary step between 
              mouth  pump  and  aspiration breathing.  Pressure transducers, muscle activity 
              transducers, air flow transducers, and x-ray video  will  be  used to determine
              ventilation patterns in representatives of  all  three  orders of extant
              amphibians.  The  results  will  test  the hypothesis that use of body muscles
              for exhalation  is  an  ancestral character of the amphibians, and  hence  a 
              probable  intermediate  stage  in  the  evolution   of   the  aspiration pump. 
              In the long term, this research  will  aid  in identifying the sequence of
              behavioral, morphological and  neural  changes  that  resulted in  a 
              reorganization  of  a  complex   physiological  system  for  function  in   a  
              new  environment.
