Title       : Development of a Novel Optical Trapping Interferometer for Investigations of
               Biological Motors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9419546

Award Number: 9419546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349259             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce J. Schnapp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The PI proposes to design, build, and use a novel "optical trapping 
              interferometer" which integrates the following functions: 1) real-time, 
              computer-enhanced light microscopic imaging; 2) multiple laser light  traps; 3)
              a dual-beam interferometer for measuring nm-scale  displacements of microscopic
              beads; and 4) a feedback system for  detection of force fluctuations in the pN
              range. The main use of this  instrument will be to detect and characterize pN
              forces and nm  movements generated by single microtubule motor proteins,
              including  kinesin, kinesin-related proteins, and cytoplasmic dynein. In cells,
               such proteins carry intracellular cargos and walk in a particular  direction
              along microtubules; in so doing they accomplish various forms  of cell
              motility, such as vesicle transport and mitosis.    The proposed
              instrumentation is required for the PI's research on  microtubule motors and
              vesicle transport. A long-term goal of this  research is to determine the
              molecular mechanism of motility and force  production by kinesin,
              kinesin-related proteins, and cytoplasmic  dynein. Using the proposed
              instrumentation, the fundamental molecular  mechanical events which occur
              during movement will be defined and  related to intermediates in the ATP
              hydrolytic cycle. These molecular  mechanics will be related to the primary
              structure of the motor domains  by analysis of mutant proteins.    The proposed
              instrumentation is based on a prototype optical trapping  interferometer
              developed collaboratively between the PI's lab and the  lab of Dr. Steve Block
              at the Rowland Institute for Science (which  funded the instrument). Dr. Block
              has recently moved to Princeton with  the prototype instrumentation. The new
              optical trapping interferometer  will perform the same functions as the earlier
              version, including  manipulation of beads carrying single motor proteins onto
              microtubules  (Block et al, 1990) and detection of 8 nm steps corresponding to
              single  kinetic cycles of the kinesin motor (Svoboda et al, 1993). In 
              addition,  the new instrument will have fundamentally new features, the most 
              important of which are: 1) Accomodation of an improved assay system  which
              avoids direct irradiation of the motor protein; 2) feedback from  the
              interferometer output to the laser trap, enabling measurement of  isometric
              force fluctuations during the mechanochemical cycle of single  motors, 3)
              increased stiffness to diminish Brownian noise and thereby  reveal more details
              of the stepping process; and 4) three independent  laser light traps to allow a
              variety of manipulations.    The new instrument will be constructed around a
              custom optical bench  light microscope, developed by the PI and capable of high
              resolution  differential interference contrast (DIC) or fluorescence imaging. 
              Single microtubules (or possibly single actin or intermediate  filaments, or
              single strands of DNA or RNA) will be imaged in real time  by digital
              enhancement of the light microscope image. Two laser light  traps will be used
              to capture, apply tension to, and manipulate single  microtubules (or possibly
              other filaments) via latex bead "handles"  attached to the filament surface.
              Trapped microtubules will be  manipulated onto fixed bead surfaces carrying
              single motor molecules. A  third laser beam will be used as the source of
              coherent, polarized  illumination for an interferometer that will track the
              position of the  trapped microtubule (with precision better than 1 nm at 100
              Hz) as it  is driven by the motor on the fixed bead surface. In other assays,
              the  third laser beam will be used simultaneously as the source of the 
              interferometer and as a light trap to manipulate beads carrying single 
              biological motors onto the surface of a trapped filament held in  solution. The
              latter use of the trap will benefit the investigation of  processive DNA
              enzymes using in vitro motility assays.    The proposed research bears on
              several fields: 1) The molecular  mechanism of cell motility, including muscle
              contraction and the  operation of processive DN A enzymes; 2) the mechanism of
              enzymatic  catalysis; 3) nanotechnology and surface chemistry.
