Title       : Aircraft Measurements of Aerosol Physical, Chemical and Optical Properties
               During ACE-1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9419475

Award Number: 9419475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211091             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antony D. Clarke tclarke@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John N. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419475  Clarke     This project is part of the Southern Hemisphere Marine
              Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE-1), which will be conducted in the
              remote Southern Pacific in 1995 using aircraft, ship-board, and ground-based
              measurements of a wide variety of chemical species, physical  and
              meteorological parameters with the central goal of investigating the formation,
              evolution, and optical properties of atmospheric aerosol. In this component, a
              variety of instruments will be deployed on the C-130 aircraft to measure
              aerosol properties: thermally conditioned optical particle counters will be
              used to assess size resolved composition of the larger optically active
              aerosol, various condensation nuclei counters, ultrafine condensation nuclei
              counters, and a differential mobility analyzer to determine the condensation
              nuclei size spectrum, nephelometers for the aerosol scattering coefficient, and
              an aethaelometer for the aerosol absorption coefficient.    The objective of
              this work is to characterize aerosol radiative properties in the region
              studied, and also to develop tools that may lead to a predictive understanding
              and modeling of the remote aerosol and its radiative properties. The following
              specific objectives will be addressed:  Establish a link between aerosol
              microphysical, chemical and optical parameters that can be used to model
              aerosol optical properties, radiative forcing and satellite derived radiance. 
              Examine the contribution of fine particles (e.g. sulfate) and coarse particles
              (e.g. sea salt) and relative humidity to the local and column aerosol
              scattering extinction.  Develop a quantitative understanding of the processes
              shaping evolution of the aerosol in the marine boundary layer during Lagrangian
              advection.  Identify the presence of particles recently formed in situ and/or
              surface derived aerosol (sea salt, dust, soot) in the mid-troposphere and
              examine the relationship of associated air masses to environmental processes
              and sources.   Work with other ACE-1 participants towa rd linking aerosol data,
              lidar data, gaseous precursors, etc. on global, regional and local scales to
              identify key parameters and processes for a dynamic model of remote marine
              aerosol.
