Title       : Re-examination of the Algal Class Chrysophyceae Using Gene Sequences and
               Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1999  
File        : a9419498

Award Number: 9419498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Andersen randersen@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419498  Andersen   The world's freshwater and marine algae are an important
              group of photosynthetic organisms, usually studied botanically with plants and
              fungi.  In the oceans they provide the primary food for marine animals.  The
              Chrysophyceae are one group of algae characterized by their golden color (due
              to photosynthetic pigments and storage compounds); despite their simple
              external morphology, they are diverse physiologically and ultrastructurally. 
              Over the last three decades, active oceanographic exploration followed by
              laboratory studies in electron microscopy and molecular biology have shown that
              numerous unusual chrysophytes were misclassified or simply missed in previous
              studies.  Furthermore, the original classification of chrysophytes, reflecting
              a need for a simple identification scheme, placed emphasis on flagella and
              other external cell wall characters observable with light microscopy, features
              that are now suspected to represent instances of convergent evolution in
              adapting to open-ocean conditions.   Dr. Robert Andersen of the Bigelow
              Laboratory and colleagues will study new collections of chrysophytes from
              Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian ocean expeditions, with emphasis on electron
              microscopy of fine-scale internal features and on gene sequencing.  DNA data
              will be accumulated from both nuclear and chloroplast genomes of individual
              strains.  A modern and reliable systematic classification of the Chrysophyceae
              will benefit those working in areas of marine ecology, biodiversity,
              aquaculture, and marine biotechnology.  ??
