Title       : Acquisition of a Computer-Assisted Light Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1995  
File        : a9419920

Award Number: 9419920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45181              (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Armstrong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Purchase of a computer-asslsted light microscope for digital data  acquisition
              and analysis is  proposed. The sytem consists of a light microscope, the stage
              of which  is precisely controlled by stepping motors in three dimensions via a
              PC  interface. This control provides a vectorial, threedimensional 
              representation in computer memory, the most efficient means of storing  and
              manipulating ob~ects spanning the scale (from less than micron to  several
              millimeters) of a neuron and all its extended processes. The  system will be
              used to: 1) provide three-dimensional reconstruction of  the dendritic trees
              and and axonal arborizations of selectively stained  neurons; and 2) to
              precisely plot and count selectively stained neurons  in a cytoarchitectonic
              context. Data are acquired using either video or  optical overlays. The optical
              mode uses a miniture cathode ray tube  projected directly into the oculars and
              is best for the highest  resolution tracing; the video mode will employ a color
              camera which  will be useful with fluorescent markers. Users will choose
              between  acquisition modes via software switches, even within a session and 
              while tracing the same ob~ect. The software support includes analysis  programs
              for extracting quantitative information such as length,  diameter, branching
              and spine density of processes and for displaying  three-dimensional
              reconstructions. Analysis of images can be performed  routinely in the user's
              own labs, since the software runs on PCs and  Macintoshes which make up the
              user computer base. Also, the station  will communicate over an existing
              Ethemet network to which all users  are connected. The network wlll allow rapid
              data transfer from the  station to individual labs, and provide additional
              analysis options by  remote operation of software on existing larger computers
              in the  department..    The station is designed to faciliate ongoing studies of
              the complex  structure and function of nerve cells. A range of projects will be
               supported, including: 1) determini ng the morphological differences  between
              oxytocin and vasopressin neurons and their neurohypophysial  axon arborization
              as a function of secretory state; 2) understanding  corticostriatal axon
              divergence and convergence, in particular their  relation to the dendritic
              branching of striatal neurons and to  cytoarchitectonic boundaries; 3)
              determining the role of adhesion  molecules in axonal guidance; 4) determining
              whether functional  plasticity in somatosensory cortex is accompanied by
              changes in  cortical neuron morphology; 5) understanding the normal
              organization of  neurons in the basal ganglia and the selectivity of cell loss
              in  neurodegenerative disease.
