Title       : Luminescent Transition Metal Complexes: Static/Dynamic Interactions in
               Macromolecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  1996   
File        : a9419074

Award Number: 9419074
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $371500             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Demas jnd@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,9178,9183,BIOT,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic  Program supports
              research by Dr. James N. Demas of the Department  of Chemistry, University of
              Virginia, on interaction of  luminescent Ru(II), Os(II), Ir(III), and Re(I)
              photosensitizers  with various environments.  The work will be carried out with
               collaborator Dr. Benjamin A. DeGraaf of the Chemistry Department,  James
              Madison University.  The long-term goal is to understand  the effect that
              attachment to biopolymers, vesicles, organic  polymers, cyclodextrin, DNA, and
              other organized media has on the  luminescent properties of these complexes. 
              Of particular  interest is testing the suitability of these complexes with
              long-  lived excited state lifetimes for detecting processes such as 
              association and folding of proteins.  Long alkyl chains will be  attached to
              the metal complexes in order to modify the behavior  of the luminescent portion
              of the molecule as a consequence of  placing hydrophobic interactions in the
              vicinity of the metal.   Factors such as temperature and media dynamics would
              be  considered.  The project will require synthesis of a number of  new
              complexes and use of advanced luminescence methods, such as  dynamic
              polarization and phase fluorimetry measurements. This  research could be aid in
              the design of highly sensitive  luminescent materials to selectively identify
              certain structural  features or to serve as sensors or detectors.    Selective
              and sensitive probes for molecular-level structural  features and changes in
              macromolecules are needed for biological,  environmental, and industrial
              applications.  For example,  reactions of enzymes, catalysts, and gas molecules
              at surfaces  are known be very sensitive to structural and solvent 
              environment.  In this research, the luminescent property of  certain metal
              complexes will be tested as a probe for structural  changes in proteins, in
              order to obtain information necessary for  the design of effective molecular
              probes.
