Title       : The Role of Cap Z in Sarcomere Organization and Function in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1999      
File        : a9419106

Award Number: 9419106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn G. Miller miller@biodec.wust.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Miller  9419106  The mechanisms which regulate actin assembly are responsible
              for giving both form and function to cells.  Actin is a protein which
              contributes to support structures within the cell and to mechansims which cause
              contraction, and consequently it is central to the existence and function of
              muscle cells.  This proposal investigates the formation of, and regulatory
              mechanisms in, muscle cells.  It  would be technically impossible to conduct
              this studies on muscle cells from higher organisms because the ability for
              genetic manipulation is not possible.  The PI uses Drosophila muscle
              development as a model system for the analysis.  This system is the seminal
              system for genetic analysis in eukaryotic cells and can easily be employed for
              studies involving genetic manipulation.  Since muscle cells organization is
              highly conserved among eukaryotics results from this system are anticipated to
              be easily extrapolated to other eukaryotic cells  %%%  The PI is interested how
              actin polymerization is controlled and how different actin-containing
              structures are formed and positioned in many different types of cells in
              eukaryotic organisms.  Of particular interest is the process of muscle
              sarcomere assembly.  A highly regular array of actin filaments is present, the 
              location and organization of which is essential to muscle function.  To
              understand how this regular array  of actin filaments is generated, the PI is
              studying the actin binding protein, Cap Z.  Cap Z is a heterodimeric protein
              (alpha and beta subunits) that binds to and blocks polymerization at the barbed
              (fast-growing) end of an actin filament in vitro.  It is located at the Z-line
              of muscle in vertebrates, where the barbed end of actin filaments terminate and
              are anchored.  Cap Z's properties in vitro and its localization in muscle
              suggest that it is a key component in controlling actin polymerization and/or
              anchoring actin filaments.  However, definitive evidence for its function in
              vivo is lacking.  The PI will obtain direct inform ation about how the actin
              filament organization of muscle is generated and in particular, the role of Cap
              Z, by making mutations in the gene that encodes one of the Cap Z subunits
              (beta) in the fruit fly, Drosophila.  Drosophila is an attractive model system
              for studies on muscle function because its muscles are organized similarly to
              vertebrate muscles, yet it can manipulated using genetic techniques that are
              difficult or impossible in vertebrates.  The PI will study the development,
              organization and function of muscles in Cap Z beta mutant flies and study Cap
              Z's distribution in flies that carry mutations in other sarcomere components. 
              Through these studies  the PI will determine how different proteins of the
              muscle interact to generate its structure.  These studies should be applicable
              to a wide variety of organisms  ***
