Title       : The Orientation System of a Night-Migrating Songbird
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1995    
File        : a9419664

Award Number: 9419664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186045             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Able kpa@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Orientation System of a Night-migrating Songbird    Kenneth P. Able,
              Principal Investigator    Non-technical Summary    The orientation and
              navigation performed by birds that migrate  long distances are among the most
              complex behaviors performed by  animals.  Their reliance on several interacting
              compass systems  provides the migrants with flexible orientation behavior that 
              enables them to cope with the variety of environmental conditions  and
              navigation problems that may be encountered enroute.  The  compasses used by
              migratory birds (magnetic, star, sun and  polarized compasses) interact during
              the development of  orientation abilities in young birds and also in mature, 
              experienced migrants.  These interactions take the form of  calibration of one
              system by another.  This project will use two  approaches to determine the
              nature of these interactions.  First,  birds will be hand-raised under
              conditions in which their  experience with relevant orientation cues can be
              controlled and  manipulated.  In this way, the interactions and calibrations
              that  occur during the development of compass orientation abilities in  the
              young animal can be explored.  Experiments with adult birds  will reveal the
              extent and nature of plasticity that persists  throughout the life of a
              migratory bird.  Migratory orientation  provides some of the most elegant
              examples of the interplay of  genetically-based learning predispositions with
              experience in the  development and control of behavior.
