Title       : Research on Ocean-Atmosphere Variability and Ecosystem Response in the Ross Sea
               (ROAVERRS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1997    
File        : a9419605

Award Number: 9419605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224012             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Dunbar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,1302,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is an interdisciplinary study, titled Research  on Ocean-Atmosphere
              Variability and Ecosystem Response in  the Ross Sea (ROAVERRS), of atmospheric
              forcing, ocean  hydrography, sea ice dynamics, primary productivity, and 
              pelagic-benthic coupling in the southwestern Ross Sea,  Antarctica.  The
              primary goal is to examine how changes in  aspects of the polar climate system,
              in this case wind and  temperature, combine to influence marine productivity on
              a  large antarctic continental shelf.  In the Ross Sea,  katabatic winds and
              mesocyclones influence the spatial and  temporal distribution of sea ice as
              well as the upper ocean  mixed layer depth, and thus control primary production
               within the sea ice as well as in the open water system.  The structure,
              standing stock and productivity of bottom-  dwelling biological communities are
              also linked to  meteorological processes through interseasonal and  interannual
              variations in horizontal and vertical fluxes of  organic carbon produced in the
              upper ocean.    Linkages among the atmospheric, oceanic, and biological 
              systems will be investigated during a three-year field  study of the
              southwestern Ross Sea ecosystem.  Direct  measurements will include regional
              wind and air  temperatures derived from automatic weather stations; ice  cover,
              ice movement, and sea surface temperatures derived  from a variety of
              satellite-based sensors; hydrographic  characteristics of the upper ocean and
              primary productivity  in the ice and in the water derived from research cruises
               and satellite studies; vertical flux of organic material  and water movement
              derived from oceanographic moorings  containing sediment traps and current
              meters, and the  abundance, distribution, and respiration rates of  biological
              communities on the sea floor, derived from box  cores, benthic photographs and
              shipboard incubations.    Based on archived meteorological data, it is expected
              that  the atmospheric variability during the study period will be  such that
              changes in airflow pat terns and their influence  on oceanographic and
              biological patterns can be monitored,  and their direct and indirect linkages
              that are the focus  of the research can be deduced.  Results from this study 
              will contribute to our knowledge of atmospheric and oceanic  forcing of marine
              ecosystems, and lead to a better  understanding of marine ecosystem response to
              climatic  variations.  ***
