Title       : Equipment for X-ray Analysis of Biological Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9419592

Award Number: 9419592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175810             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon D. Robertus   (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Rhodes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Hoffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin L. Hackert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to upgrade facilities for analysis of  biological
              macromolecules, using X-ray diffraction, at the University  of Texas. The
              equipment will be used in the research of two established  investigators and
              two newly appointed assistant professors. It falls  into three categories, A.
              X-ray diffraction, B. high speed computing,  and C. molecular graphics.    A.
              The diffraction equipment consists of a high brilliance rotating  anode X-ray
              generator and a state of the art imaging plate (IP) area  detector. The
              detector captures X-rays as metastable centers on a  BaFBr:EuX-phosphor, which
              is read by subsequent laser activation. This  type of detector has the spatial
              resolution to accommodate both single  crystal protein diffraction and the low
              angle scattering patterns  generated by the users of the equipment.    B. A
              high speed, dual processor, computer with 4 Gbytes of disk  capacity will be
              used largely for molecular model refinement. This  machine will allow timely
              turnover of simulated annealing refinements  using the program XPLOR. It will
              also be used for sophisticated  analysis of low angle scattering patterns.   
              C. A modern molecular graphics station will be acquired. This  instrument will
              augment a heavily used molecular graphics capacity and  may be required to
              replace a failing instrument currently in use.    The research interests of the
              user group are quite varied, involving a  number of biologically important
              systems under study by a range of  methodologies. Proteins under study by
              single crystal analysis include:  ribosome inhibiting proteins like ricin, PAP
              and ebulin; plant and  fungal chitinases; the antifungal protein zeamatin; at
              least four  structurally different amino acid decarboxylases including
              ornithine,  arginine and histidine decarboxylases; several invertebrate 
              hemoglobins; multienzyme complexes, like PDC; and the ribosomal RNA  binding
              protein L9. In addition to single crystal studies, the  equipment will be used
              in the low angle scattering ana lysis of  polymerizable lipid assemblies.
              Systematic studies are underway to  define the rules governing subassembly in
              the planes of lipid bilayers.    The above projects tend to extend well beyond
              simply describing the  initial X-ray structure. Each protein is refined in a
              crystallographic  sense to the limits of it data in order to produce as
              accupate a  molecular model as possible. Also, the binding of substrate analogs
              or  other ligands is assessed where appropriate. Several of the research 
              groups have vigorous site-directed mutagenesis programs which create a  family
              of proteins whose X-ray analysis is important to describing  their
              structure/function relationships. Finally, structure-based drug  design is
              being developed. The design paradigm requires analysis and  energy refinement
              of numerous intermediate structures.    The equipment requested is of great
              importance to the continuation of  established programs and to the expansion of
              new ones. The X-ray  generator and IP detector, together with a cold
              temperature apparatus,  are important for data collection on the many systems
              under study. Some  of these crystal systems have large unit cells and require
              lengthy time  periods or several crystals for complete data collection. Some
              projects  involve a large number of mutant, inhibited, or liganded structures, 
              and in all cases it is desirable to collect as high resolution data as 
              possible. All of these considerations argue for increased data  collecting
              capacity. Furthermore, research projects involving low angle  scattering work
              on bilayer structures cannot be carried out, for  technical reasons, without
              acquisition of the new equipment.  The requested computing upgrade will allow
              modern structural refinement  programs, such as XPLOR, to run expeditiously. It
              will also allow the  most modern and powerful data analysis programs for single
              crystal and  low angle scattering analysis to be executed with comparative
              ease. The  need for this system is intensified by the apparent demise of the  
              University managed supercomputer. With over a dozen students and other 
              scientists using the facilities, there is a strain on current molecular 
              graphics equipment. A new unit will allow proper analysis of the mass  of
              structural work being done particularly if one key instrument,  currently in
              place, fails.
