Title       : An Energy-Resolving X-ray Fluorescence Detection System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9419635

Award Number: 9419635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $548783             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ke Zhang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ City Science Center
	      3624 Market Street One East
	      Philadelphia, PA  191042614    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An energy-resolving x-ray fluorescence detector system has been  proposed. The
              detector system uses the concept of selecting x-ray  fluorescence from an
              elastically scattered background by the  diffraction from a synthetic
              multilayer. The multilayer will be  linearly graded as to satisfy the
              diffraction condition everywhere on  the multilayer. Preliminary evaluation
              shows that such a detector can  be made with a good energy resolution
              (sufficient background  rejection), large solid angle, and fast time response.
              The project will  be carried out in two phases. The first phase of the project
              is to  simulate the performance of such a detector and to fabricate a 
              prototype detector with 3-4 multilayer elements. Based on the results  of Phase
              I, a multilayer analyzer array detector containing 40  multilayer elements will
              be developed in Phase II. The detector will be  tested and used by research
              groups on various metalloproteins. Since  the use of graded synthetic
              multilayers for fluorescence energy  selection, to our knowledge, is an
              original idea, we try to come up  with more detailed designs and procedures.
              The evaluation of the  performance of the proposed detector shows that it is
              more efficient  than the currently operating detectors, such as the 13-element
              Ge  detector and ionization chamber, when collecting data on a bending  magnet
              beamline using a few mM sample. The advantages of the array  detector become
              more evident under the conditions of increased photon  flux and/or decreased
              sample concentration. The detector will provide  tremendous opportunities for
              conducting XAFS experiments either on  time-resolved transient states or on
              very dilute systems at third  generation synchrotron sources, such as the APS.
              The detector will  greatly benefit the research projects of the P.I. in the
              same fashion  by largely improved efficiency and data quality. However, due to
              the  page limitation and the nature of this proposal, the scientific aspects 
              of these projects are not discussed. The cost for co nstructing the  detector
              is comparable to the cost for purchasing a 13-element Ge  detector, and is well
              justified in view of the efficient increase and  the cost for building new
              beamlines. In addition, long term operation  and maintenance are planned (see
              Section I. Special Information) to  insure the access of a wide circle of
              potential users to the detector  through its useful life.
