Title       : Multi-User Analytical Equipment for the Plant Ecology Program at UM-St. Louis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1995  
File        : a9419994

Award Number: 9419994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen S. Mulkey   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victoria L. Sork  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bette A. Loiselle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Marquis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds for multi-user analytical  equipment for the
              University of Missouri-St. Louis plant  sciences program.  Five investigators
              require this equipment  to enhance their current research programs and for
              future  research.  These researchers work in the areas of plant  population
              genetics, plant-herbivore interactions, and plant  life history.  Research in
              these diverse areas gains a  common focus through the investigators' interest
              in  determining the selective environmental factors influencing  plant
              development, growth, and reproductive success.  The  equipment requested would
              provide the resources for faculty  and students to study patterns of plant
              resource allocation,  plant responses to environmental variation and stress,
              water  relations, photosynthesis, and secondary compound chemistry.  Specific
              research projects requiring this equipment include:  comparative analysis of
              resource allocation and growth  patterns in different microhabitats in Quercus
              species,  assessment of genotypic variation in Piper arieanum defense  and
              tolerance resistance to herbivory, documentation of  resource allocation across
              canopies of tropical forests and  between developmental stages of seedlings in
              Missouri  forests, resource availability in fleshy fruits and  assimilation
              efficiencies for common understory fruit-eating  bats and birds, and
              determination of the genetic basis of  reproductive costs in Solidago.    The
              requested equipment includes an elemental analyzer, a  fluorometer and
              photosynthesis system, water relations  instruments, environmental monitoring
              equipment and  computer, plant growth chambers, a gas chromatograph, and an 
              ultracold freezer.
