Title       : Acquisition of Centrifuges for Plant Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1995      
File        : a9419935

Award Number: 9419935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gynheung An   (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Browse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norman G. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clarence A. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney Croteau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We are requesting matching funds for the purchase of five centrifuges  and
              associated rotors to use in plant biochemistry and molecular  biology research
              being carried out by eight investigators in the  Institute of Biological
              Chemistry at Washington State University. Our  current roster lists 85 graduate
              or postgraduate researchers and  technicians. These full-time scientists,
              together with about 20  undergraduates, share 4 ultracentrifuges and 7 high
              speed centrifuges.  The demand on available centrifuges has increased to the
              point where it  is often difficult to schedule a centrifuge or rotor and we
              currently  depend on an adjacent department for access to two special use 
              centrifuges. The need for centrifuges and rotors has increased  considerably
              over the last six years due to the addition of Drs. Kahn,  Browse and Lewis,
              the growth of other research groups and the extension  of several programs into
              molecular biology. In addition, there are  commitments to add two new faculty
              positions within the next 2 years.  These new groups will place further demands
              on our centrifugation  capabilities.    The Fellows of the Institute have
              research programs of national and  international prominence in the broad areas
              of plant productivity,  plant metabolism, plant protection, and signalling and
              recognition  processes in plants. The principal investigator studies plant gene
               regulation, especially during the development of complex plant tissues.  Other
              programs investigate the synthesis of plant storage molecules  such as lipids,
              starch and storage proteins, symbiotic nitrogen  fixation, plant "secondary"
              compounds such as terpenoids,  phenylpropanoids, cyclitols and oxalate, plant
              structural materials,  molecules that are used to carry information between
              plant cells and  the mechanisms by which the cells alter their gene expression
              in  response to these signals. The research is heavily dependent on 
              centrifugation to isolate and purify specialized cells, cell  components, cell
              walls, organelles, membr anes, proteins, DNA and mRNA.  Our centrifuge
              inventory is outdated and inadequate--the average age of  our ultracentrifuge
              rotors is 12.6 years and only one is less than 10  years old. In addition to
              upgrading our existing centrifuges,  acquisition of new types of centrifuges
              and rotors will allow  procedures and a number of specialized methods to be
              carried out much  more efficiently and will permit the investigation of new
              research  areas.
