Title       : GRGC: High Resolution Stable Isotopic Fluctuations in Tropical Marine Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1998     
File        : a9419176

Award Number: 9419176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208455             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Swart pswart@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              G M. Grammer  (Principal Investigator former)
              Donald F. McNeill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419176  Grammer  This project focuses on the use of marine aragonite cements
              from  the Bahamas and Belize to increase the resolution of the stable  isotopic
              skeletal record during the latest deglaciation for  tropical oceans. 
              Specifically we will address: 1) the timing and  magnitude of the apparent
              warming trend associated with the "melt  water pulse" immediately preceding the
              Younger Dryas event, as well  as apparent earlier higher frequency cooling
              events, to date only  known from ice core records: 2) the absolute temperature
              of near  surface tropical ocean waters during the period from about 10-14ka 
              (radiocarbon age); and 3) to what degree the very high frequency  (2,5,11,22
              and 83yr) climate signals may be recorded in these  tropical marine cements. 
              The use of inorganic carbonate cements to determine paleo-  oceanographic and
              paleoclimatic changes provides an opportunity to  increase both the accuracy of
              the isotopic record derived from  marine skeletal material, as well as to
              increase the resolution of  high-frequency changes in the tropical oceans. 
              These cements  provide a continuous record of isotopic changes on a decadal and
               possibly higher frequency scale, over time periods of several  hundreds of
              years.  This degree of resolution has not been possible  with the currently
              available marine skeletal records, and provides  a unique opportunity to
              compare and possibly correlate the high-  frequency climatic events in the
              tropical oceans with those  recently documented in the ice core data. 
              Preliminary work has established that our present sample set  contains cements
              that range in age from 10.9-13.6ka  (AMS 14C),  that  the cements grew at
              average  rates of approximately 1mm/10yr, and  that the cements    grew for
              periods of approximately 50-500 years.    Because of the long-lived nature of
              the cements, many of the  samples overlap in time.  Isotopically the cements
              exhibit a strong  depletion trend in  18O over this time interval that 
              correlates  well with those values reported fo r the marine skeletal records.  
              In addition, because of the decadal to century scale record within  individual
              cements, there is strong evidence that the cements are  recording
              high-frequency isotopic fluctuations in the tropical  oceans.  Our present data
              set shows a strong correlation in both  the timing and magnitude of the
              isotopic shift as reported for the  "melt-water pulse" immediately preceding
              the Younger Dryas cooling  event as well as evidence for other higher frequency
              shifts to  cooler conditions that to date has only been reported in ice cores. 
              This proposal requests funds to expand upon our preliminary  findings by doing
              high density AMS 14C sampling transects combined  with microsampled (100 um
              scale) isotopic analysis on these  individual cements to evaluate these
              high-frequency isotopic shifts  in the tropical oceans. We anticipate being
              able to document  changes on at least a decadal scale, and possibly at a higher
               resolution, due to the continuous and overlapping record of the  individual
              cements.  This data should increase both the accuracy  and resolution of the
              isotopic records in tropical oceans, and have  direct impact on our
              understanding of rapid climate change and the  potential for high latitude
              shift to be carried over into the  tropics
