Title       : Gas- and Solution-Phase Properties of Aromatic Amino Acid Radicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1995   
File        : a9419734

Award Number: 9419734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph A. Wheeler rawheeler@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ralph Wheeler, University of Oklahoma,  is funded by the Theoretical and  
              Computational Chemistry Program to study the gas phase and solution phase  
              properties of aromatic amino acid radicals.    Wheeler will use ab initio  
              quantum calculations and molecular dynamics to further understand the  
              energetics, pathways, and rates of radical migration in proteins and  
              peptides.  Comparisons will be made between gas phase and solvated   tyrosine
              and tryptophan radicals and cations.  Density functional theory   will be used
              to calculate the gas phase vibrational frequencies and spin   densities of
              these species for comparison with organic phenoxyl, phenoxyl   cation, indoyl
              and indoyl cation radical side chains.  One of the   objectives here is to
              identify vibrational and ESR spectroscopic features   which can be used to
              distinguish different orientations of the aromatic   amino acid radicals. 
              Molecular dynamics will then be used to compute   free energies of hydration
              using free energy perturbation theory together   with charges and force
              constants obtained from the gas phase density   functional calculations.  The
              formation and migration of highly reactive radicals is implicated in  
              carcinogenesis and aging.  The recent discovery and characterization of  
              aromatic amino acid radicals in proteins implies that amino acid radicals   are
              much more prevalent and important than previously suspected.  The   long term
              goals of Wheeler's computational research include understanding   the molecular
              components and their interactions responsible for the   energetics, pathways,
              and rates of radical migration in proteins and   peptides.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
