Title       : Tungsten and Molybdenum Oxotransferases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1996  
File        : a9419019

Award Number: 9419019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9183,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419019  Johnson  The objective of this research is to investigate the
              structural and  functional diversity of Mo-pterin and W-pterin centers in terms
              of  Mo/W coordination environment and the nature and properties of the 
              molybdopterin component.  The approach involves the use of three  complementary
              spectroscopic techniques that are capable of  selectively monitoring the
              electronic, magnetic and vibrational  properties of the Mo/W-pterin centers
              even in the presence of  additional paramagnetic or chromophoric prosthetic
              groups.  Ground  and excited state electronic properties for Mo(V) and W(V)
              forms  will be established by variable temperature magnetic circular  dichroism
              and electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopies.   Vibrational frequencies
              for Mo/W-ligand and molybdopterin  stretching modes will be investigated by
              resonance Raman  spectroscopy using excitation into visible charge transfer
              bands/   Electronic and vibrational assignments will be based on resonance 
              excitation profiles, isotope shifts, and studies of appropriate  Mo/W model
              complexes.    Spectroscopic studies will focus on five distinct classes of 
              oxotransferases:  hepatic sulfite oxidase, DMSO reductase from  Rhodobacter
              sphaeroides, formate dehydrogenase from Clostridium  thermoaceticum, aldehyde
              ferredoxin oxidoreductases from the  hyperthermophilic archaea Pyrococcus
              furiosus and ES-4,  formaldehyde ferredoxin oxidoreductases from the
              hyperthermophilic  archaea Pyrococcus furiosus and Thermococcus litoralis.  %%%
               Oxotransferases catalyze a diverse array of oxygen  insertion/removal
              reactions that are of crucial importance in the  metabolism of carbon, nitrogen
              and sulfur.  In mesophilic organisms  that function at ambient temperatures
              (plants, bacteria and  mammals), many of these reactions are catalyzed by
              enzymes with a  novel molybdopterin active site of unknown structure.  Recent 
              studies of hyperthermorphilic archaea from deep sea volcanic vents  have
              revealed the presence of similar enzymes with tungstopteri n  active sites,
              that appear to be evolutionary ancestors of the  mesophilic enzymes.  The
              objective of this research is to  investigate the structural and functional
              diversity of  molybdopterin and tungstopterin oxotransferases in terms of 
              molybdenum/tungsten coordination environment and the nature and  properties of
              the pterin component. The approach involves the use  of three complementary
              spectroscopic techniques that are capable of  selectively monitoring the
              electronic, magnetic and vibrational  properties of the molybdopterin and
              tungstopterin cofactors.   Ground and excited state electronic properties for
              molybdenum(V)  and tungsten(V) forms will be established by variable
              temperature  magnetic circular dichroism and electron paramagnetic resonance 
              spectroscopies.  Vibrational frequencies for metal-ligand and  pterin
              stretching modes will be investigated by resonance Raman  spectroscopy using
              excitation into visible charge transfer bands.   Electronic and vibrational
              assignments will be based on resonance  excitation profiles, isotope shifts,
              and studies of appropriate  molybdenum and tungsten model complexes.  The
              results will be  important in understanding the catalytic mechanisms of this
              class  of enzymes and are likely to have important evolutionary and 
              biotechnological implications.  ***
