Title       : Surface Diffusion and Metallicity Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1995      
File        : a9419914

Award Number: 9419914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Gomer rgomer@rainbow.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In this research project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
              Program, the  diffusion of H on Re surfaces will be investigated using field
              emission fluctuation methods.  This  experimental information will be
              supplemented by Monte Carlo simulations of the surface  diffusion process, in
              order to extract microscopic diffusion parameters for this system.   Tunneling
              diffusion on stiff lattices will form the focus of this aspect of the research
              work.   These studies will be extended to the diffusion of H and O and CO on Ta
              surfaces as well.  A  second aspect of the work to be carried out in this
              project addresses the question of metallicity  in metal monolayers.  Gold and
              iron overlayers deposited on refractory metal substrates, with  chemisorbed
              molecular spacers, will be investigated.  Electron energy loss measurements,
              work  function measurements, and ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy will
              be combined to probe  the metallicity of these monolayers.    Understanding the
              microscopic mechanism of diffusion of atomic and molecular species on 
              transition metal surfaces is crucial to the understanding of a number of
              important technologies,  ranging from heterogeneous catalysis to electronic
              materials processing.  The present research  project focusses on experimental
              and calculational studies of this important physical process.   In addition,
              the question of the metallic nature of thin film overlayers is important to the
               understanding of thin film growth and electronic device fabrication.  The
              second aspect of this  project addresses questions related to the metallic
              nature of metal overlayers.
