Title       : Mechanisms of Orientation and Navigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1997     
File        : a9419993

Award Number: 9419993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112758             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Lohmann KLohmann@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY    Lohmann, K., IBN 94-19993    Mechanisms of Orientation
              and Navigation         Sea turtle hatchlings begin an amazing long-distance 
              migration as soon as they emerge from their underground  nests on oceanic
              beaches.  They scramble to the sea and swim  through the surf, then quickly
              establish a course towards  the open ocean,  Maintaining their direction after
              swimming  beyond sight of land..  Little is known about how hatchling  sea
              turtles maintain their course through a vast ocean that  contains no obvious
              landmarks.  Near the beach, wave  direction provides a reliable cue, Which the
              hatchlings seem  to use initially.  But farther from land, where waves no 
              longer reliably indicate direction, the hatchlings appear to  depend on the
              magnetic field of the earth.  Recent  experiments have demonstrated that sea
              turtles have a well-  developed magnetic compass that allows them to maintain a
               specific heading, even in total darkness.       For long-distance migrants
              such as sea turtles, the  geomagnetic field not only provides a possible cue
              for  compass orientation, but a potential source for worldwide  positional
              information.  Several parameters of the earth s  magnetic field vary
              predictably with latitude and it appears  that hatchling sea turtles can sense
              these parameters.  The  research that Dr. Lohmann will carry out is designed to
               investigate:  (1) how hatchlings may use these geomagnetic  parameters in
              global position finding; (2) how young sea  turtles may acquire a directional
              preference and how the  preference influences orientation; and (3) the
              mechanism  hatchlings use to detect wave direction and how this  information
              interacts with the information from the magnetic  compass.       All species of
              sea turtles are now either threatened or  endangered. Thus this research will
              provide information  useful to conservation workers trying to save these
              animals  from extinction.  In addition it will provide valuable  information
              about how animals (including turtles, fis h and  whales) navigate using
              information from the magnetic field  of the earth.    .
