Title       : Developmental Resource for Biophysical Imaging and Opto- Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9419978

Award Number: 9419978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1670000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Watt W. Webb www2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     The global mission of the "Developmental Resource for  Biophysical
              Imaging and Opto-electronics" consists of the creation,  development,
              facilitation and application of new instrumentation  technologies for the
              visualization and measurement of dynamic cellular  and molecular processes with
              the ultimate objective of solving  fundamental problems in biological research.
              A renaissance in light  microscopy, driven by advances in laser physics,
              nonlinear optics,  microelectronics and computer technology has engendered
              powerful new  optical and microprobe technologies.                 
              Instrumentation research and development has recently produced  nonlinear laser
              microscopy based on two photon excitation (TPE) which  occurs by simultaneous
              molecular absorption of two low energy photons  to create a high energy
              excitation that generates fluorescence or  photochemistry. This Resource
              invention was motivated by a need for  instantaneous spatially resolved
              photochemistry as well as three  dimensionally resolved, background-free
              fluorescence microscopy. Much  of this research program aims to realize the
              potential of this  invention and to establish its methodology and utility
              through  exploratory biophysical applications. We propose developments aimed 
              particularly at dynamical measurements in living nervous system  preparations
              such as neurotransmitter micropharmacology by point  photolysis of caged
              molecules, fast (video rate) ratiometric calcium  imaging, and optimization of
              methods for thick, highly scattering  biological specimens.                 
              Resource developments include nanometer spatial displacement  measurements,
              nanometer scale tracking of individual molecules, and  most recently a
              picoNewton-sensitivity optical force probe whose  operation in a scanning mode
              provides surface mapping by Optical Force  Microscopy (OFM). These instruments
              are enabling new Resource  biophysics research on cell surface receptor
              dynamics, sensory  transduction, cell motility mechanisms, and second messen
              ger signalling  mechanisms. Resource development of multiplexed instrumentation
              that  accommodates cmmbinations of these probes, atomic force microscopy (for 
              larger forces) and fluorescence imaging and molecular tracking on  living cells
              is proposed. Using these novel technologies, research  objectives are the in
              vivo measurement and mapping of picoNewton  interaction forces, dynamics of
              ligand-receptor pairs, cell surface  compliances and individual intermolecular
              forces.    Specific Research Objectives:  (1) Technology of two photon laser
              scanning microscopy (TPLSM) --  Design and develop TPLSM research workstations
              capable of fluorescence  decay time imaging, video rate ratiometric imaging,
              programmable caged  neurotransmitter release and single particle tracking.   
              (2) Exploratory applications of laser microscopy and two photon  excitation --
              Develop new instrumentation techniques to exploit the  advantages of TPLSM, in
              particular (a) techniques for thick, strongly  scattering, living preparations,
              (b) localized fast cage activation for  micropharmacology, (c) specific
              applications to nervous system  preparations, and (d) specific applications to
              plant tissue.    (3) Photochemistry and photophysics -- laser excitation in the
              cellular  environment -- Determine mechanisms and controls of photochemical 
              processes that ultimately limit the effectiveness of both one and two  photon
              fluorescence microscopy in living cells. Understand operative  mechanisms of
              one and two photon photobleaching, cellular photodamage,  photoablation and the
              kinetics of cage activation. Apply photoablation  and cage activation to
              biological systems.    (4) Nonlinear laser microscopy measurements of molecular
              mobility --  Develop instrumentation and techniques for 3-d resolved molecular 
              mobility measurements using two photon excited fluorescence  photobleaching
              recovery (FPR), Fluorescence Activation Redistribution  (FAR), and Fluorescence
              Correlation Spectroscopy (FCS). Apply to  photoregulation of second messenger 
              responses, receptor-secretion  coupling, and neurotransmitter release.    (5)
              Measurement of Protein Dynamics and Folding by Fluorescence  Correlation
              Spectroscopy (FCS) -- Apply FCS aided by spatially  localized two photon
              excitation as a new fast probe of protein folding  and dynamics.    (6)
              Nanometer microscopy and picoNewton forces -- Develop multimode  nanometer
              instrumentation and techniques for scanning cell surface  receptor interactions
              and for practical measurements of force-velocity  relations down to the
              picoNewton level. Combine Optical Force  Microscopy (OFM) with optical tweezers
              manipulation, nanometer  molecular tracking, fluorescence imaging, atomic force
              microscopy AFM),  and possible near field fluorescence excitation.
