Title       : Studies on Ant Systematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9419242

Award Number: 9419242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120312             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip S. Ward psward@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419242  WARD   The purpose of this project is to enhance our understanding of
              ant biology and taxonomy.  One part of the project focuses on the genus
              Pseudomyrmex, a group of ants which are common and widespread in the New World
              tropics. The species of Pseudomyrmex will be distinguished from one another on
              the basis of morphology, new species will be described and given names, keys
              for species identification will be developed, and the historical and biological
              relationships among species will be analyzed.  Because these ants are confined
              to the New World tropics their histories may tell us something about the
              geographical history of Central and South America.  Moreover, many Pseudomyrmex
              species live in intimate, mutually beneficial associations with specialized
              plants: the plants provide shelter for the ants and the ants in return protect
              their "host plant" from plant-feeding insects and vertebrates.  An improved
              classification of Pseudomyrmex ants will help us understand how these symbiotic
              associations with plants originate.  It could also provide clues as to how we
              might manipulate ant populations to protect plants of economic importance to
              man.   A second part of this project involves studying the classification and
              relationships which are collectively known as the "poneroid group".  The ants
              in this group display an amazing range of biological or ecosystem roles: some
              are scavengers, some are predators, some timid and some rapacious (e.g. army
              ants).  One subgroup of species is even comprised of "agricultural" ants that
              culture fungi in their nests for food.  The aim of this second study is to
              improve our systematic knowledge of these ants and to construct a
              classification which accurately summarizes the relationships among members of
              the group.  The currently existing classification is believed to be deficient
              because of recent evidence that some of the subfamilies, tribes and genera are
              artificially grouped assemblages of species, defined by characters that are
              superficial in nature and  not reflective of the historical relationships among
              the species.  In this study, as well as the first, the primary source of data
              to be used is morphology; the resulting improvement in classification will give
              us better insight into the ecology and behavior of this diverse group of ants. 
              %%%  This study will contribute to our understanding of tropical biodiversity
              of ants.  Ants are important components of ecosystems and, in terms of human
              economics, include several members that are beneficial as well as those few
              that are considered pests.  ***
