Title       : Development of a "Smart" Tetroon Capability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9419536

Award Number: 9419536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278725             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Businger businger@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This research will develop and test "smart" balloons whose  altitude can be
              controlled to provide the capability to follow  isentropic, constant pressure
              surfaces or other chosen strategies.   In addition to providing track
              information through Global  Positioning System (GPS) derived position data, the
              smart balloons  will carry pressure, temperature and humidity sensors, and
              these  data will be transmitted along with the position data.  By  including
              pressure and temperature sensors and a pressure pump, the  smart balloon can be
              programmed to track along isentropic, moist  isentropic, isopycnic or constant
              pressure surfaces.  The  ballasting of the smart balloon will be achieved using
              an helium  filled, expandable balloon inside an air-filled constant-volume, 
              pressurized balloon.  If a higher altitude is required during an  experiment,
              air is released from the pressurized outer balloon.   This action allows the
              helium-filled inner balloon to expand and  take the place of the heavier
              released air.  If a lower altitude is  desired, outside air is pumped into the
              outer balloon, which  increases its density and causes the balloon package to
              decrease in  altitude.  The virtue in development of this capability is that
              the  instrumented smart balloons can be utilized in a number of  observational
              applications including:  Lagrangian observational  strategies, or in prescribed
              sounding strategies, without the  threat of balloon loss through groundings.   
                   Smart balloons capitalize on recent technological advances to  provide a
              cost-effective, new data gathering capability for the  atmospheric sciences
              research community.  Such balloons, or  tetroons, can be deployed during field
              experiments directed at  investigation a variety of research problems ranging
              from storm  structure to atmospheric chemistry in the troposphere and 
              stratosphere.  In situ observational data for the previous seven  hours are
              transmitted at five minute intervals on UHF along with  GPS position of the
              tetroon.  These da ta can then be intercepted by  receivers on-board research
              platforms within approximately one  hundred miles of the tetroon.
