Title       : Acquisition of a Multi-User Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9419949

Award Number: 9419949
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128030             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daphne D. Blumberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested for the purchase of a multi-user laser scanning  confocal
              microscope and associated workstation to be housed in the  Electron Microscopy
              Facility of the Department of Biological Sciences,  University of Maryland
              Baltimore County. No such instrument is  currently available on the Catonsville
              Campus of the University of  Maryland System. The applicants have been using
              traditional  epifluorescence microscopy, electron microscopy and fluorescent 
              activated cell sorting for the study of cell structure, function and  problems
              in spatial and temporal localization of developmentally  regulated
              macromolecules. The availability of a laser scanning confocal  microscope would
              substantially enhance these research efforts by  improving resolution in the
              x-y plane by a factor of 2 and in the Z  axis by ~1.4x. Additionally the
              ability to take optical sections and do  3-D image reconstruction and analysis
              will enable us to address aspects  of these problems which had previously been
              impossible. All of the  applicants hold federal grants for the support of their
              research and  several are recipients of NSF grants.    The instrument will
              consist of a Bio-Rad MRC 1000 confocal laser  scanning unit mounted on a Zeiss
              Axiovert Inverted Fluorescence  Microscope fitted with phase and Nomarski
              optics in order to overlay  the confocal fluorescent images on the brightfield
              images. Image  collection and control of the microscope will be managed by a
              486 (or  appropriate upgrade) computer running the Bio-Rad CoMOS software. The 
              data will be stored on an optical disc drive. The 486 computer will be  hooked
              by an ethernet link to the department Silicon Graphics Indigo  Computer. Vital
              Images Volume Microscope Workbench software will be  loaded on the SGI computer
              for doing the 3-D image analysis. A network  printer will be hooked by ethernet
              link to both computers so that  digitalized images can be printed for
              publication and for preparation  of slides.    The instrument will be
              administered by a committee  consisting of the  P.I. and the major users. Dr.
              Terry Viancour who has extensive  experience with enhanced video microscopy and
              image analysis has agreed  to be the faculty supervisor responsible for
              insuring that all users  are trained in the proper operation of the instrument.
              The instrument  will be a part of the Biological Sciences Electron Microscope
              facility.  This facility is staffed by a full time research associate, Mr.
              Phillip  Rutledge. The Department of Biological Sciences will commit 10% of Mr.
               Rutledge's time to overseeing the day to day operation of the laser  scanning
              confocal Microscope. The microscope will be made available for  use by all
              members of the University community, including post-doctoral  fellows, graduate
              and undergraduate students. While primarily a  research instrument, its use
              will be incorporated into an advanced  course on microscopy and into the
              research projects of the graduate and  undergraduate programs thus providing
              increased student exposure to  this powerful technology.    In recognition of
              the central role that research plays in the teaching  mission of the University
              and the importance of exposure of students in  the biomedical/bioengineering
              sciences to "state of the art" technology  the University of Maryland Baltimore
              County has committed matching  funds to aid in the purchase of this equipment
              should the grant be  funded.
