Title       : Acquisition of HPLC System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1995   
File        : a9419614

Award Number: 9419614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24020              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenda Speer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan H. Brawley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy E. Croall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              August J. De Siervo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Gundersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This is a shared equipment proposal for the acquisition of a high  performance
              liquid chromatography system (HPLC). HPLC provides a major  improvement over
              conventional chromatography by increasing resolution,  improving yields, and
              decreasing elution times and volumes. HPLC  separations are applicable to
              virtually any class of compound,  including small organic molecules, lipids,
              nucleic acids or  macromolecules such as proteins, due to the diversity of
              available  columns.    The requested HPLC consists of the basic components
              required to provide  a fully functional and highly versatile semi-preparative
              system. The  unit includes an IBM 486 computer with the appropriate software
              for  control of the individual HPLC components and data analysis; a single  two
              solvent pump system capable of gradient formation; a manual sample  injector; a
              Diode array detector for monitoring elution of a wide  variety of molecules 
              the Diode array permits the user to scan multiple  wavelengths during an
              experiment, which will allow the researcher to  determine if the eluted
              fraction is pure or not ; the Quick Res  software for analysis of co-eluting
              compounds; and an initial  assortment of HPLC columns to allow separations
              based on different  physical properties.    The requested instrument will
              enhance and modernize facilities  available for research and teaching in the
              department of Biochemistry,  Microbiology and Molecular Biology in addition to
              being available to  other faculty and students outside of the department. The
              HPLC system  will directly benefit several faculty research projects such as:
              1) the  metabolism and degradation of tetracycline and hydrocarbons by 
              bacteria; 2) mechanisms regulating mammalian proteolytic enzymes, in  vivo and
              in vitro; 4) post-translational modification as a regulatory  mechanism in
              signal transduction processes in Dictyostelium; 5)  purification of phenolics
              and hormones; 6) studies of the intermediate  and slow blocks against
              polyspermy and embryonic stress tolerance in  f ucoid algae and 7) the
              regulation of membrane lipid and fatty acid  composition and the metabolism of
              these molecules in a variety of  eubacteria, eukaryotes and plants. The
              graduate and undergraduate  curricula in Biochemistry, Microbiology and
              Molecular Biology at the  University of Maine include several laboratory
              courses that will also  be enhanced by the availability of a HPLC system.
              Proposed uses include  purification of monoclonal antibodies for Immunology;
              separation and  isolation of DNA and polymerase chain reaction products for
              Molecular  Biology and Bacterial Genetics; purification of proteins and peptide
               mapping in Biochemistry; and characterization of membrane lipids from  several
              microorganisms for Bacterial Physiology. The inclusion of HPLC  within these
              courses will provide our students with an important  experience in using
              current methodologies. Such skills are commonly  required and are greatly
              beneficial for ensuring their competitiveness  for post-graduate studies,
              research jobs or careers.
