Title       : Complex Sensory Network Coordinating Interactions of Pseudomonas solanacearum
               with Host Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1997  
File        : a9419582

Award Number: 9419582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Schell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy P. Denny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419582  Schell  Pseudomonas solanacearum is a soil-borne phytopathogen that
              causes a lethal wilting disease of diverse plants, in part due to production of
              an unusual exopolysaccharide (EPS 1) and numerous extracellular proteins
              (EXPs). Levels of many virulence factors are controlled by a complex sensory
              network whose size, organization, and other properties set it apart from others
              found in prokaryotes. The network controls switching between two morphotypes,
              each probably specialized for survival in different ecological  niches (plant
              vs. soil), and also modulates transcription of genes for EPS I (eps) and other
              virulence factors in response to multiple environmental signals. The focus of
              this work is on the unique molecular aspects of the network, and on the
              biochemical and  physiological functions of some of its unusual regulated
              targets.  The biochemical mechanism of the network's unique signal-integrator
              protein, XpsR, that in conjunction with the VsrC response regulator coordinates
               transcription at the eps promoter in response to three different signals is
              being explored,  mutagenesis and in vivo footprinting will be used to define
              promoter sequences and  conditions required for binding and  transcription
              activation by XpsR and/or VsrC to gain insight into their interactions with
              each other and/or the promoter. Powerful screening methods will be used to
              isolate mutant alleles of xpsR and vsrC that activate eps transcription
              independently of each other, and nonfunctional xpsR alleles. DNA  sequence
              analysis and characterization of these mutants will identify important domains
              of XpsR and VsrC that interact to link individual signal transduction systems
              into the  larger network. Another network component regulating production of
              EPS I is vsrAD  which appears to also regulate important penes that are
              required for stem colonization.  Another network-regulated gene, tek, encodes
              an unusual 59-kDa lipoprotein that is externally processed to release its basic
              28-kDa C-terminus, which becomes th e major EXP of P. solanacearum. Using
              antiserum and various mutants synthesis, processing, localization, and fate of
              labelled Tek polypeptides is being monitored their function and apparent
              association with EPS I and virulence. rgnll is also regulated by the network
              and appears to   prevent inhibition of EPS I production by certain
              environmental conditions. The mechanism of this and its physiological
              significance are being investigated by: DNA sequence analysis, testing the
              effect of rgnll mutations on expression of eps and related genes, and
              characterizing in more detail what molecules  and conditions affect rgnll
              function. Finally, DNA sequence analysis of eps are being used to gain further
              insight into its novel enzymes, their role in biosynthesis and decoration of
              EPS 1, and their physiological functions.  %%%  Research on this bacterium that
              causes disease in plants could lead to a lessening of damage done to plants by
              bacterial infection.  ***
