Title       : Stochastic Effects and Deterministic Chaos in Spatially Extended Nonlinear
               Dissipative Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9419168

Award Number: 9419168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $654000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guenter Ahlers guenter@stc.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project employs optical and video techniques to record pattern formation in 
              classical fluids such as acetone and water. Thermal convection, flow, and
              imposed electric fields  induce density fluctuations or patterns in
              non-equilibrium systems that can detected by optical means.  These patterns can
              be irregular both in space and in time. The mathematical description of such 
              irregularity is often described by deterministic macroscopic equations and is
              referred to as spatio-  temporal chaos (STC). However, an additional stochastic
              term representing local microscopic  fluctuations (thermal noise  external  to
              the deterministic equations) is also thought to be important  in STC. The
              purpose of this project is to seek experimental evidence for the external noise
              in  different fluids and in different geometries. The project involves strong
              collaboration between the  principal investigator and theorists in the U.S. and
              in Germany. The results are of fundamental  interest and are also of
              technological interest in the behavior of liquid crystals in electric fields, 
              engineering fluid dynamics, and re lated fields.   % % %  The project employs
              optical and video  techniques to observe and record pattern formation in
              classical fluids such as acetone and water.  Thermal convection, flow, and
              imposed electric fields induce density fluctuations or patterns that can 
              detected by optical means. These patterns are in some ways similar to patterns
              appearing in smoke  plumes rising and moving by convection in front of a
              theater projection lens. The mathematical  description of such phenomena is
              quite complex and careful experiments, as proposed by the principal 
              investigator, are required to test extant probabilistic theories of pattern
              formation. The project  involves strong collaboration between the principal
              investigator and theorists in the U.S. and in  Germany. The results are of
              fundamental interest and are also of technological interest in the  behavior of
              liquid crystals in electric fields, engineering fluid dynamics, and related
              fields.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
