Title       : World Color Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1995     
File        : a9419702

Award Number: 9419702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Kay kay@cogsci.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Internationl CompSci Inst
	      1947 Center Street
	      Berkeley, CA  947041105    510/666-2900

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9419702  Kay  ABSTRACT      The long run objective of the project is to deepen
              our   understanding of the relation between visual perception and   linguistic
              meaning. More specifically, this study is conducted in   the domain of words
              for colors. Words for colors have been and   remain a key domain in which to
              study the relation between   perception and language because colors themselves
              are objectively   describable independent of the words used to name them in any
                particular language.     For a study of this kind to be interpretable in
              general terms it   is essential that data be gathered, not only from familiar  
              languages of developed regions of Europe, America and Asia, but   also from
              unwritten languages spoken by peoples at relatively   simple technological
              levels in all parts of the world. Otherwise   the findings may merely reflect
              aspects of technologically   advanced societies, rather than revealing
              properties of homo   sapiens. For this reason a survey of 111 unwritten
              languages,   distributed world-wide, was conducted in a prior phase of this  
              study.     The meanings of the principal words for colors in each of these  
              languages are established by obtaining from twenty-five (or   occasionally
              fewer) speakers of each participating language that   speaker's word for each
              of 320 colored stimuli, chosen to give a   representative sample of all the
              colors visible to humans.     Analysis of the stage of basic color term
              evolution of each   language will be assessed. A set of detailed hypotheses
              regarding   how the two original basic color terms, (white or red or yellow)  
              and (black or green or blue), are eventually divided into the   separate
              fundamental categories: black, white, red, yellow,   green, blue will be
              investigated with regard to the full set of   data on 111 languages. Separate
              hypotheses regarding derived   categories such as purple, orange and brown and
              heterogeneous   categories, such as 'desaturated'/'muddy-colored', will also be
                tested against the full data set. Ca tegories comprising both   yellow and
              green are known to exist. They pose special problems   for the psychophysical
              derivation of the evolutionary sequence of   basic color terms; this problem
              will also be addressed. Special   attention will be paid to color categories
              that appear in the   data which are not related in a simple way to the  
              psychophysically established basic color sensations. Special   attention will
              also be paid to inter-speaker variation in each   language set and its relation
              to the evolutionary status of the   language community taken as a whole.
