Title       : Functional Analyses of an Epicuticular Wax Gene from Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9419093

Award Number: 9419093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244822             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Feldmann feldmann@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,9161,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9419093  Feldmann  All plants contain epicuticular wax (EW) on the surface
              of  the cuticle.  Scanning electron microscopy has revealed that  in many plant
              species the EW consists of an amorphous ground  layer covered by rod-shaped
              structures and irregular shaped  plate-like structures with rounded edges.  The
              wax is  composed of a mixture of long chain aliphatic compounds  which can be
              isolated by dipping an aerial portion of the  plant into chloroform or hexane
              for a few seconds and then  evaporating the solvent.  The aliphatic compounds
              include  alkanes, esters, beta-diketones, aldehydes, primary and  secondary
              alcohols, ketones, free acids, and triterpenes.  There is tremendous diversity
              among plant species both in  the number of chemical classes present in a wax
              and in their  relative abundance.  Even within an individual plant the  vairous
              organs can be characterized by quantitative and  qualitative differences in the
              EW composition.    The wax biochemical pathway is poorly understood and even 
              less is known about the export of these molecules through  the cell wall and
              cuticle to the surface.  However, a large  number of EW mutants have been
              isolated in Arabidopsis,  which allows the investigator to take a genetic and 
              molecular approach to dissecting the epicuticular wax  pathway.  The objective
              of this proposal is to clone and  characterize two of these genes, CER4 and
              CER21.  The  mutation at the CER4 locus eliminates the accumulation of  primary
              alcohols whicle a mutation at the CER21 locus  eliminates nearly all of the
              aldehydes.  Both genes will be  sequenced.  Their expression level in leaves,
              stems and  siliques will be characterized during development.  Also,  the
              expression of the CER4 and CER21 genes will be studied  in plants grown under
              several encironmental regimes.  The  cell-type specific expression of these two
              genes will be  studied.  Subcellular localization will be performed via in 
              situ analyses with antibodies raised against the CER4 and  CER21 proteins. 
              Also s tudied will be the function of these  genes in the plant, i.e., are they
              important in  biosynthesis, transport, or regulation.    There is substantial
              evidence to show that the composition  of the EW is important in host plant
              selection by  herbivorous insects.  Modification of the EW via genetic 
              engineering methods should enable us to provide resistance  to various insect
              pests in a number of important agronomic  crops.  The results obtained from the
              modification of  Arabidopsis can be used to modify the waxes on agronomic 
              plants.
