Title       : Acquisition of Automated DNA Sequencer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1996   
File        : a9419732

Award Number: 9419732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80824              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. William O. Ballard   (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Hall  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Field Museum requests funds to purchase an automated DNA  sequencer, the
              Applied Biosystems 373A, for its Biochemistry  Laboratories, a core facility
              that provides opportunities for  Field Museum staff and students to use gene
              amplification  (PCR) and DNA sequencing in basic research and research 
              training in systematics.  Examination of the levels and  patterns of Lab use
              indicate why this instrument is needed.      The Biochemistry Laboratories,
              which are undergoing NSF  funded renovation in 1994, are heavily used:  10
              curatorial  staff and research associates independently have used the 
              facilities, and at six of these research staff are now  pursuing or planning
              major DNA sequencing projects in the  near future.  The effect of this
              increasing demand on the  facilities and the concomitant establishing of
              reliable  protocols in the preceding steps (DNA extraction, PCR, and  amplicon
              purification), is that sequencing and base calling  have now become the primary
              factors limiting the Labs'  productivity.  Productivity and cost analyses
              support the  contention that acquisition of the 373A will result in:  1) 
              greater lab productivity; 2) an increase in lab capacity by  freeing otherwise
              dedicated lab space; and 3) a cost savings  of about 40% per sequencing
              reaction.  The latter will allow  the Labs to recoup purchase costs iTI less
              than three years  at present productivity levels.      The Applied Biosystems
              373A has several advantages over  competing instruments, including:  1) a 4-dye
               fluorescent-labeling system that enables running up to 4  times as many
              samples per PAGE gel; and 2) patented  dye-labeled dideoxynucleotide
              terminators that permit use of  unlabeled oligonucleotide primers in both ~q
              cycle sequencing  and Sequenase formats.  Ability to use unlabeled primers 
              offers an economy and versatility for Field Museum projects,  as sequencing is
              entirely from PCR products amplified from a  myriad of plant, fungi, and animal
              sources.      Field Museum has well-developed training pro grams at all 
              levels.  Scientific staff have adjunct appointments at  neighboring
              institutions (e.g., U. of Chicago and U. of  Illinois, Chicago) and offer
              graduate training in systematics  through these institutions.  These students
              generally use the  Labs for their graduate research projects.  Finally, the 
              Laboratories are an active participant in Field Museum's  summer intern
              program, which targets high school and  undergraduate students, especially
              those representing  minority groups.  llhe Labs' capacity will be significantly
               augmented by the acquisition of this instrument, providing  additional
              opportunities for students to gain research  experience in systematics.        
                 NSF FORM 135~ (1194)  A--1
