Title       : Acquisition of a Cryo-Electron Microscopy System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1995     
File        : a9419824

Award Number: 9419824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phoebe L. Stewart psteward@mail.nuc.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dohn G. Glitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard H. Rome  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Guido A. Zampighi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is for matching funds to purchase a new cryo-electron  microscope
              equipped with a slow-scan CCD camera. This system will allow  direct
              acquisition of digital images suitable for computer image  reconstruction and
              structural analysis of macromolecular complexes.  Although the UCLA campus has
              several electron microscopes, none are  suitable for state-of-the-art cryo
              techniques. Each of the major users  will contribute different areas of
              expertise to the shared facility,  including cryo sample preparation, classical
              electron microscopy,  site-specific antibody and gold labeling techniques,
              two-dimensional  crystal growth, and three-dimensional image reconstruction.
              Proposed  research projects involve a diverse array of biological assemblies: 
              human adenovirus particles with bound cellular receptors; retroviral  capsid
              protein assemblies; the spliceosome, a complex particle involved  in mRNA
              processing; the vault organelle, a ubiquitous cytosolic  ribonucleoprotein
              particle; cell-to-cell channels, which directly  connect the cytoplasms of
              adjacent cells; and GABAA receptors.    The proposed facility will complement
              the existing strengths at UCLA in  imaging and biological structure. The
              Nuclear Medicine Division has  leaders in the fields of PET scanning and
              medical image reconstruction.  The Molecular Biology Institute has several
              renown x-ray  crystallographers. One goal of the proposed facility is to bridge
              the  resolution gap between x-ray crystallography and electron microscopy by 
              combining atomic structural information of component molecules with  image
              Reconstructions of macromolecular complexes.    The Department of Molecular and
              Medical Pharmacology will provide  suitable renovated space for the
              cryo-electron microscope and funds for  half of the instrument's cost.
              Sufficient computational power for image  processing already exists at UCLA.
              Additional computer graphics  workstations will be purchased from the Principal
              Investigator' s  start-up funds. After the initial one ye ar warranty period,
              the ongoing  maintenance and operating expenses for the cryo-electron
              microscope and  CCD cameras will be covered jointly by the major users' grants
              and  departmental funds. The administration of the proposed cryo-electron 
              microscopy facility will be carried out by an inter-departmental  committee at
              UCLA. Dr. Nigel Unwin, a recognized leader in the field,  has agreed to serve
              as an external consultant and provide both  technical advice and overall
              scientific guidance.
