Title       : Genetic Regulation of Bioluminescence in Marine Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1996   
File        : a9419862

Award Number: 9419862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Silverman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Agouron Institute
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92037    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419862  Silverman  The objective of this investigation is to understand the
              genetic control mechanisms which regulate expression of luminescence in the
              bacterium Vibrio harveyi.  Expression of genes for luminescence (lux) in marine
              bacteria is controlled by cell density and a variety of environmental cues. 
              Density-dependent regulation is a primary facet of lux regulation and is
              mediated by extracellular signal substances called autoinducers.  Two
              autoinducer signaling pathways converge to control luminescence in V. harveyi. 
              One pathway, signaling system 1, consists of functions for production of
              autoinducer 1 (AI-1 Signal) and for response to the cognate autoinducer (AI-1
              Sensor).  The luxL and luxM genes are required for AI-1 production, and luxN
              encodes the AI-1 Sensor.  A second pathway, signaling system 2, consists of
              functions for production of autoinducer 2 (AI-2 Signal) and for response to
              this signal (AI-2 Sensor).  The luxP and luxQ genes encode AI-2 Sensor
              proteins.  Both signaling pathways intersect at a control function encoded by
              the luxO gene.  The LuxO protein integrates the responses of both Sensors 1 and
              2 and, with the participation of the luxR gene product, activates transcription
              of the luxCDABE operon encoding the luminescence enzymes.  Lux regulation is
              apparently complicated, and many functions and interactions remain to be
              identified.  This project includes mutant isolation to guide the cloning,
              sequencing and characterization of additional regulatory genes, particularly
              those required for production of autoinducter 2 (AI-2).  Transcripts from
              various lux regulatory genes are being mapped and quantitated to analyze
              hierarchical and feedback relationships in the regulatory circuitry.  Mutants
              defective both in sensor 1 and 3 function will be stimulated with a variety of
              environmental signals to detect cross-communication with other sensory systems.
               Site-directed mutagenesis will be used to obtain locked or aberrant Lux
              signaling proteins which will then be used to exam ine interactions of
              regulatory components and the biochemistry of signal transduction.  %%% 
              Analyzing the lux system should be valuable for understanding how bacteria
              perceive and react to their environment.  The regulatory process is complex and
              involves both intercellular and intracellular signal transmission so
              interesting new mechanisms could be revealed.  However, complexity should not
              be a barrier because the sensory input (chemical signals) and the output (light
              emission) can be conveniently controlled and measured, and the genetic
              methodology is well-developed.  ***
