Title       : Interactions of Trait and Population Dynamics in Ecological Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1994  
File        : a9419716

Award Number: 9419716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Abrams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419716  Abrams   This project will use mathematical models of food webs to
              explore the interactions between changes in population densities and changes in
              the traits that determine individuals' feeding and anti-predator
              characteristics. It builds on a previous project that explored the population
              dynamical effects of rapid behavioral adaptation and developed a simple method
              of approximately modeling the dynamics of quantitative traits. The present
              project is centered on an analysis of the dynamics of simple food webs in which
              one or more species is characterized by feeding and/or predator-avoidance
              traits that change adaptively over time. Most of the food webs to be studies
              consist of groups of two to six species. Two different models of trait dynamics
              will be explored to reveal differences between traits whose distribution has a
              relatively inflexible shape and those whose distribution can have any shape
              within the bounds of possible trait values. The analysis of these models, and
              their extensions, will advance our understanding of several problem areas
              ecology. Extensions of the basic models will examine the dynamic consequences
              of species having two or more modes of adaptive change in trait values, and
              will explore how the results of these simple models are changed by spatially
              subdivided environments or more complex population structures, such as size
              and/or age classes.   %%%   This mathematical theory will provide a basis for
              predicting long-term changes in the populations of species in ecological
              communities. Such long-term changes are almost always affected by natural
              selection, which is absent from almost all ecological models. By working out
              the potential consequences of adaptive change for community dynamics, this
              analysis of simple models will provide a guide to what types of adaptively
              flexible traits empirical community ecologists need to study.
