Title       : FTIR Study of Bacteriorhodopsin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1997   
File        : a9419059

Award Number: 9419059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Rothschild kjr@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419059  Rothschild  The central goal of this project is the elucidation of the 
              molecular mechanism of light-driven proton transport in  bacteriorhodopsin
              (bR).  In earlier work, it was demonstrated  that Fourier transform infrared
              (FTIR) difference spectroscopy can  provide detailed information about the
              protonation state, local  environment and orientation of specific amino acid
              residues which  are structurally active during the bR photocycle.  However, a
              key  problem limiting future progress is the assignment of FTIR bands to 
              individual groups in a protein.  While site-directed mutagenesis  (SDM) has
              been successfully applied in special cases for this  purpose, its use is
              limited due to perturbations induced in the  structure and function of the
              protein as illustrated by recent  studies on the mutant Y185F. In addition, SDM
              does not permit the  assignment of bands to the vibrations of specific peptide
              groups,  an essential next step for investigating protein backbone 
              conformational changes such as have been detected between the M and  N
              intermediates of bR.  A general method of band assignment has now been
              developed based on  site-directed isotope labeling (SDIL).  SDIL analogs of bR
              are  produced by cell-free synthesis using specially aminoacylated  suppressor
              tRNAs.  These SDIL-bR analogs have identical properties  as native bR and are
              suitable for FTIR-difference spectroscopy.  In  the first application of this
              approach, bands have been assigned to  the vibrations of specific tyrosine
              side-chains as well as to  individual groups in the bR backbone structure.  In
              this research,  SDIL-FTIR will be used to investigate systematically the role
              of  specific residues in bR proton pumping .  Our experiments will be  guided
              by earlier studies which have provided information about  specific residues
              which undergo protonation changes, may  participate in a hypothesized proton
              wire, act to couple the  retinal chromophore to the protein and are involved in
              secondary  structural changes of the protei n.  Recently developed methods for 
              time-resolved FTIR-difference spectroscopy, polarized FTIR and  attenuated
              total reflection FTIR will also be used in this  research.  In collaboration
              with the J. Spudich laboratory, the  SDIL-FTIR approach will be extended to
              sensory-rhodopsin I (sRI),  a phototaxis light-receptor in Halobacteria
              salinarium.  %%%  The primary goal of this project is understanding how 
              bacteriorhodopsin functions as a light-driven proton pump.   Bacteriorhodopsin
              serves as a prototype for other membrane proteins  which carry out essential
              process in cells including ion transport  and energy transduction.  A promising
              new approach for studying how  membrane proteins function is FTIR-difference
              spectroscopy.  When  combined with biochemical and genetic methods it has the
              power to  provide information about the protonation state, local environment 
              and even orientation of specific groups in a protein.  Unlike  solid-state NMR,
              infrared spectroscopy can also probe rapid dynamic  conformational changes in
              proteins.  In this project, FTIR-  difference spectroscopy will be combined
              with three methods: i)  uniform isotope labeling of specific amino acids; ii)
              site-directed  mutagenesis (SDM) and site-directed isotope labeling (SDIL) to 
              investigate bacteriorhodopsin.  If successful, these studies will  provide a
              detailed picture of how bacteriorhodopsin functions and  provide clues to how
              other membrane proteins work.   ***
