Title       : Collaborative Research: Calcareous Nannofossil Biostratigraphy and
               Paleoenvironmental History of Cape Roberts Cores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2001    
File        : a9419770

Award Number: 9419770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34664              (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Watkins dwatkins1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,1340,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    This award supports basic characterization of calcareous 
              nannofossils as part of the development of the biostratigraphic  framework for
              drill core recovered by the Cape Roberts Project  (CRP).  This is a major
              program within the international  Antarctic earth science community, designed
              to sample the  stratigraphic record that spans the time interval 30 to 100 
              million years ago, by drilling four sites on the flank of the  Victoria Land
              basin. This award is to support the drilling  program by providing rapid age
              and paleoenvironmental information  through the study of calcareous
              nannofossils.  This research will  systematically sample the recovered
              sedimentary cores and analyze  their calcareous nannofossil content at the
              Crary Science and  Engineering Center (CSEC) at McMurdo Station, Antarctica.
              The  preparation of an Initial Reports volume at the end of each of  the two
              drilling seasons will include the results of this work as  part of the initial
              characterization of the cores.    The calcareous nannofossil biostratigraphic
              record spans the  entire interval to be cored by the CRP. Recent work on
              calcareous  nannofossils from ocean drilling sites around Antarctica has 
              yielded a refined zonation for the Paleogene and Upper Cretaceous  of the
              Southern Ocean that will provide a high-resmlution  biostratigraphic framework
              for hemipelagic and pelagic sediments  recovered by Cape Roberts drilling. This
              research, when combined  with data from other fossil groups,
              magnetostratigraphic data,  and other age-dating methods, will provide
              integrated age control  that is essential for other geological investigations.
              In  addition, calcareous nannofossils are excellent  paleoenvironmental
              indicators for surface water temperature and  productivity.  Statistical
              analysis of quantitative population  census data will be used to infer
              paleoenvironmental variations  during the Paleogene and Cretaceous.  These
              data, in combination  with data from other fossil groups and sedimentological
              studies,  will  be useful for assessing climatic change through the critical 
              period of 30-100 million years before present.
