Title       : A Molecular Quantitative Genetic Study of Epistasis and Its Evolutionary Role
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1997     
File        : a9419992

Award Number: 9419992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337941             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Cheverud cheverud@thalamus.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419992  CHEVERUD   Many traits are affected by multiple genes.  Studying the
              interactions among these genes, epistasis,  is essential for understanding the
              genetic basis for these complex traits.  Gene interaction, for example, may
              cause a disease to occur in some families but not others depending on what sets
              of genes are in those families.  The extent of epistasis is also important for
              the amount of flexibility available in small populations to respond to
              selective pressures, to avoid extinction or as part of speciation.   The amount
              of gene interaction on adult body weight in mice will be measured and then the
              effects of that interaction on inherited differences between animals in small
              populations will be followed.  Standard population genetic theory predicts a
              sharp decline in inherited differences as inbreeding occurs in small
              populations, thus limiting their evolutionary potential.  However, new models
              incorporating the effects of epistasis predict only a slight decline, or even
              an increase in the level of inherited differences, with inbreeding.  Two inbred
              strains of mice will be crossed.  Fifty small populations (4 animals) and two
              large populations (100 animals) will be derived from this cross.  The overall
              average level of inherited differences between mice and the differences due to
              each previously identified gene will be compared between the large and small
              population size treatments and the results interpreted in the light of
              evolutionary models incorporating epistasis.
