Title       : Molecular Analysis of Pokeweed Antiviral Protein Gene Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9419919

Award Number: 9419919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99474              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nilgun Tumer Tumer@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419919  Tumer  Pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP) is a ribosome inactivating
              protein (RIP) of 29,000 daltons that is extracted from the leaves of Phytolacca
              americana (Pokeweed).  RIPs are site-specific RNA N-glycosidases, which
              catalytically remove a single adenine from a conserved loop of the 28S rRNA of
              eukaryotic ribosomes. This lesion interferes with elongation factor-2 (EF-2)
              binding and blocks protein synthesis at the translocation step. PAP was
              discovered due to its ability to inhibit the transmission of tobacco mosaic
              virus (TMV) in plants and it was subsequently demonstrated that the purified
              protein is equally effective against a number of other plant viruses and animal
              viruses, including HIV. Recently, we cloned the cDNA encoding PAP and
              demonstrated that expression of PAP in transgenic plants leads to broad
              spectrum resistance to viral infection (Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90:
              7089-7093, 1993).  The primary objective of this to generate critical
              information regarding the underlying mechanism for the antiviral activity of
              PAP. We will test the hypothesis that the antiviral activity of PAP is distinct
              from its ribosome inhibitory activity by isolating nontoxic PAP mutants using
              general mutagenesis and selection in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PAP mutants will
              be characterized (i) molecularly by sequence analysis and (ii) biologically by
              measuring their enzymatic activity and antiviral activity. We will determine if
              mutations that render PAP nontoxic are located at the active site or at other
              domains and whether the residues that are involved in enzymatic activity are
              critical for antiviral activity. These studies will provide insight into the
              underlying mechanism of action of PAP.  %%%  Pokeweed antiviral protein (PAP)
              is a ribosome inactivating protein that is extracted from the leaves of
              Phytolacca americana (Pokeweed).  PAP catalytically removes a single adenine
              from 28S rRNA thereby inactivating the ribosome and inhibiting protein
              synthesis.  PAP was discovered due to its ability to i nhibit the transmission
              of tobacco mosaic virus in plants, and was subsequently demonstrated to be
              equally effective against a number of other plant and animal viruses, including
              HIV.  The primary objective of this research is to determine the mechanism for
              the antiviral activity of PAP, and to test the hypothesis that the antiviral
              activity of PAP is distinct from its ribosome inhibitory activity.  These
              studies will provide critical insight into the underlying mechanism of action
              of PAP.  ***  ??
