Title       : Enhancing the Research Efficiency and Experimental Capabilities of Analytical
               Ultracentrifugation Using the XL-A Coupled with Multi-User Research
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9419624

Award Number: 9419624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob Lebowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal represents a combined Instrument Development for  Biological
              Research and a Multi-User Biological Equipment and  Instrumentation Resources
              grant application focused on analytical  ultracentrifugation. This technique
              has a wide range of applications:  molecular weight analysis, the
              characterization of molecular shapes and  conformational changes, buoyant
              density separations and the evaluation  of association constants from both
              sedimentation equilibrium and  velocity data. Beckman Instruments has developed
              a new digitally  equipped "state of the art" XL-A analytical ultracentrifuge.
              This  instrumentation coupled with the development of very powerful software 
              for data analysis has generated a renaissance in sedimentation  analysis. As
              the research demand for analytical ultracentrifuge  measurements increases, and
              institutions are faced with limited  resources for equipment, it becomes very
              important to consider  techniques that can increase the efficiency of
              instrument usage and  approaches that advance the analytical capabilities of
              sedimentation  analysis. The P.I. proposes to pursue the above objectives by
              using  gradient forming cells for the rapid establishment of sedimentation 
              equilbrium thereby increasing instrument efficiency enormously and by 
              developing computational software for the determination of diffusion 
              coefficents using band centrifugation. The following specific aims are 
              proposed for the developmental part of this grant application:  1. The
              fabrication and testing of a six step double sector gradient  forming
              centerpiece to achieve rapid sedimentation equilibrium.  Equilibrium times will
              be determined for molecular weight sets of  spherical proteins; DNA fragments
              and plasmids.  2. A simultaneous determination od the sedimentation coefficient
              and  diffusion coefficient would provide a rapid evaluation of the molecular 
              weight of a macromolecule. Computational programs will be developed to  test
              the Vinograd and Bruner (1) proposed band centrifugation moment  re lationships
              for the measurement of diffusion coefficents. The band  centrifugation analysis
              will be compared with other sedimentation  approaches for obtaining diffusion
              coefficients.          An XL-A analytical ultracentrifuge is essential to
              accomplish the above  specific aims. This instrumentation will also support the
              research  needs of six other investigators at UAB and their research proposals 
              represent the multi-user part of this application. The major users  consist of
              faculty from the Microbiology, Biochemistry, Cell Biology,  and the Laboratory
              of Molecular Biophysics.    The Principal Investigator of the grant is Dr.
              Jacob Lebowitz who has  30 years experience in analytical ultracentrifugation.
              Most recently  the P.I. has spent a month at the National Analytical
              Ultracentrifuge  Facility gaining experience using the NON-LIN program for the
              analysis  of sedimentation equilibrium data for self-associating systems. In 
              addition the P.I. has gained experience in the van Holde-Weischet  method for
              the analysis of boundary sedimentation velocity data. The  P.I. is now in an
              excellent position to rapidly apply the XL-A and data  analysis for the
              research problems of the major users and believes that  all the projects
              proposed in the application can be very significantly  assisted by analytical
              ultracentrifugation. The P.I. believes that the  operation of the XL-A and the
              computational analysis of the data can  and should be part of the training of
              biological scientists working on  structure-function problems. The best
              resolution of research problems  rests with those research personnel who will
              be most directly in need  of the results from the sedimentation alalysis. The
              laboratories of the  major users of the XL-A will be required to enroll either
              a  postdoctoral associate or graduate student in a laboratory/lecture  course
              in analytical ultracentrifugation. This training will build a  network of
              investigators that can share knowledge and these individuals  can be called
              upon to assist new  users in the operation of the XL-A and  in data analysis.
              After 2 years long term maintenance of the XL-A will  be on cost sharing basis
              provided by the major users. The P.I. believes  that the above combination of
              training and cost sharing will insure the  long term use of the XL-A
              instrumentation. In summary this combined  development and multi-user
              application will provide new developments  for sedimentation analysis, assist
              important research programs and  develop in young scientists an expertise in
              analytical  ultracentrifugaton.
