Title       : Acquisition of a University Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1995       
File        : a9419609

Award Number: 9419609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Jenkins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan B. Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy S. Petersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter E. Thorsness  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Vogelmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9184,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This proposal requests funds to assist in the purchase of a Confocal  Laser
              Scanning Microscope System (CLSM). The enormous and rapidly  expanding battery
              of antibodies and of other fluorescent probes has  opened the way to a greatly
              expanded use of fluorescent microscopy.  Unfortunately, the thickness and light
              scattering occurring in many  biological specimens seriously compromises the
              sensitivity, clarity and  resolution of even the best epi-fluorescent images.
              CLSM overcomes  these limitations and produces images of great clarity. This 
              instrumentation will serve the needs of biological scientists at the 
              University of Wyoming (UW) whose work focuses on cell architecture and 
              cellular dynamics, organelle structures and their spatial and temporal 
              relationships and the localizations/functions of cell and tissue  antigens. The
              proposal is submitted by a major user group representing  four UW departments:
              Botany, Molecular Biology, Psychology, and Zoology  and Physiology. The system
              will be available to all UW researchers who  have legitimate needs and will
              operate as a bona fide University  instrumentation center. The acquisition of
              this state-of-the-art  instrumentation and the establishment of a CLSM center
              will offer  investigators the opportunity to remain competitive in
              cell/molecular  biology and neuroscience, foster research collaborations and
              provide  training for both undergraduate and graduate students.       The CLSM
              system will initially be used in support of the following  projects:
              Chromosomal Studies in Bromeliaceae (G. Brown, Botany), The  Role of
              Bombesin-like Peptides in Neural Physiology (F. Flynn,  Psychology),
              Applications of Confocal Laser Microscopy to Research on  Nuclear Phenomena in
              Ciliate Protozoa (R. Jenkins, Zoology), Probing  Plant-Fungal Interactions: The
              Form and Physiology of Ectomycorrhizal  Fungal Linkages with Plant Roots (S.
              Miller, Botany), Effects of Heat  on Development: Use of the Confocal
              Microscope to Follow Assembly of  Actin Fibers and Localizati on of Integrins
              Following Heat Shock (N.  Petersen, Molecular Biology), Applications of
              Confocal Microscopy to  Research in Behavioral Neuroendocrinology (J. Rose,
              Psychology),  Confocal Microscopy in Studies of DNA Escape from Mitochondria to
              the  Nucleus (P. Thorsness, Molecular Biology), Laser Confocal Microscopy in 
              Studies of Leaf Structure Function: Do Epidermal Lens Cells Play a Role  in
              Photosynthesis? (T. Vogelmann, Botany).       In addition, the CLSM system will
              be used as a teaching tool within  laboratory based courses within the four
              departments as well as for  closely supervised graduate and undergraduate
              research. The total  project cost is $253,710 of which the University of
              Wyoming has pledged  a 49% match.            NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)    3
