Title       : The Role of Ecological Interactions in Diversification: Rates of Habitat Shifts
               and Within-Habitat Diversification in the Enallagma Damselflies of Two
               Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9419318

Award Number: 9419318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. McPeek mark.mcpeek@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9419318  McPeek          Our ability to steward the world's biological diversity
              depends on our understanding of the processes that generate and maintain
              biodiversity in different ecological settings.  This research explores the
              importance of evolutionary processes in affecting biodiversity patterns in
              different habitats for a group of aquatic insects, the Enallagma damselflies
              (Odonata: Coenagrionidae).  Some Enallagma species are found only in fishless
              water bodies.  Furthermore, 3-4 times more species exist in habitats with fish
              than in fishless habitats.  Aspects of the physical environment, the major
              prey, and major predator species that coexist with various Enallagma species
              will be identified and used to evaluate how these aquatic communities vary
              across the southeastern USA.  Also, a phylogeny for most of the North American
              Enallagma will be developed using modern molecular DNA techniques.  Statistical
              techniques developed to test for differences in diversification rates will be
              applied to evaluate whether the differences in the number of species between
              the two lake types can be explained by speciation and extinction in the group. 
                Along with addressing basic questions about diversification into multiple
              habitats, this study has important implications for the conservation of
              biological diversity.  Most effort for conserving species is directed at the
              processes leading to extinction, because of extinction's immediate and
              irreparable impacts.  However, in the longer term an understanding of how
              conservation practices influence the continued evolution and diversification of
              taxa is needed to preserve functioning ecosystems and the abilities of species
              to respond evolutionarily to long-term environmental changes.  By studying how
              ecological conditions influence diversification, this research will provide
              initial data to evaluate how properties of ecological settings may influence
              the continued evolution of taxa.
