Title       : The Fifth International Symposium on Reproductive Physiology of Fish (July 2-8,
               1995 @ Jester Center Halls-University of Texas at Austin)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9419996

Award Number: 9419996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick W. Goetz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419996  Goetz      The International Symposium on the Reproductive Physiology
              of Fish (ISRPF) was first organized and held in 1977 in Paimpont, France. This
              meeting was followed by a second ISRPF in 1983 in Wageningen, the Netherlands,
              a third in 1987 in St. John's, Newfoundland and the most recent ISRPF was held
              in 1991 in Norwich, England.  The primary goal of the ISRPF is to foster the
              exchange and dissemination of the most recent information on the reproductive
              physiology of fish.  Further, this exchange has included both basic and applied
              researchers.  One important objective is to promote the application of basic
              research information and, in reverse, to inform basic researchers of relevant
              problems facing applied researahers.  The meeting covers a wide range of
              disciplines within fish reproductive physiology from cell/molecular biology to
              behavior and the physiological ecology of fish.  For the first time, the ISRPF
              will hold its meeting in the United States on July 2-8, 1995 at the Jester
              Center Halls of the University of Texas at Austin.  The organization and
              operation of the fifth ISRPF is being carried out by a Local Organizing
              Committee headed by Peter Thomas (Chairperson - U. of Texas, Austin), and the
              scientific program is being organized by a Scientific Program Committee led by
              Dr. Frederick Goetz (Chairperson - U. of Notre Dame).  The scientific program
              will consist of five days of single session oral presentations and posters. All
              oral presentations will be invited and the presenters chosen by the Scientific
              Program Committee.  Sessions will specifically cover gonadal physiology,
              gametogenesis, the hypothalamic/pituitary axis, aquaculture, behavior,
              reproductive life history and environmental influences on reproduction. 
              Proceedings of the oral presentations and posters will be published as a book
              within six months of the meeting.  Financial support, obtained from this grant,
              will be used specifically to defray the registration costs for graduate
              students and postdoctorateq so t hat it is possible for them to attend the
              meeting.  ***
