Title       : Crystallographic Study of a Quinoprotein Electron Transfer System: Methylamine
               Dehydrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1996   
File        : a9419899

Award Number: 9419899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. S. Mathews MATHEWS@BIOCHEM.WUSTL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419899  Mathews  Structural studies will be carried out on the
              quinoprotein-electron  transfer system methylamine dehydrogenase (MADH) from
              Paracoccus  denitrificans by the methods of x-ray diffraction.  Three proteins 
              are involved in this system, MADH, amicyanin and cytochrome c551i.   MADH is an
              H2L2 dimer of 124 kDa and contains the unusual cofactor  tryptophan
              tryptophylquinone (TTQ).  Amicyanin is a blue copper  protein of 12.5 kDa which
              interacts specifically with MADH.   Cytochrome c551i is a 17.5 kDa protein
              which can accept electrons  from amicyanin and transfer them via another
              cytochrome to a  terminal oxidase.  The structures of MADH, amicyanin, the
              binary  complex of MADH with amicyanin and the ternary complex of MADH, 
              amicyanin and cytochrome c551i have been determined.  Refinement of  the
              present complexes will be extended to higher resolution by  cryo-cooling and
              use of synchrotron radiation.  Mutants of  amicyanin will be studied both alone
              and in the complexes.  Studies  of MADH and its electron transfer complexes
              will also be carried  out after reaction with substrates and inhibitors and in
              different  redox states.  The structure of MADH from Methylophilus W3A1, which 
              uses a cytochrome rather than amicyanin as the primary electron  acceptor, will
              be completed and compared with the Paracoccus  enzyme.  Finally, attempts will
              be made to co-crystallize the W3A1  enzyme with a cytochrome electron acceptor
              from the same organism.  %%%  Electron transfer is fundamental to many
              biological processes, but  is difficult to study structurally since the
              components are usually  insoluble and cannot be crystallized.  The proposed
              studies of the  MADH enzyme system will provide valuable information about this
               process.  The interaction of the three components of this soluble  electron
              transport system define molecular features important for  recognition and
              control of electron transfer and define likely  pathways for electron flow. 
              The proposed mutational and ligand-  induced perturbati ons of the system will
              further probe this complex  precess.  In addition, the molecular details of
              substrate oxidation  by the TTQ cofactor will shed light on how this cofactor
              functions  in vivo and how it differs from other, more common redox cofactors. 
              TTQ is unusual because it is obtained directly from the fusion of  two amino
              acid side chains coded by genomic DNA rather than from a  separate biosynthetic
              pathway.  The MADH system is well suited to  provide an understanding of these
              important processes at the  molecular level.  ***
