Title       : Enhancement of DNA Replication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1997       
File        : a9419027

Award Number: 9419027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria L. Gennaro   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Public Health Res Inst
	      
	      New York, NY  10016    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9419027  Gennaro, Maria  During initiation of replication, the specific
              interaction between replication initiation protein(s) and the origin (ori)is
              often modulated by accessory factors that bind to specific DNA sequences called
              replication enhancers. The replication enhancer found in the staphylococcal
              plasmid pT181 has been identified and characterized during the previous
              granting period. The pT181 enhancer, designated cmp, stimulates the interaction
              of ori with the replication initiation protein, RepC, from a site located at a
              distance of 1,000 base pairs (bp) from ori. cmp binds a chromosomally-encoded
              accessory protein called CBF (cmp-binding factor).  Dr. Gennaro was recently
              cloned the gene encoding CBF.  These studies will advance the present
              understanding of a distant replication enhancer and its cognate accessory
              factor(s) and contribute to the definition of general rules underlying
              enhancement of DNA replication, such as involvement of accessory proteins,
              competition between origins in the same cell, and action at a distance.  To
              achieve the goals, genetic and biochemical studies will be performed, often in
              parallel. Using the cloned cbf gene, the role of CBF in replication enhancement
              by cmp will be assessed a) by producing a host mutant carrying a defective cbf
              gene in which cmp activity can be studied in the absence of the CBF product,
              and b) by correlating in vivo activity of mutant cmp sequences with their
              ability to bind CBF in vitro. Three different models of replication enhancement
              by cmp are proposed. One model postulates a truly distant action by cmp on ori,
              while others involve protein-protein interactions between RepC and CBF. Since
              cmp activity is associated to changes in linking deficit (supercoiling), the
              nature of cmp-associated supercoiling changes will be determined by using
              torsionally tuned Z-DNA probes to measure intracellular superhelical tension in
              cmp+ and cmp- plasmids. Results of these supercoiling experiments should
              contribute support to one of the models pr oposed for cmp activity. Finally, a
              mutant screen will be undertaken, searching for host-linked mutations that
              suppress Cmp-. Putative host factor(s) obtained using this mutant screen should
              help define the intracellular signals to which cmp may respond to stimulate
              plasmid replication. Understanding the mechanism of action of accessory DNA
              sites located far from the origin of DNA replication and the soluble factors
              interacting with those sites is expected to contribute to our understanding of
              the regulatory circuitry governing initiation of DNA replication.  %%%  The
              overall goal of these studies is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms that
              regulate DNA replication. DNA replication is a key event in the cell cycle that
              determines efficient and faithful duplication of the genetic material.  A
              variety of regulatory circuits are imposed upon the replication initiation
              step.  Initiation can respond to stimulatory mechanisms that activate the
              origin, either transcriptionally or through the activity of distinct, often
              distant, DNA elements called replication enhancers.  A major objective of these
              studies is to characterize the function of a bacterial replication enhancer and
              of the soluble protein factor(s) interacting with it. These studies are
              expected to advance our understanding of the complex regulatory circuitry
              governing cell growth and, of how different replicons are controlled within the
              same cell.  ***  ??
