Title       : The Divide-and-Conquer Density-Functional Approach for Large Molecules and for
               Molecules on Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1996   
File        : a9419391

Award Number: 9419391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weitao Yang yang@chem.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Weitao Yang at the Chemistry Department of Duke University is  
              supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry   Program
              at NSF for studies of the electronic structure of large systems.   These
              studies involve the divide-and-conquer, D&C, approach which has   been
              pioneered by Professor Yang. The D&C approach to electronic   structure divides
              a large system into many smaller systems and the   electron density of each
              system is determined separately. The density and   properties of the entire
              system are obtained by appropriately combining   the results for the
              sub-systems. The D&C approach provides a powerful way   to use Density
              Functional Theory to determine the energies and other   properties of large
              systems, condensed matter as well as isolated   molecules. One focus of the
              work supported by this grant is to enhance   and extend the mathematical
              methods used in the D&C approach. In   particular, energy gradients are being
              calculated in order to allow the   efficient calculation of the stable
              geometries of these large systems.   There is also effort directed toward
              combining quantum mechanics and   molecular mechanics. The accurate quantum
              mechanical treatments are used   to describe regions of the system where there
              are important chemical   effects. On the other hand, the more approximate
              molecular mechanics   treatments are used to describe the environment of these
              regions. The   second focus of the work supported by this grant is to apply the
              D&C   approach to the study of the bulk and surface properties of solids. An  
              advantage of D&C  is that it can be used in a straightforward way to   treat
              systems without translational symmetry; thus, problems involved in   the
              adsorption, or chemisorption, of atoms and molecules on surfaces are   being
              treated.   A major limitation for accurate theoretical treatments of large
              molecular   systems has been the exponential increase in computational effort
              with   the size of the system being studied. A similar comment holds for the  
              size of the repeat unit, or unit cell, of solids. For a large system, it   is
              possible to relate the scaling of the computational effort to the   number of
              atoms, N, contained in the system. Ab initio methods scale at   the fourth or
              even higher powers of N and standard Density Functional   methods scale as the
              third power of N. However, the D&C approach to   Density Functional methods
              scales linearly with N; this linear scaling   could make accurate treatments
              possible for quite large systems. If the   efforts supported by this grant are
              successful, a major breakthrough will   have been made.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
