Title       : Acquisition of Phosphorimager
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9419819

Award Number: 9419819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56210              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mariano A. Garcia-Blanco garci001@mc.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The proposal before you requests partial funding for a  PhosphorImager to
              be used by members of the Departments of Pharmacology  and Molecular Cancer
              Biology of the Duke University Medical Center. The  proposal describes two
              major areas of research that join the different  investigators (both major
              users and minor users), in common pursuit.  First, is the understanding of
              signal transduction networks in  eukaryotic organisms, particularly in areas
              related to the cell cycle  and cellular differentiation. Second, is the
              understanding of the  structure, function and regulation of eukaryotic genes.  
                         The elucidation of the networks of intracellular signalling in 
              eukaryotes will be accomplished by work on a variety of organisms. The  work of
              Drs. Garrett and Lew addresses issues of cell cycle regulation  and
              differentiation in the baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Dr.  Means uses
              Aspergillus nidulans to address the importance of calcium  binding proteins in
              signalling. Xenopous laevis oocytes and mammalian  cell lines are used by Drs.
              Bell, Pendergast, Shenolikar, Swenson and  Wang to elucidate signalling
              pathways with an emphasis on the  importance of phosphorylation and
              dephosphorylation. Dr. Casey also  uses mammalian cell lines to unravel the
              signalling mediated by small G  proteins,. The precise regulation of
              intracellular signalling is  modulated by subtle changes in multiple pathways.
              Reliable  quantification of these changes has been difficult, if not
              impossible,  to document using autoradiographic techniques. PhosphorImager 
              technology is the standard for this quantification and the studies  described
              in the proposal require ready acces to this technology.              The study
              of gene structure and expression has resulted in some of  the most dramatic
              revolutions in modern biology. Work to understand the  transcription regulation
              of gene expression following cellular  activation is ongoing in the
              laboratories of Drs. Horowitz, McDonell,  Pendergast, and Wang. Dr. Gar
              cia-Blanco has focused his research on the  mechanism and regulation of
              pre-mRNA processing in mammalian cells and  in Drosophila melanogaster. The
              regulation of DNA synthesis as an  integral decision of cycling cells is
              investigated in Xenopous laevis  oocytes by Dr. Kornbluth. All of these
              projects require precise  quantification of specific macromolecules, which is
              best done using  radiolabel and PhosphorImager technology.              This
              dynamic and productive group of investigators needs this  technology in order
              to continue an outstanding program of research. In  the proposal it is
              explained how this instrument will benefit the group  and the institution.
