Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: The Effects of Environmental Conditions on CO2
               Fixation and the Photosynthetic Apparatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1998        
File        : a9726524

Award Number: 9726524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur R. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0521400   Plant Productivity                      
Program Ref : 5921,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9726524  Grossman    This award supports the participation of American
              scientists  and engineers in a U.S.-Japan seminar on the effects of 
              environmental conditions on CO2 fixation and the  photosynthetic apparatus, to
              be held in Pacific Grove,  California in November, 1998.  The co-organizers are
              Dr.  Arthur Grossman of the Carnegie Institution of Washington  and Professor
              Tatsuo Omata of Nagoya University in Japan.  The emphasis of the seminar will
              be on the ways in which  photosynthetic organisms cope with their environment
              and  will include researchers from different disciplines; some of  these
              disciplines emphasize a reductionist approach while  others view acclimation
              processes at the more global scale.  The former gains strength by helping to
              provide detailed  mechanistic information that can help us predict the 
              consequences of change, while the latter can often identify  major large scale
              problems and give the reductionists a  perspective on the problem.  A
              binational dialogue among the  researchers of different disciplines will help
              identify  important areas for further analysis and lead to  collaborative
              efforts to meet the challenge of coping with  changing environmental
              conditions.    Developing a more detailed understanding of this broad area  of
              research will help in understanding factors that limit  plant growth and
              productivity in given environments.  Additionally, it might enable us to extend
              the range of  environments in which specific plants can survive and might  also
              provide new insights into the ways in which long-term  changes in the
              atmosphere of the earth (gas composition,  incident light intensity and quality
              and temperature) will  affect the growth and photosynthetic activity of plants.
               The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in this  field will
              enable U.S. participants to advance their own  work, and will set the stage for
              future collaborative  projects.  Seminar organizers have made a special effort
              to  involve younger researchers, postdoctoral resea rchers and  graduate
              students.  Proceedings of the meeting are expected  to be made available by the
              organizers.  ***
