Title       : Phylogenetic and Monographic Studies in the Aralia-Panax Complex of the Ginseng
               Family (Araliaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2000     
File        : a9726830

Award Number: 9726830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Wen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9726830    Wen    Project Title:  Phylogenetic and Monographic Studies in the
              Aralia - Panax Complex of the Ginseng Family (Araliaceae)    The disjunct
              distribution of many morphologically similar plants in eastern Asia and eastern
              North America represents a well-known biogeographical pattern.  However,
              Liquidambar, a biogeographic model in the North Temperate zone, recently was
              shown to have given rise to the subtropical genera, Altingia and
              Semiliquidambar, despite high levels of morphological cohesion in Liquidambar. 
               These studies from Dr. Wen's laboratory strongly suggest the need for
              examining the evolution of other eastern Asian and eastern North American
              disjuncts in a broader biogeographical context, including temperate,
              subtropical, and tropical regions.  The Aralia - Panax complex, which includes
              the medicinally important ginseng species, American ginseng and sanchi, is an
              ideal candidate for such a study.  The genera consist of approximately 75
              species that have a wide distribution in the temperate and tropical regions in
              Asia and the Americas; Dr. Wen will collect specimens for the study in
              Argentina, Peru, Indonesia, China, Nepal, and Vietnam.  Three major groups
              (Panax, Aralia sect. Aralia, and Aralia sect. Dimorphanthus) have disjunct
              distributions in eastern Asia and North America.  Previous studies by the PI
              documented phylogenetic patterns in each of the three lineages and suggested
              that the close relationship between the eastern Asian and eastern North
              American disjuncts has been over emphasized.  The goals of this study are to 1)
              construct a robust phylogeny of the Aralia - Panax complex with evidence from
              morphology, nuclear ribosomal DNA and chloroplast DNA, 2) examine the eastern
              Asian and eastern North American disjunct pattern in the broader context of
              temperate and tropical Asia and the Americas, 3) evaluate the previous
              classification of the complex and examine the evolution of several frequently
              used taxonomic characters, 4) provide taxonomic treatments for Panax  and
              Aralia sect. Aralia, and 5) develop a World Wide Web page on the systematics of
              the economically important ginseng genus, posting information on morphology and
              nomenclature, taxonomic keys, species descriptions, distribution maps,
              conservation status, ethnobotany, common names, color photographs showing
              diagnostic characters, and updated references.  The taxonomic treatment of the
              ginseng genus will be valuable for future pharmacological and ecological
              research and for efforts to balance the conservation and the human use of these
              resources.  This study will also provide important insights into the relative
              utility of different types of data for phylogenetic comparisons in plants.
