Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Concentration Flux Measurements and Modeling
               of Scalar Transport in Bounded Turbulent Shear Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9726632

Award Number: 9726632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Wallace wallace@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence Ong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Bernard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
Program Ref : 5918,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This three-year award provides support for US-France cooperative research on
              studies of   the dispersion of passive scalar contaminants from line and point
              sources at the wall of   turbulent boundary layers.  The investigators will
              conduct theoretical and experimental   studies into the behavior and prediction
              of scalar fields as it relates to urban air quality.    The collaboration
              involves research groups led by James M. Wallace of the University of  
              Maryland and Michel Ayrault of the Fluid Mechanics and Acoustics Laboratory of
              the   Ecole Centrale in Lyon, France.  The experiments will combine optical
              measurement   methods:  Particle Image Velocimetry and Mie scattering
              concentration measurements in   order to obtain scalar fluxes in the flows.  In
              addition, the investigators will examine the   predictive capabilities of a new
              non-local scalar flux model for the same flow conditions   considered in the
              experimental work.  The combined theoretical modeling and   experiments will
              advance understanding of the behavior and prediction of scalar fields,   thus
              reducing a principal source of uncertainty in urban air quality modeling.  The
              US investigators bring to this collaboration expertise in studies of turbulent
              boundary   layers and scalar dispersion.  This is complemented by French
              expertise in PIV/Mie   scattering techniques and a special windtunnel adapted
              to accommodate the requirements   of the PIV/Mie scattering measurement
              techniques.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
