Title       : The Impact of Episodic Events on Nearshore-Offshore Transport in the Great Lakes
               (Meterological Modeling Program)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9726679

Award Number: 9726679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Roebber roebber@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9726679  Roebber    Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement  
              of Opportunity (NSF 97-38)for Coastal Studies in the Great   Lakes.  This is a
              collaborative research project between   investigators from ten academic and
              government research   institutions.  The research is being conducted under the 
               auspices of the NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program   and the NOAA
              Coastal Ocean Program.    This collaborative, 5-year research program will
              focus on   the importance of episodic events on nearshore-offshore   transport
              and subsequent ecological consequences. The study   seeks to 1) determine what
              processes control the cross-  margin (inshore to offshore) transport of
              biological,   chemical, and geological materials in the coastal margins of  
              the Great Lakes, and to 2) develop and test scientific   strategies for
              assessing, quantifying, and predicting the   impacts of multiple stresses both
              natural and anthropogenic,   in the Great Lakes or selected coastal
              sub-regions.    A tight coupling between contaminated sediments and   overlying
              water exists in lakes and coastal ecosystems  through the process of sediment
              resuspension. Satellite   observations in Lake Michigan illustrate an annually 
               recurrent episode of nearshore-offshore transport, a 10 km   wide plume of
              resuspended material extending over 200 km   along the southern shores of the
              lake. Preliminary evidence   indicates that this episodic event may be the
              major   mechanism for cross-margin sediment transport in Lake   Michigan.  This
              type of event impacts recycling of   biogeochemically important materials
              (BIMS), ecosystem   responses, cross-isobath transport in the Great Lakes. The 
               program results will be applicable to similar events in many   coastal areas. 
                This comprehensive, interdisciplinary study will implement   an integrated
              observational program and numerical modeling   effort to identify, quantify,
              and develop prediction tools   for the winter-spring resuspension event and to
              assess the   impact of  this event on the transport and transformation of  
              BIMS and on lake ecology.    The objective of this research is to accurately
              describe the  overwater wind field to be used as input for circulation  
              modeling of Lake Michigan for identified episodic transport   events during the
              retrospective period and the two field   years of the program. The study will
              test the hypothesis   that the generation of cross-isobath transport of
              material   in Lake Michigan is an episodic response to storm events    that
              occur during a critical time brought about by seasonal   preconditioning of the
              dynamic-thermodynamic structure of   the lake.
