Title       : Challenges in CISE: Virtual Environments for Telesurgery and Surgical Training:
               Efficient Computation, Visualization and Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9726362

Award Number: 9726362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1004922            (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian A. Barsky barsky@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. Shankar Sastry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2884,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9726362  Barsky, Brian  Sastry, S. Shankar  University of California, Berkeley  
               Challenges in CISE:  Virtual Environments for Telesurgery and Surgical
              Training: Efficient  Computation, Visualization and Interaction    This
              research is focused on virtual environments for telesurgery and will   result
              in software testbeds for eye and abdominal surgery.  The development   of these
              testbeds depends on the integration of the following research   activities:   
              Tissue modeling and rendering.  For effective surgical training in virtual
              environments, deformable models   of tissue are needed with sufficient
              accuracy, yet fast enough for real   time interaction. Beginning with continuum
              models of solid behavior,   suitable approximations will be developed that
              account for the compliance   of tissue and the deformation of organs in the
              presence of a surgical tool.   Methods for representing and rendering tissue
              shape, especially aspects   that affect lighting models that provide important
              visual cues, will be   compared.    Haptic interaction with simulated models. 
              There has been little work done or kinesthetic perception and display of  
              compliant surfaces.  Subjects' perception of compliance will be measured  
              under a variety of conditions to provide requirements for object modeling  
              algorithms, and for teleoperation and haptic display schemes with high  
              fidelity.    Real time data fusion and 3-D visualization.  Although surgeons
              have a variety of data sources available, they are not   integrated into a
              useful 3-D model.  A major difficulty in integrating real   time data during
              surgery is compensating for shape changes due to   deformability.  Vessels and
              ducts will be used to provide road-maps to locate   important features.   
              Training and interaction with simulation.  Modeling, rendering, and display
              factors that contribute to an environment   that will be effective for
              training, yet efficient enough to run in real   time will be determined.  Using
              a set of fundamental skills, the   contribution  of these factors to training
              transfer in students and   experienced surgeons will be experimentally studied.
