Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Structure, Seismicity and Tectonics of the
               Japanese Island Arc from New Deep Seismic Exploration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a9726766

Award Number: 9726766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry D. Brown brown@geology.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
Program Ref : 5921,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726766  Brown    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor Larry Brown of Cornell University  and Professor
              Naoshi Hirata of the University of Tokyo in  Japan.  The researchers will be
              undertaking a study of the  structure, seismicity and tectonics of the Japanese
              island  arc from new deep seismic exploration.   Japanese scientists  are
              developing a program for the systematic exploration of  the Japanese islands by
              deep seismic surveys on land to be  combined with comparable efforts by marine
              groups offshore.  They are developing a new deep seismic reflection/refraction 
              transect.  The transect will attempt to delineate the deep  geometry of major
              active, intra-arc faults at depth in an  area where the current tectonic
              boundary conditions are  relatively simple.   These geometries are a critical
              missing  element in understanding strain partitioning within the  crust and the
              dependent dynamic models of earthquake  tectonics.  The  researchers will focus
              on optimal design  and execution of deep seismic surveys, coupled with an 
              integrated, global approach to interpreting the results of  those surveys.    
              This project brings together the efforts of two  laboratories that have
              complementary expertise and research  capabilities.  The Cornell group will
              provide expertise in  the application of reflection seismic methods to a wide 
              variety of lithospheric imaging problems while the Japanese  researchers will
              provide expertise in fault tectonics and  earthquake mechanisms. The geologic
              targets of deep seismic  profiling in Japan are of scientific interest in their
              own  area.  However, these results are also likely to have much  broader
              implications for researchers in other areas, both in  terms of technique
              development and geological models of  continental evolution and active
              tectonics.  Younger  scientists will also be participating in this project. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project  will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promo te  international understanding and
              cooperation.  ***
