Title       : Variable Bit-Rate Control of Distributed Sensor Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a9726253

Award Number: 9726253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269643             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kamal Premaratne kamal@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christos Douligeris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              An accurate model of an ATM communication network must take into account the
              buffer delays which are time-variant, and nonlinearities arising from buffer
              and source rate saturation and quantization.  The time-variant buffer delays in
              particular play a crucial role in the dynamic behavior of high-speed networks. 
              The ensuing nonlinear time-variant model however is extremely difficult to
              analyze.  All existing work therefore rely on simplified linear piecewise
              time-invariant models.  At simulation stage, network flow controller designs
              based on such models may appear satisfactory; however, when applied to a
              high-speed system, the true network often exhibits undesirable behavior in
              contrast to what is predicted.

In this proposal, a more realistic model for
              high-speed networks that includes time-variant delays and nonlinearities will
              be developed.  A distributed sensor network (DSN) that operates in a highly
              dynamic environment is a particularly demanding application where the network
              time-variance cannot be ignored.  Indeed, treating such a network by
              conventional piecewise time-invariant methods can lead to unacceptable
              oscillatory behavior.

Communication and processing of signals from a DSN
              that utilizes a variety of sensors which may be distributed logically,
              spatially, and geographically, is an essential problem encountered in several
              areas, such as, robotics, automation, aerospace, medical imaging, etc.  In such
              a DSN, decisions are made at each node in a particular hierarchical level by
              fusing data communicated from the lower levels.  In a highly dynamic
              environment where the observed scene can change frequently and dramatically, it
              is essential that importance measures or weights are attached to nodes in the
              network.  This allows allocation of `importance proportional rates' to each
              node.  Such a paradigm, when implemented via an ATM network with the available
              bit-rate (ABR) option, is shown to allow effective utilization of bandwidth,
              possibility of capturing transient network dynamics with minimal data loss, and
              adaptability to fast changes and faults.  To accommodate `bursty' traffic,
              buffer set points are allowed to be varied according to importance of
              corresponding nodes.  Furthermore, network configuration guidelines that allow
              maximum utilization of the proposed variable bit-rate scheme are
              provided.

To ensure fault tolerance, each node is provided with a local
              controller whose parameters are chosen to guarantee the node rate to conform to
              the allocated weight within a specified settling time.  The fundamental
              requirement of stability of such a time-variant network is achieved via recent
              results on robust stability.  The same methods will be used to provide bounds
              on maximum delays involved and buffer lengths.  This allows effective
              utilization of the proposed strategy of variable buffer set points.  For the
              assignment of importance measures and weights to each node, Dempster-Shafer
              evidential reasoning techniques are invoked.  


