Title       : A Diachronic Study of Prepositional Phrases in Latin Noun Phrases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9726601

Award Number: 9726601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31687              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Wharton wharton@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                One of the notable linguistic features of classical Latin, when compared with
              its Indo-European relatives, both ancient and modern, is its relatively
              infrequent and selective use of adnominal prepositional phrases; for example,
              phrases like, `a bird in the hand` are rarely found. Both traditional
              philological studies and linguistically oriented ones have shown that, in
              classical Latin, prepositional phrases may assume only a limited number of
              roles in the noun phrase (e.g. Theme, but not Agent, and only a restricted set
              of Goals).  It is commonly said that adnominal prepositional phrases occur both
              more frequently and more freely in post-classical Latin, indicating that, as
              early as the first century CE, Latin's use of adnominal prepositional phrases
              began shifting toward that of its Romance offspring. Evidence for this shift
              is, however, rather anecdotal, and to date no controlled frequency studies have
              been undertaken, nor has the nature of the increased freedom, ever been
              precisely defined, although it is well known that in Medieval Latin,
              prepositional phrases representing Agents are well-attested.  This study
              proposes to fill one of the gaps in our knowledge of the change from Latin to
              Romance, first by gathering a corpus of adnominal prepositional phrases from
              Latin prose texts ranging from the 2nd century BCE to the sixth century CE,
              then by measuring, recording, and analyzing their frequency of occurrence, and
              finally by analyzing the corpus to see what it can tell us about changes in the
              Latin noun phrase. The corpus itself will be stored both in ASCII format and in
              a relational database, both of which will be obtainable on the World Wide Web
              via FTP.  The analysis will concentrate on the argument structure of noun
              phrases containing prepositional phrases, and especially on the expansion of
              the kinds of thematic roles (e.g., Agent, Experiencer, Goal) that prepositional
              phrases came to encode. The study will provide new and detailed evidence which
              will shed light on more generalized linguistic phenomena, such as the decay of
              the system of nominal inflection, involved in the change from Latin to Romance.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
