Title       : Regional Problems and Local Solutions in the Post-Soviet Transition: An
               Ethnographic Study of Reindeer Herding Communities in the Chuckota Autonomous
               Okrug
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9726308

Award Number: 9726308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Duguay                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter P. Schweitzer ffpps@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patty Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Simon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5221      ARCTIC SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9726308  Schweitzer    This pilot project investigates the social,
              economic, political and cultural aspects of reindeer herding during the
              post-Soviet period of transition ill the Chukotka Autonomous 0krug.  Reindeer
              herding in the Russian has perhaps never been faced with such rapid and
              sweeping changes as in this unstable time.  With the abrupt withdrawal of the
              large government subsidies that kept reindeer state farms operational, they
              must now adapt to the  changing political and economic conditions or risk
              failure -- not merely economic failure, but failure in their ability to provide
              the basic social service that rural Northern communities have come to depend on
              for their very survival.  A variety of restructuring options have been put into
              effect at different reindeer herding operations, but they have experienced
              dramatically varying outcomes.  Why are some thriving while others are
              struggling to survive, or even dissolving?  Reindeer herding is treated by
              administrators as just one of the many branches of the former Soviet economy
              that must now become privatized; but is reindeer herding as practiced today an
              enterprise that can deliver a product to market and a profit to its owner?  And
              is that the most important reason for its existence, from the point of view of
              those who practice it?  This research examines why reindeer herders and
              administrators choose the options they do, and evaluates the consequences of
              those choices.  The Chukotakan case provides valuable comparative data on the
              ways in which privatization and agricultural reform are implemented in the
              regions of the Russian Federation and the kinds of responses that are emerging
              to the rapid social change resulting from the post-Soviet transition.
