Title       : The Role of Heritability, Environment, and Mechanism in Phenotypic Expression of
               Paracerceis sculpta (Crustacoa: Isopoda)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a9726504

Award Number: 9726504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Shuster stephen.shuster@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Shuster  9726504    Two questions are central to research in ecological and
              population genetics: (1) what is the genetic basis for complex traits, and (2)
              how are genes expressed in different environments? This project will address
              these questions in Paracerceis sculpta, a marine isopod in which three distinct
              male morphs coexist: alpha-males are largest and defend harems in sponges using
              elongated posterior appendages; beta-males invade harems by mimicking female
              behavior and adult body form; gamma-males invade harems by being small and
              secretive. Females are monomorphic. A single gene (Ams) controls male
              differences in P. sculpta.  Sex determination in this species is chromosomal. 
              Another gene (Tfr) interacts with Ams and with sex chromosomes to bias family
              sex ratio. Isopods complete up to eight generations per year.    The first
              objective of this research is to determine whether observed population dynamics
              in adult body form and sex ratio can be attributed to the interaction of simple
              genetic factors. Field-collected males will be crossed with females from two
              specific laboratory lineages. The progeny of these crosses will exhibit
              distinctive family signatures in adult body form and sex ratio depending on
              their fathers' genotypes at Ams, Tfr and primary sex determination genes. The
              second objective is to determine how natural environmental variation may
              influence the expression of these genetic factors. Individuals of known genetic
              background will be reared under high and low treatments of food, temperature, 
              day-length and density. Such detailed experiments are seldom possible with
              longer-lived species.    Paracerceis sculpta provides a precise experimental
              system for determining how genetic variation is maintained in nature, and how
              genes are expressed in different environments. The significance of these
              questions to population genetics and evolutionary biology is profound.
              Moreover, these questions can be addressed in a species whose population
              biology and inheritance mechanisms are kno wn. This system thus provides
              fundamental insights for studies of breeding system dynamics and sex ratio
              evolution in other animal species.
