Title       : Testing the Role of Reproductive Assurance Selfing in the Maintenance of Mixed
               Mating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9726980

Award Number: 9726980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Kalisz kalisz@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Kalisz  9726980     A plant's mating system (the degree to which it outcrosses
              rather than self  pollinates) is a vital determinant of genetic variability at
              the population  level.  While theoretical studies have demonstrated that either
              complete   outcrossing or complete selfing are stable evolutionary states,
              mixed   mating (whereby progeny are sired by a mixture of self and outcross
              pollen)  is not as easily explained. Yet in nearly half of the animal
              pollinated   plants studied, intermediate outcrossing rates (those between
              20-80%) are   observed.  The current study utilizes the winter annual,
              Collinsia verna,   the Blue-eyed Mary, as a model organism to examine the
              consequences of   variability of pollinator activity over the flowering season
              and its   influence on the evolution of self pollination as a back-up strategy
              (i.e.,  reproductive assurance selfing). Using clonal replicates of individual 
               plants in a series of integrated field and controlled environment  
              experiments, the correlations between specific floral attributes conferring 
              delayed selfing, fruiting success via self pollination, and the degree of  
              inbreeding depression expressed by those individuals will be quantified.  
              These measurements will be interpreted in the light of a novel field   bioassay
              which allows us to quantify the frequency of pollinator failure   from the
              perspective of paired flowers which are experiencing common   resource
              conditions.  Field estimates of pollinator failure and selfing   ability will
              be compared with estimates of the natural outcrossing rates   derived for three
              populations across the flowering season and across two   years.         The
              proposed research addresses the links between selective pressures on   delayed
              selfing via pollinator mediated pollen limitation, the expression   of mixed
              mating, and inbreeding depression expressed in natural populations  of
              Collinsia verna.  The actual, physical process of reproductive assurance 
              selfing has been characterized for very few species.  Q uantifying the   timing
              of self-pollination within a flower, and the associated   morphological traits
              will address an important issue in evolutionary   ecology: how developmental
              processes (like the timing of anther and pistil  elongation) contribute to
              selfing rates and how they evolve. Moreover, this  research will be the first
              to test the mixed mating model of Schoen and   Brown (1991) which indicates
              that when environmental variation in   pollinator availability exists,
              reproductive assurance is more important in  driving the evolution of a mixed
              mating system than is inbreeding   depression.  As a result, this work will be
              of interest to plant   geneticists, crop breeders and conservationists who work
              with species which  may become pollen-limited due to unusual weather patterns
              or regional   epidemics in key pollinators (e.g. as has happened recently to
              honeybee   populations).
