Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Origin and Evolution of Amitochondriate Protists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9726707

Award Number: 9726707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miklos Muller mmuller@rockvax.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9726707  Muller    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor Miklos Muller of Rockefeller  University and Dr.
              Masami Hasegawa of the Institute of  Statistical Mathematics in Japan.  The
              researchers will be  undertaking studies relating to the origin and evolution
              of  amitochondriate protists.  The main goal of the  collaboration is an
              in-depth study of the nature and  phylogenesis of single celled eukaryotes that
              harbor no  mitochondria, functioning as energy conservation systems.  Although
              mitochondria provide a significant energenetic  advantage to eukaryotic
              organisms, they are absent from a  number of independent lineages.  According
              to phylogenetic  reconstructions some but not all amitochondriate protists 
              represent early branches of the eukaryotic tree.  Recent  research suggests
              that most if not all amitochondriates  descended from mitochondria containing
              ancestors.  The  research aims to contribute data and concepts in an effort  to
               resolve this central issue of the evolution of  eukaryotic cells.     This
              project brings together the efforts of two  laboratories that have
              complementary expertise, research  capabilities and equipment.  The
              collaboration will unite  the Tokyo group to functional molecular facilities
              fully  equipped for cultivation of the protists,  enzyme studies  and molecular
              cloning.  The Rockefeller group will have  access, in Tokyo,  to extensive
              computing facilities with  high-powered, novel methods of sequence comparison
              and  phylogenetic reconstruction.  Results of the research should 
              significantly advance understanding of the evolutionary  history of an unusual
              but widely distributed group of  eukaryotes.  Through the exchange of ideas and
              technology,  this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and  promote
              international understanding and cooperation.  ***
