Title       : Uncoating of a Helical Virus: Cotranslational and Coreplicational Disassembly
               Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a9726966

Award Number: 9726966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Webb   (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Shaw  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Shaw (University of Kentucky) EPSCOR  9726966  Uncoating of a Helical Virus:
              Cotranslational and Coreplicational  Disassembly Mechanisms  1. Technical  Of
              all the stages of the infection process by an animal or plant virus, uncoating
              of the viral genome or disassembly of the virus particle is one of the least
              understood. This study examines tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), as its
              positive-sense RNA genome is enclosed (encapsidated) in rod-shaped particles.
              TMV particles undergo bidirectional disassembly after being introduced into
              plant protoplasts.  The viral RNA is initially uncoated in the 5'-to-3'
              direction and the process is completed by the removal of coat protein molecules
              (subunits) in the 3'-to-5' direction.  Two hypotheses are set forth to account
              for the  bidirectional disassembly: (1) in vivo uncoating begins by a
              cotranslational disassembly mechanism in which the removal of subunits in the
              5'-to-3' direction is coincident with ribosome translocation during translation
              of the first ORF of the viral RNA; (2) in vivo uncoating is completed by a
              coreplicational disassembly mechanism in which the viral polymerase proteins
              (encoded by the first ORF and/or its readthrough sequence) are involved in the
              removal of subunits in the 3'-to-5' direction and the synthesis of progeny
              minus-strand viral RNA molecules. These hypotheses are tested by determining
              the behavior of various TMV mutants.  The possibility that regions in the
              polymerase proteins that are not involved in replication may be required for
              3'-to-5' disassembly will also be explored. The significance of this study lies
              in its atttempt to understand a stage of life in which the ultimate success or
              failure of a virus to initiate infection in host cells is determined.  2.
              Non-technical  Particles of tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) disassemble in
              inoculated plant cells, which allows the genome to be released so that the
              production of  progeny virus particles can proceed, inducing the pathogenic
              state in the host organism. In this process, about  75% of the subunits is
              first removed, sequentially, beginning at one end of the viral genome; the
              remainder is then removed proceeding from the other end. The first step may
              involve concomitant synthesis of viral proteins, and the other may involve the
              production of copies of the viral RNA. Experiments are designed to examine the
              validity of each of these hypothetical mechanisms.
