Title       : Stability of Land Surfaces in the Dry Valleys: Insights Based on the Dynamics of
               Sub-Surface Ice and Sand Wedge Polygons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a9726139

Award Number: 9726139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414198             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Hallet hallet@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald S. Sletten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the  National Science
              Foundation, supports a project to study  features of the landscape and soils of
              the Dry Valley region  of Antarctica toward a fuller understanding of past
              climatic  and environmental conditions.  The dynamic nature of climate  has
              received growing public attention because of the  occurrence of seemingly
              extreme weather events recently, and  growing concerns about warming. El Nino
              and global  greenhouse warming have become familiar topics in the news.  In
              this context, it is increasingly important to understand  the inherent
              variability of Earth's climate and how humans  affect can affect Earth's
              environment.  One important means  of improving our understanding of the
              Earth's climate system  is to treat the Earth as a natural laboratory and
              examine  it's past behavior.  One of the most extreme changes in the  Earth
              climate system during the last few million years is  the transition from a warm
              period in the Pliocene to an ice  age world.  In Antarctica, this interval of
              time is thought  to have seen relatively mild conditions give way rapidly to 
              intense glacial conditions that catalyzed the growth of the  largest ice sheet
              on Earth. This inference is based on  geologic indicators of past climate from
              which some  scientists suggest that East Antarctica was relatively warm  and
              largely free of glaciers about 3-4 millions years ago  (during parts of the
              Pliocene). The mild conditions ended  abruptly by rapid ice-sheet growth and
              development of the  very cold, dry climate that now characterizes this region.
              A  contrasting view, based on substantial geologic evidence,  suggests that
              East Antarctica has been cold and the ice  sheet stable for at least 8 million
              years, and perhaps  considerably longer. These views lead to drastically 
              different interpretations of the stability of Earth's  climate.  This project
              will contribute to a resolution of  this important dilemma by introducing
              independent new  evidence and insights der ived from studies of the stability 
              of ground ice and land surfaces in the Dry Valleys,  Antarctica.  This project
              will study modern day processes  that have important implications for
              understanding the  occurrence of buried ice found recently in Beacon Valley. 
              This ice may be the oldest ice on Earth and, if so, provides  strong evidence
              of long-term stability of the East Antarctic  ice sheet and may provide a rare
              glimpse at atmospheric  conditions millions of years ago. Specific processes to
              be  investigated include: energy exchange at the ground surface  that affect
              ground temperature, water vapor transport and  other processes leading to the
              formation or loss of ice in  the soil, and frost cracking due to contraction
              during rapid  cooling of the frozen ground in the winter and its resulting 
              disruptions of the soil.
