Title       : Challenges in CISE: TUNE: System Support for Memory-Friendly Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2000 
File        : a9726370

Award Number: 9726370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1547929            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kishor S. Trivedi kst@ee.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Board  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaobai Sun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alvin Lebeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2882,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9726370  Trivedi, Kishor  Board, John A.  Duke University    Challenges in CISE:
               TUNE: System Support for Memory-Friendly Programming    The pervasive use of
              multi-level memory hierarchies in microprocessor-based machines makes the
              performance of an application primarily determined by and extremely sensitive
              to its memory mapping, and requires memory-friendly programming: careful layout
              of data structures and restructuring of code to improve data locality. 
              Techniques for improving memory system performance manifest themselves at
              various levels, from high-level algorithms and data structures, through
              compile-time analysis and restructuring of programs, to special architectural
              primitives that allow an application to better manage the memory hierarchy. 
              The lack of automatic tools for improving data locality currently forces many
              application programmers to manually restructure their codes.  Unfortunately,
              the sophisticated algorithms seen in modern scientific computing require
              equally sophisticated restructuring techniques.  These techniques require
              expertise in computer architecture, burden the programmer with tedious
              machine-specific details unrelated to program correctness, and reduce the
              readability, maintainability, and portability of the restructured code.  For
              all these reasons, manual restructuring of programs of any significant size is
              untenable, and some kind of system support is necessary.  This project targets
              all aspects of this problem, from developing the relevant mathematical
              techniques for representing and manipulating data locality, through
              implementing interactive and automatic data locality management tools, to
              proposing innovative memory architectures for future-generation systems.  The
              efficacy of the resulting system will be demonstrated using programs
              representative of modern scientific computations including divide-and-conquer
              scientific computations such as N-body solvers (e.g., fastmultipole) and many
              linear algebra kernels (e.g., Strassens's matrix multiplication algo rithm).
