Title       : Analytical Chemical Approaches to the Elucidation of the Structure of
               Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9726183

Award Number: 9726183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $371000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evan R. Williams williams@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program,
              focusses on the development and characterization of new  method for probing the
              mechanisms and energetics of large ion  dissociation in electrospray ionization
              and matrix assisted laser  desorption/ionization mass spectrometry.  Professor
              Williams and  his students at the University of California at Berkeley will 
              experimentally and theoretically study this new method, blackbody  infrared
              radiative dissociation, with smaller biomolecules  initially.  A long-term goal
              of this work is to understand the role  of salt bridges involving acidic
              residues in peptides in the gas  phase.  The unique feature of this new method
              is ions ranging in  size from small to large can be trapped in a
              Fourier-transform mass  spectrometer cell and exposed to blackbody photons that
              activate  dissociative processes under controlled conditions.  This  experiment
              permits study of the kinetics and mechanisms of these  processes which also
              occur in other ion dissociation methods, but  under uncontrolled conditions.   
              A new method for inducing chemical reactions for ions ranging in  size from
              small to large is being developed and characterized in  conjunction with mass
              spectrometry experiments.  Professor Williams  and his students at the
              University of California at Berkeley will  use blackbody infrared photons to
              initiate these reaction under  controlled conditions in a mass spectrometer
              cell.  The  experimental and theoretical characterization of this new method, 
              developed in Professor Williams' laboratories, will permit the  study of the
              conformation of large biological molecules, such as  DNA, in the gas phase. 
              This information is important for  understanding the chemistry of these
              biological molecules and their  structures.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
