Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: High-Resolution Angle-Resolved Photoemission
               Study of High Tc Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9726550

Award Number: 9726550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan Carlos Campuzano jcc@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9726550  Campuzano    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor Juan Carlos Campuzano of the  University of Illinois
              in Chicago and Professor Takashi  Takahashi of Tohoku University in Japan.  The
              researchers  will undertake a high-resolution angle-resolved  photoemission
              study of high Tc superconductors.  They will  research an area of high
              temperature superconductivity as  well as fundamental questions related to
              dimensionality in  certain superconducting ladder compounds.  The main 
              objective of the research is to extend their current  experiments with new
              materials being developed in Japan, and  currently not available in the U.S. 
              The Japanese have state-  of-the-art equipment that will allow for
              investigation of  problems of current interest in condensed matter physics, 
              such as the connection between dimensionality and non-Fermi  liquid behavior,
              and the connection between spin gap  behavior and the presence of a pseudogap. 
              Detailed momentum  dependence and photon energy dependence of the photoemission
               features will be investigated in the U.S. and extreme energy  resolution
              experiments will be carried out in Japan.     This project brings together the
              efforts of two  laboratories that have complementary expertise, research 
              capabilities and equipment.  The U. S. researchers have  ultra-high resolution
              capabilities but no frequency tuning,  while the Japanese have the highest
              resolution spectrometer  available, coupled with the highest intensity source 
              available. Young investigators, from both countries, will be  significantly
              involved in the research.  Through the  exchange of ideas and technology, this
              project will broaden  our base of basic knowledge and promote international 
              understanding and cooperation.  ***
