Title       : A Systematic Study of Overcoat-Lubricant Interfaces Used in Magnetic Recording
               Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a9726146

Award Number: 9726146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis W. Frank curt@chemeng.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher A. Klug  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)  project
              is supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities.  It  focusses on collaboration between Stanford
              University and IBM  Almaden Research Center on an extremely important problem, 
              increasing the durability and areal density of magnetic recording  media. 
              Professor Klug and his students at Stanford University will  work in close
              collaboration with Drs. Wade and Sherwood at IBM  Almaden to systematically
              study the overcoat-lubricant interface of  hard disks using surface
              spectroscopy and solid-state Nuclear  Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy. 
              Overcoats on sol-gel silicon  dioxide and on amorphous carbon composed of
              perfluoro-polyethers  will be the focus of this study.  The technology of
              magnetic  recording devices will be improved by this project and this high 
              risk-high return project will enhance the educational experience of  students.
              The students will gain broad experience in an industrial  setting ranging from
              basic laboratory work to implementation in a  manufacturing facility.  The
              mentoring of these students by many  industrial scientists will be invaluable
              to them as they make  career decisions.  Professor Klug and his students at
              Stanford University will  collaborate with Drs. Wade and Sherwood at IBM
              Almaden Research  Center in the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with 
              Industry project to study the surfaces of magnetic recording  materials. 
              Through a systematic study of the lubrication  properties of these surfaces
              computer hard disks will be developed  that have increased data storage
              capacities and improved  durability.  Solid-state Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
              Spectroscopy  will be the central method used to study these surfaces and
              special  attention to handling of these thin film materials will be required 
              in this work in order to obtain useful information.  Professor Klug  and his
              students will gain valuable experience through  collaboration with their IBM
              industrial partners during this  project.  Mentoring of these students by
              industrial scientists will  be invaluable as they make future career decisions.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
