Title       : Phylogeny and Biogeography of the Dichrostachys Group (Mimosideae Leguminosae)
               in Madagascar: Evidence from Morphological and Molecular Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a9726981

Award Number: 9726981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94502              (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa A. Luckow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726981    Luckow    Phylogeny and biogeography of the Dichrostachys group
              (Mimosoideae:Leguminosae) in Madagascar: evidence from morphological and
              molecular studies.     The Madagascan biota qualifies as one of the most
              diverse on earth, whether  one measures biodiversity using raw numbers of
              species, unique features, or phylogenetic position. Estimates of over 10,000
              species of flowering plants have been reported from an area about 1000 miles
              long and 360 miles wide, and the large number of endemic species often possess
              extreme morphological innovations not seen in  related taxa native to other
              regions. Thus, Madagascar offers an ideal system in which to investigate the
              factors influencing both speciation and morphological diversity and
              elaboration.  An assemblage of three genera of mimosoid legumes, the
              Dichrostachys group has radiated widely throughout Madagascar, with all but
              three of approximately 30 species endemic to the island.  The group provides a
              model system for investigating the evolution of Malagasy plants both because
              there are a large number of species and because they are widely distributed
              throughout the dry, seasonally dry, and moist forests of Madagascar. 
              Phylogenetic analyses based on molecular and morphological data will be used to
              address questions relevant to systematics, pollination, and biogeography. 
              Generic boundaries have been controversial in the Dichrostachys group, and the
              phylogeny will serve as a basis to define monophyletic genera.  Pollinator
              shifts and correlations of pollinators with changes in inflorescence color and
              other floral traits will be examined.  Of special interest will be the
              comparison of the pollinators of one introduced species both in Madagascan and
              in native South African populations.  In particular this will permit us to
              explore such questions as: are changes in inflorescence color accompanied by a
              shift in pollinators?   Are ontogenetic color changes associated with
              pollinator shifts?  The phylogeny will also be used in biogeographic stu dies
              of areas of endemism within Madagascar.  Specifically, the proposed
              biogeographic study will explore the relationship between speciation and
              geological processes, addressing questions such as:  Is there a correlation
              between soil type and speciation in Madagascar?  Is this a general phenomenon
              that can be measured across unrelated groups?  Is there correspondence of
              phylogenies and geologic events indicating a general pattern of speciation
              through time?  This investigation also will contribute primary descriptive data
              in the form of a monograph, an enumeration of pollinators, and the detailed
              mapping of species distributions.  The detailed mapping of species
              distributions can be used to corroborate or refute generalizations about the
              primary vegetation types that recently have been classified using satellite
              imagery.  The Dichrostachys group has never been monographed and there are
              species new to science as well as new information on previously described
              species. The biota of Madagascar is currently one of the most threatened in the
              world and the need for this work is urgent.
