Title       : Species Turnover, Trophic Coupling and Life History Tradeoffs: Plankton Food Web
               Structure Along a Gradient of Lake Size/Depth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9726555

Award Number: 9726555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Tessier tessier@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Tessier    9726555      A substantial amount of current ecological work focuses
              on the interfaces between population, community and ecosystem ecology.  One
              focus within this area consider how food-web structure interacts with abiotic
              features of the environment.  This proposal would explore these features by
              considering community structure characteristics systematically along a gradient
              of lake forms that exhibit substantial differences in their basin features with
              consequent differences in physico-chemical features and the occurrence of
              fishes, a major player in lake food webs.    In temperate zone lakes with
              warm-water fisheries, lake size and depth strongly regulate the types of fishes
              that are present within a basin.  Environmental stress is more common in
              smaller water bodies to the extent that fishes are excluded from shallow or
              small basins.  Fishes have been shown to have controlling influences over lake
              food webs and shifts in suspension-feeding zooplankton and their food sources
              can be expected with changes in fishes.  This work would involve a systematic
              comparison of how food-web structure and trophic coupling change along a
              gradient of lake size and depth.    Investigation will combine comparative data
              and experiments along the lake gradient to evaluate interactions between
              habitat and food-web characteristics.  It would specifically examine the nature
              of heterogeneity within the suspensio-feding zooplankton and their resource
              assemblages.  The ultimate goal of this project is to integrate considerations
              of life-history strategies into food-web, and ultimately ecosystem-process
              evaluations.
