Title       : An Electronic Forum for Design and Manufacturing Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9726178

Award Number: 9726178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jens E. Jorgensen jorgen@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Heim  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1340,1463,7410,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  This grant provides funding for the development of an internet-based
              electronic forum and workshop for design and manufacturing education.  The
              electronic forum and workshop will provide organization and focus for the
              growing body of research data, information and materials created by educators
              and industry professionals.  A network-centric approach will help ensure that
              those materials are more widely accessible, and interactive aspects of the
              forum and workshop system will foster opportunities for expanded dialogue and
              interaction among faculty, students and organizations interested in design and
              manufacturing education.  The forum will also be a place where faculty,
              students and industry can organize and coordinate a wide variety of
              collaborative activities, develop and exchange course materials, and share
              resources and information that will enrich the engineering educational
              experience.  The electronically publishable results of the many Technology
              Reinvestment Projects manufacturing engineering education partnerships will
              provide initial content and motivation for organizing electronic workshops;
              these resources will be expanded and encompass a broad spectrum of resources
              from those involved and interested in manufacturing education.      The design,
              development and conduct of an electronic community provides a unique research
              opportunity for faculty and students, and a major objective is to ensure that
              knowledge about development and conduct of electronic forums is broadly
              available to individuals or groups wishing to establish similar kinds of
              communications infrastructures.  Although electronic forum and workshop will be
              developed for initial use by the engineering community concerned with design
              and manufacturing education issues, the software, data structures, tools and
              operational guidelines for operation of the system will be designed in a
              content-neutral manner.  By changing appropriate configuration parameters,
              other disciplines and groups will be able to deploy an instance of the
              electronic forum and workshop framework to support their unique
              network-mediated dialogue and seminars and create specialized databases and
              rich subject-specific resources for sharing and exchange within their community
              of interest.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
