Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Influence of Natural Processes and Human
               Modifications of River Channels on Stream-Groundwater Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9726535

Award Number: 9726535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Wondzell wondzell@fsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick J. Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1325,5921,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726535  Wondzell    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor Steven Wondzell of Oregon State  University and
              Professor Futoshi Nakamura of Hokkaido  University in Japan.  The researchers
              will be exploring the  influence of natural processes and human modifications
              of  river channels on stream-groundwater interactions in the  hyporheic zone of
              mountain streams.  The overall objective  is to learn about controls on the
              extent of the hyporheic  zone and associated biological and geochemical
              processes in  mountain watersheds.  The researchers are interested in 
              constraints on vertical and lateral exchange flows of  surface and groundwater
              and how exchange flows may be  limited by controls on flow path direction and
              flow rate.  Their general approach is to combine: (1) field studies of 
              existing natural and managed sites;  (2) before/after  observations at sites
              altered by natural processes or  experimental manipulations of flood control
              structures; and  (3) modeling to draw general conclusions about types and 
              magnitudes of effects of various constraining factors.     This project brings
              together the efforts of two  laboratories that have complimentary expertise,
              research  capabilities and equipment.  Streams at the Andrews  Experimental
              Forest in Oregon range from relatively pristine  to moderately impacted.  They
              offer the opportunity to study  the natural dynamics of forest-stream
              interactions and their  influence on surface-and subsurface exchange flows. 
              Stream  networks in Japan are highly modified relative to streams in  the
              Pacific Northwest.  Thus, the Japanese streams provide  an important contrast
              to the pristine streams in Oregon.  Research results will include further
              refinements of the  conceptual framework for riparian ecosystems as well as 
              specific findings relevant to the mountain streams under  study.  Through the
              exchange of ideas and technology, this  project will broaden our base of basic
              knowledge and promote  international understand ing and cooperation.  ***
