Title       : The Impact of Episodic Events on Nearshore-Offshore Transport in the Great
               Lakes: Sediment Resuspension and Transport Modeling Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a9726682

Award Number: 9726682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $587965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith W. Bedford bedford.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement   of Opportunity
              (NSF 97-38)for Coastal Studies in the Great   Lakes.  This is a collaborative
              research project between   investigators from ten academic and government
              research   institutions.  The research is being conducted under the   auspices
              of the NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program   and the NOAA Coastal Ocean
              Program.    This collaborative, 5-year research program will focus on   the
              importance of episodic events on nearshore-offshore   transport and subsequent
              ecological consequences. The study   seeks to 1) determine what processes
              control the cross-  margin (inshore to offshore) transport of biological,  
              chemical, and geological materials in the coastal margins of   the Great Lakes,
              and to 2) develop and test scientific   strategies for assessing, quantifying,
              and predicting the   impacts of multiple stresses both natural and
              anthropogenic,   in the Great Lakes or selected coastal sub-regions.    A tight
              coupling between contaminated sediments and   overlying water exists in lakes
              and coastal ecosystems  through the process of sediment resuspension. Satellite
                observations in Lake Michigan illustrate an annually   recurrent episode of
              nearshore-offshore transport, a 10 km   wide plume of resuspended material
              extending over 200 km   along the southern shores of the lake. Preliminary
              evidence   indicates that this episodic event may be the major   mechanism for
              cross-margin sediment transport in Lake   Michigan.  This type of event impacts
              recycling of   biogeochemically important materials (BIMS), ecosystem  
              responses, cross-isobath transport in the Great Lakes. The   program results
              will be applicable to similar events in many   coastal areas.    This
              comprehensive, interdisciplinary study will implement   an integrated
              observational program and numerical modeling   effort to identify, quantify,
              and develop prediction tools   for the winter-spring resuspension event and to
              assess the   impact of this event on the  transport and transformation of  
              BIMS and on lake ecology.    This component of the study focuses on development
              of an   Eulerian sediment resuspension and transport model for Lake   Michigan
              by integrating a hydrodynamic model with a sediment   transport model that
              includes the effects of wave current   interaction, variable bed properties,
              and flocculation of   fine-grained sediments. Concurrently, a Langrangian-based
                particle tracking model will be developed to provide   predictions of
              particle trajectories and residence times.
