Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Effects of Percolation on the Mechanical and
               Electrical Properties of Nanocomposite Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9726537

Award Number: 9726537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Baer exb6@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Hiltner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5918,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This two-year award provides support for US-France cooperative research on the
                development of new composite materials with novel interactive electrical and
              mechanical   properties.  The collaboration involves Eric Baer and Anne Hiltner
              at the Center for   Applied Polymer Research, Case Western Reserve University,
              and Jean-Yves Cavaille at   the Center for Research of Macromolecules, Joseph
              Fourier University, Grenoble, France.    The investigators will explore the
              development of new materials using nano-scale   conductive cellulose whiskers,
              which will be dispersed in a thermoplastic matrix and   coextruded with an
              elastomeric polymer.  Using microlayer multiplying technology, the  
              investigators will try to produce nano-scale layered composite materials. 
              Parallel studies   will be conducted on the electrical characteristics of the
              microlayered composites and the   viscoelastic mechanical properties of these
              systems.  The mechanical properties of the   microlayers will be measured in
              the US laboratory.  French investigators will determine the   electrical and
              coupled mechanical-electrical properties.  The US investigators bring to this
              collaboration expertise in microlayer multiplying   technology and materials
              processing.  This is complemented by the French investigators'   experience in
              nano-scale materials.  The French group developed the nano-scale   conductive
              cellulose whiskers to be used in this project.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
