Title       : The Genetic Basis of Reproductive Isolation: QTL Mapping and Hybrid Zone
               Analysis Between Aquilegia Formosa and A. pubescens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  2000   
File        : a9726272

Award Number: 9726272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294230             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Hodges hodges@lifesci.lscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726272  Hodges    Two species of the columbine genus Aquilegia, A. formosa and
              A. pubescens,   have very different floral morphologies and are predominantly
              pollinated by   different animals. A. formosa has red, pendent, short-spurred
              flowers   pollinated by hummingbirds and A. pubescens has white, upright,  
              long-spurred flowers pollinated by hawkmoths.  While these two species are  
              fully compatible in controlled crosses, they rarely crossbreed in nature   due
              to the differences in their flowers. The two species' distributions   overlap
              in the southern Sierra Nevada mountains of California where narrow   hybrid
              zones form. We will determine the number of genes responsible for   the
              differences in floral morphology by utilizing techniques developed for   animal
              and plant breeding. Because hybrid zones do occur where these   species
              overlap, genes from one species that are not affected by natural   selection
              can penetrate beyond the hybrid zone into the other species.   However, genes
              that are affected by natural selection are prevented from   penetrating the
              alternate species. We will determine how natural selection   acts on each
              segment of the genome by measuring the degree it is able to   penetrate beyond
              the hybrid zone.         A major goal of evolutionary biology is to understand
              the genetic basis of   traits conferring reproductive isolation. These traits
              are responsible for   the generation and maintenance of biological diversity.
              Many scientists   believe that most adaptive differences between species arise
              from the   accumulation of many small genetic changes while others believe that
              they   arise from a few changes with large effects. This issue has remained  
              unresolved because detailed genetic studies have been limited to only a few  
              model organisms. In addition, the number of traits and the proportion of   the
              genome important for species isolation is unknown. By synthesizing   genome
              mapping techniques with hybrid zone analyses a detailed examination   of the
              genetics of specie s isolation will be possible.
