Title       : Photochemical and Photophysical Mechanisms of Transition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1999   
File        : a9726889

Award Number: 9726889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Ford ford@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program provides continued support for photochemical research by Dr.   Peter C.
              Ford, Chemistry Department, University of California, Santa   Barbara.  Work
              will focus on two classes of compounds:  metal nitrosyl   and nitrito
              complexes, and polynuclear copper(I) complexes.   The goal of   the first
              project is to elucidate the photochemical mechanisms of nitric   oxide (NO)
              generation as well as the dynamics of NO reactions with metal   centers of
              bioinorganic interest.   Flash and continuous photolysis of   various
              mononuclear metal nitrosyl and metal nitrito complexes will be   conducted,
              placing particular emphasis on compounds that may serve as   precursors for the
              photochemical delivery of NO  to desired targets on   demand.    In addition,
              the synthesis and photochemical-photophysical   characterization of dual
              chromophore systems that might serve as   luminactive sensors for detection of
              NO will be studied.  The second   project will investigate the photoluminescent
              behavior of mononuclear and   cluster compounds containing d-10 metal centers,
              primarily copper(I),   including how the excited state properties respond to
              perturbations in   the properties of the media.  When light is absorbed by a
              molecule, the energy that the molecule   acquires is sometimes used to initiate
              a chemical reaction and sometimes   is re-emitted as light of a different
              wavelength (luminescence).  The   methods used in this study enable changes of
              both types to be determined.    Nitric oxide(NO) affects bioregulatory and
              immune response and medical   benefits could be derived from controlled release
              of NO at specific   targets.  This study will contribute to the understanding
              of the   interaction of NO with biomolecules and the ability to monitor its  
              effects.  Studies of the changes of excited state properties of metal  
              clusters are relevant to the design, optimization, and application of  
              photooptical devices and photocatalysts.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
