Title       : Innovative, Internet-Based Protocols for the Rapid Acquisition of Biodiversity
               Collection Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9726116

Award Number: 9726116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Haynes RHAYNES@BIOLOGY.AS.UA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Ginzbarg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9139,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This Small Grant for Exploratory Research proposes to  develop innovative data
              acquisition protocols for  information associated plant biodiversity voucher 
              collections.  The conceptual innovation of the proposed work  is the separation
              of the process of specimen data  acquisition from the processes of keystroke
              data entry.  Acquisition of data will be accomplished by imaging plant 
              specimens, in situ, within the collection galleries. The  images will then be
              communicated over the Internet to a  remote data entry contractor where the
              scientific data  within the image will be converted to structured data  records
              and then returned via the Internet to the  collection.    This data acquisition
              protocol development project is  significant for two reasons: 1) There are an
              estimated 60+  million plant specimens in research collections in the U.S. 
              alone.  Each specimen includes historical distribution data  on the world's
              flora and data from only an estimated 2% of  the specimens in U.S. collections
              have been captured in  automated systems.  This information stored in museum 
              cabinets is the result of 300 years of biodiversity  inventories on the planet
              and represents a monumental human  and financial investment in the US
              biological  infrastructure. 2) The project is critically examining the 
              scientific and management components of data entry  protocols, with the primary
              objective of minimizing cost.  The largest impediment to bringing the data
              archived on the  labels of 60 million plant specimens into currency is the 
              scale of the challenge.  This project will examine several  work protocol
              variations to attempt to find efficient and  economically scalable techniques
              that could be implemented  generically across the collections community for the
              rapid  development of computerized indexes of the holdings of  biodiversity
              research institutions.  The results of this  work will likely contribute
              significantly to the National  Biological Infrastructure (NBII) by producing
              tools,  protocols and standards  for rapid data entry from biological 
              collections.
