Title       : Wilderness Policies and Cultural Values in Finland and the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1998   
File        : a9726044

Award Number: 9726044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles E. Myers                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20430              (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Gladden ffjng@aurora.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5221      ARCTIC SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              WILDERNESS POLICIES AND CULTURAL VALUES IN FINLAND AND THE UNITED STATES    As
              part of a comprehensive, multi-year study of comparative wilderness polices in
              the circumpolar north, this study is designed to analyze the types of human
              uses permitted in wilderness areas in terms of the cultural values they
              represent.  Finland in its northern region and the United States in Alaska are
              well suited for a comparison of Arctic Circle that policies.  Both countries
              have large amounts of land near and above the Arctic Circle that remain in a
              relatively undeveloped and natural condition.  Each also has established
              legislative mechanisms to designate lands under its sovereign control as de
              jure wilderness. Finland and the United States have indigenous populations in
              their Arctic regions; northern Finland is the homeland of the Saami, while
              Inuit and Athabascans inhabit northern Alaska.    Although Finland and the
              United States share the above traits as Arctic countries, they differ in
              several respects.  The northern geography of Finland is linked directly to its
              southern, more populated and urban regions, while Alaska is detached from the
              contiguous United States.  Finland also has a younger policy history of
              establishing and managing de jure wilderness.  In 1964 the US Congress passed
              the Wilderness Act, and in 1980 it approved the Alaska Lands Acts.  The Finnish
              Parliament passed its Wilderness Act in 1991, establishing 12 areas in its
              Arctic region as de jure Wilderness.      The study, an initial comparison of
              circumpolar wilderness policies, seeks to increase understanding in three areas
              of concern.  First, the study describes the specific types and levels of human
              uses permitted by government policies in Finland's northern wilderness areas. 
              Second, it analyzes these human uses in terms of what they suggest about the
              underlying cultural values held toward nature by Finland.  Third, the study
              analyzes uses permitted by public policies in Alaska's wilderness areas with
              Finland's, comparing and contrast ing their cultural approaches to the place of
              humans in nature.
