Title       : LTER: Plum Island Sound Comparative Ecosystem Study (Pisces)Effects of Changing
               land Cover, Climate and Sea Level on Estuarine Trophic Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9726921

Award Number: 9726921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4140000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Hopkinson chopkins@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Giblin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Hobbie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda A. Deegan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce J. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1316,1650,4444,9251,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               Human activities in rivers and watersheds have altered enormously the timing,
              magnitude and nature of inputs of materials such as water, sediments, nutrients
              and organic matter to estuaries. An important but neglected linkage between
              land and coastal waters is the input of dissolved and particulate organic
              carbon and organic nitrogen. This long term ecological research (LTER) in
              land/ocean margin ecosystems will focuses on the question-How will trophic
              structure and primary and secondary productivity in estuaries be affected by
              changes in organic matter, nutrient and water fluxes caused by changing land
              cover, climate and sea level? The project examines this question through 1)
              short  and long term measurements of the fluxes of dissolved and particulate
              organic carbon and organic nitrogen entering estuaries from land, marshes and
              the ocean, 2) short and long term manipulative experiments to determine the
              effects of nutrient and organic matter interactions on the flow of C and N
              through pelagic and benthic food webs, and 3) modeling the effects of land use
              changes on food web transformations. The proposed research integrates estuarine
              biogeochernistry with studies of food webs and population biology of higher
              trophic levels. The research program will create a legacy of well designed and
              documented ecological experiments and observations. A data base of research
              results will be accessible (WWW) to the scientific community.  The study builds
              on the existing long term research record at Plum Island Sound, MA, and at the
              North Inlet, SC and Wells, ME National Estuarine Research Reserves. Intensive
              work will take place at Plum Island Sound, and specific comparative studies at
              North Inlet and Wells. The research is designed to take advantage of natural
              differences between these systems to determine the importance of inorganic and
              organic matter interactions in controlling trophic structure, production and
              efficiency.  The project will make a unique contribution to our understanding
              of land margin ecosystems by determining how changing nutrient supply interacts
              with the quality and quantity of organic matter to affect estuarine trophic
              structure. It will also develop modeling methods to link highly variable
              physical drivers, here tides, long term sea level rise, river inflow, and water
              circulation, with the understanding of ecological processes. The dynamic models
              developed will be useful in a variety of ways for predicting effects of various
              coastal management options. For example, the spatially explicit models to be
              developed can be used to predict the effects of changing land use on
              eutrophication and fish production.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
