Title       : Evolution of Resistance and Tolerance in Wild Sunflower Helianthus annuus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2001  
File        : a9726407

Award Number: 9726407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana Pilson dpilson@unl edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726407  Pilson             The goal of this work is to examine constraints on
              the joint evolution of   resistance to, and tolerance of, insect damage in the
              wild sunflower, Helianthus   annuus.  A plant is resistant if it experiences
              little insect damage relative to   other plants in the population.  In
              contrast, a plant is tolerant if it experiences   damage, but that damage has
              little effect on plant fitness.  Although most studies of   the evolution of
              plant response to herbivory have only considered resistance,   a theoretical
              model suggests that resistance and tolerance do not evolve   independently.
              This work will test several specific assumptions and   predictions of that
              model.  These predictions include the cost to plants of   being either
              resistant to, or tolerant of, damage, the genetic structure of   populations
              experiencing herbivory, and the type of natural selection imposed   on
              populations by insect herbivores.  Testing these predictions will involve the
              use of   quantitative genetic methods to quantify genetic variation for
              resistance   and tolerance to several common insect herbivores, including the
              stem and   head-boring lepidopteran, Suleima helianthana, the head-clipping
              weevil,   Haplorhynchites aeneus, the seed-feeding weevils Smichronyx fulvus
              and S.   sordidus, and the head-feeding lepidopteran Homeosoma electellum. 
              These   data will also be used to measure natural selection on resistance and  
              tolerance, the pattern of correlations between resistances and tolerances   to
              different herbivores, and the costs of these characters.  In addition,  
              mechanisms of tolerance will be examined.  Previous work suggests that  
              tolerance may typically be considerably more costly than resistance.   However,
              little is known about characters conferring tolerance, and thus,   little is
              known about why tolerance may be costly.  The hypothesis that variation   in
              plant life history leads to variation in tolerance will be tested..  Additional
                experiments will quantify resource allocatio n patterns and floral phenology,
                and will determine if these characters are correlated with the ability of
              plants   to tolerate insect damage.            Herbivory by insects is
              generally detrimental to plant fitness.  In   addition, genetic variation for
              resistance to herbivory is nearly ubiquitous   in natural plant populations. 
              These data suggest that insects should   frequently impose natural selection on
              plant resistance, and further, that   such selection should proceed until
              either plant populations are maximally   resistant or genetic variation is
              exhausted.  That selection has apparently   not acted in this way has
              stimulated considerable interest.  One explanation   for this anomalous result
              is that resistance is costly to plants.  If this   is the case, then resistant
              plants should have high fitness in the presence   of insects, but low fitness,
              relative to susceptible plants, in the absence   of herbivores.  This is
              because when herbivores are absent resistant plants   bear the cost of
              resistance but receive no benefit.  However, many attempts   to quantify costs
              of resistance have failed.  This work will determine   whether simultaneously
              considering resistance and tolerance allows costs of   these characters to be
              detected, and may provide one explanation for the   abundance of genetic
              variation for resistance in natural plant populations.
