Title       : The Effects of a Recurrent Spring Plume on the Dynamics and Structure of the
               Lower Food Web in Southern Lake Michigan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1998    
File        : a9726681

Award Number: 9726681
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258213             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne S. Gardner gardner@utmsi.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9726681  Gardner    Research will be undertaken in response to an
              Announcement of Opportunity (NSF 97-  38)for Coastal Studies in the Great
              Lakes.  This is a collaborative research project   between investigators from
              ten academic and government research institutions.  The   research is being
              conducted under the auspices of the NSF Coastal Ocean Processes   (CoOP)
              program and the NOAA Coastal Ocean Program.    This collaborative, 5-year
              research program will focus on the importance of episodic   events on
              nearshore-offshore transport and subsequent ecological consequences. The  
              study seeks to 1) determine what processes control the cross-margin (inshore to
              offshore)   transport of biological, chemical, and geological materials in the
              coastal margins of the   Great Lakes, and to 2) develop and test scientific
              strategies for assessing, quantifying, and   predicting the impacts of multiple
              stresses both natural and anthropogenic, in the Great   Lakes or selected
              coastal sub-regions.    A tight coupling between contaminated sediments and
              overlying water exists in lakes and   coastal ecosystems through the process of
              sediment resuspension. Satellite observations in   Lake Michigan illustrate an
              annually recurrent episode of nearshore-offshore transport, a   10 km wide
              plume of resuspended material extending over 200 km along the southern   shores
              of the lake. Preliminary evidence indicates that this episodic event may be the
              major   mechanism for cross-margin sediment transport in Lake Michigan.  This
              type of event   impacts recycling of biogeochemically important materials
              (BIMS), ecosystem responses,   cross-isobath transport in the Great Lakes. The
              program results will be applicable to   similar events in many coastal areas.  
               This comprehensive, interdisciplinary study will implement an integrated
              observational   program and numerical modeling effort to identify, quantify,
              and develop prediction tools   for the winter-spring resuspension event and to
              assess the impact of this event on the    transport and transformation of BIMS
              and on lake ecology.    This component of the study focuses on structure and
              abundance of microbial food web   organisms before, during, and after plume
              formation; measure Nitrogen cycling rates in   relation to community and
              species-specific grazing rates of microzooplankton within, at   the edge, and
              outside of the plume. Observations, experiments, and results will be  
              coordinated with those from primary production and zooplankton grazing
              experiments and   other studies of nutrient and physical processes to complete
              a conceptual model and   provide data for the proposed coupled
              biological/physical model.
