Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Hydrogeologic Analysis of Oriented Carbonate
               Concretions, Sierra Ladrones Formation, New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1997  
File        : a9726416

Award Number: 9726416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41495              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Mozley mozley@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      P O Box Q, Campus Station
	      Socorro, NM  878010389    505/835-5700

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726416  Mozley    The effect of geological heterogeneity on fluid flow is one
              of the most difficult issues when dealing with problems of contaminant
              transport.  Spatial variations in permeability result in spatial variations in
              velocity which in turn result in dispersion.  Significant theoretical advances
              have provided a quantitative framework for understanding the relationship
              between geologic heterogeneity and dispersion.  However, many questions  remain
              regarding the nature of geologic heterogeneity and how fluids flow through
              media exhibiting multiple scales of heterogeneity.  Two types of field studies
              have traditionally been used to complement the theoretical models.  Large-scale
              subsurface tracer experiments focus on the spatial variation in hydraulic
              conductivity and the resulting plume behavior.  Outcrop studies have provided
              insight into the nature of geologic heterogeneity and its relation to
              stochastic models.  However, these two approaches are somewhat isolated in that
              the large scale tracer experiments have studied the evolution of plumes but are
              limited in their ability to document geologic heterogeneity and velocity
              correlation structure.  Conversely, outcrop studies provide high-resolution
              information on the geologic heterogeneity, but historically, have not
              quantified an explicit flow component.  We have found evidence that elements of
              diagenetic fabrics preserve quantitative information about the paleogroundwater
              flow in the Sierra Ladrones   Formation, New Mexico.  The orientations of
              elongate carbonate concretions ranging in size from centimeters to 10s of
              meters are interpreted as indicators of paleogroundwater flow direction.  The
              proposed research will obtain important additional data and employ
              state-of-the-art quantitative methods to further test the hypothesis that
              concretion orientations record local groundwater flow directions.  We will test
              this hypothesis by 1) obtaining additional data on the hydrogeology and
              concretion orientations, 2) obtaining high-resolution  images of concretion
              chemistry and growth history, and 3) conducting numerical experiments of flow
              and chemical reactions to test conceptual models of concretion growth.  Our
              mapping will include both meter-scale studies of primary sedimentary
              structures, concretion orientations, and permeability as well as mapping
              concretion orientations and facies assemblages at the scale of 100s of meters. 
              We will test alternative models of concretion origin by characterizing
              geochemical zonation (ICP-MS and Ion Microprobe) and presence of relict
              microbial populations (SEM).  Numerical modeling of flow, transport, and
              reactions will provide the quantitative means of synthesizing our
              hydrogeologic, petrographic, and geochemcial results.  The research under this
              collaborative arrangement between Davis (EAR 9725194) and Mozley (EAR 9726416)
              will focus on hydrogeologic mapping (concretion orientations and hydrogeologic
              properties) and characterizing concretion growth characteristics (petrography
              and geochemistry).  The reactive transport modeling will be conducted in a
              cooperative arrangement with Dr. H. Rajaram under EAR-9734404.  If these
              oriented concretions do record paleogroundwater flow directions, they may
              provide further insight into how fluids flow through porous media over large
              spatial scale exhibiting multiple scales of heterogeneity.
