Title       : The Genetic Control and Evolutionary Significance of a Barrier to Interspecific
               Hybridization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a9726502

Award Number: 9726502
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Howard dahoward@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Cain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Howard  9726502            Ten years of research have demonstrated that the
              ground crickets, Allonemobius fasciatus and A. socius, are reproductively
              isolated by conspecific sperm precedence.  In other words, the two species
              produce few hybrids in nature because sperm from one species operates poorly in
              the reproductive tract of females from the other species.  This is one of the
              very few situations in which biologists have a clear understanding of the trait
              that reproductively isolates two closely related species.  The genetic control
              of this reproductive barrier will be assessed through a quantitative trait loci
              (QTL) mapping study.  This is a relatively new technique that allows biologists
              to enumerate and locate the genes (or QTLs) that control a complex trait, such
              as conspecific sperm precedence.  The mapping populations will be large enough
              to detect QTLs that have even a small effect on conspecific sperm precedence. 
              Thus the study will allow a clear evaluation of the role of genes with large
              effects and the role of genes with small effects on the development of
              reproductive isolation.  Once QTLs have been identified, the effects of each
              will be examined on an individual basis.  Through carefully designed genetic
              crosses, single QTLs from A. fasciatus will be introduced into A. socius and
              vice-versa.  The crickets so   produced will allow a QTL to be studied in
              isolation from its usual genetic background, and thereby directly test the role
              of the QTL in controlling conspecific sperm precedence.   Finally, recent
              studies indicate that conspecific sperm precedence evolves quickly and may
              often be the first reproductive barrier to arise between diverging populations.
               Therefore, it is important to understand how such a barrier influences zones
              of overlap between closely related species.  The effect of conspecific sperm
              precedence on zones of overlap will be analyzed through a genetic and
              demographic modeling approach.          Speciation, the process by which new
              species are formed and ther efore the process responsible for the diversity of
              life on earth, is relatively poorly understood by biologists.  This is a
              critical shortcoming in humanity's efforts to preserve species diversity, which
              cannot succeed unless new species continue to be generated.  Reaching an
              understanding of the genetic basis of reproductive barriers between closely
              related species has proven   particularly difficult.  The difficulty can be
              attributed to two factors: 1) the multi-faceted nature of reproductive
              isolation makes it hard to identify the traits that isolate two species, and 2)
              the tools necessary to dissect complex traits were not, until recently,
              available.  In the case of A. fasciatus and A. socius the first difficulty was
              overcome by ten years of painstaking research.  The second difficulty has been
              overcome by recent   advances in genetics that have led to the development of
              markers that can be mapped in virtually any organism.  Mapped markers allow the
              effects of different regions of the genome on a reproductive barrier to be
              monitored. Combining the current understanding of the Allonemobius system with
              these new developments in genetics will provide unprecedented insight into the
              genetics of reproductive barriers.  In particular, the proposed research will
              allow a determination of whether reproductive isolation between A. fasciatus
              and A. socius is controlled by a few genes of major effect or by many genes of
              small effect.  This distinction is at the center of a debate that has raged for
              more than a century and is critical for understanding whether spatial
              separation of populations is necessary for speciation and whether the time
              required for speciation is large or small.   Finally, the study of the genetic
              control of conspecific sperm precedence boils down to   the study of the
              genetic control of fertility problems.  Thus, the insights into infertility
              provided by this research will be relevant to many organisms, including humans.
