Title       : Commutative Algebra, Algebraic Geometry and Computational Issues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9726460

Award Number: 9726460
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167863             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Eisenbud   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Eisenbud  9726460    This project is concerned with research in algebraic
              geometry, commutative algebra, symbolic computation, and computational
              statistics.  In algebraic geometry, the main thrust is towards discovering
              connections between the geometry of sets defined by the vanishing of
              polynomials and the algebraic invariants derived by solving the linear equation
              over the polynomial ring whose coefficients are the defining equations.  In
              commutative algebra, the principal investigator will work on the structure of
              syzygies in general, on the dimensions of the loci described by various sorts
              of equations, and on a problem coming from the part of number theory
              responsible for the recent proof of "Fermat's Last Theorem".  In symbolic
              computation, he will work with the developers of Macaulay2 incorporating into
              scripts methods which will enable this software to address problems of
              importance to algebraic geometers.  Finally, the principal investigator will
              study random walks on lattices, using techniques from algebraic geometry and
              commutative algebra to generate the walks and to study how fast they converge
              to their asymptotic distributions.    This is research in the field of
              algebraic geometry.  Algebraic geometry is one of the oldest parts of modern
              mathematics, but one which has had a revolutionary flowering in the past
              quarter-century.  In its origin, it treated figures that could be defined in
              the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials.  Nowadays the field
              makes use of methods not only from algebra, but from analysis and topology, and
              conversely is finding application in those fields as well as in physics,
              theoretical computer science, and robotics.
