Title       : Reconciling Molecular and Fossil Evidence on the Age of Angiosperms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9726856

Award Number: 9726856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Sanderson mjsanderson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9726856  Sanderson     The age of the angiosperms has long been a topic of
              controversy in plant evolution.  Traditionally, the problem was addressed
              primarily from a paleobotanical point of view.  However, molecular studies
              relying on the hypothesis of a constant rate of evolution ("molecular clock")
              have added a new dimension to the problem, often suggesting a much older age
              than does fossil evidence.  Many of these analyses conflict with each other,
              and therefore they call into question not only paleobotanical assumptions but
              also the validity of the molecular clock, a major issue in molecular evolution.
               Drs. Sanderson and Doyle will undertake a critical evaluation of the
              implications of molecular evidence for the age of angiosperms, especially its
              agreement or disagreement with fossil evidence, using both new data and new
              methods of analysis.   They propose to combine existing and new sequence data
              from rbcL, atpB, and 18S rDNA genes with new data to be obtained from four
              slowly evolving chloroplast genes.  Sampling of taxa will emphasize angiosperms
              with a good Cretaceous fossil record or which represent early branches in the
              angiosperm tree in addition to other relevant seed plants.  Using new
              methodologies that allow hypothetical rates of evolution to vary, we hope to
              obtain a better assessment of (1) the error in molecular estimates of the age
              of angiosperms and the sources of those errors, and (2) the level of
              disagreement between fossil evidence for the age of  angiosperms and molecular
              estimates when the error in divergence times is taken into  account.  Methods
              and insights derived from this study may be useful in dating other groups where
              there are apparent conflicts between molecular and fossil data.
