Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Joint Electromagnetic Experiment on Miyaka-Jima
               Volcano in Japan and in Long Valley Caldera in California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a9726321

Award Number: 9726321
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm J. Johnston mal@usgs.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Sur-Menlo Park
	      
	      Menlo Park, CA  94025    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
Program Ref : 5921,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726321  Johnston    This award supports a two year collaborative research 
              project between Dr. Malcolm Johnston of the U.S. Geological  Survey in Menlo
              Park, California and Professor Yoichi Sasai  of the University of Tokyo in
              Japan.  The researchers will  be undertaking a joint electromagnetic experiment
              on Miyake-  Jima volcano in Japan and in Long Valley caldera in  California. 
              Electric and magnetic signals have long been  reported to be associated with
              volcanic activity, but a  rigorous connection  between the observations and the
               precise underground physical phenomena remains elusive.  This research focuses
              on the measurement known as "self-  potential" (SP) in which the volcanic
              process is an  underground battery driving continuous electric currents.  It
              will involve careful SP measurements at volcanic  environments in Japan and
              California, with particular  emphasis on separating non-volcanic sources of
              signal from  volcanic sources and comparison with laboratory and  theoretical
              studies.  The researchers will attempt to  quantify the volcanic hazard
              associated with magmatic dikes  that have been injected at depths that are
              inaccessible to  direct sampling.  The objectives of the research are to 
              determine:  (1) the relative importance of fluid flow and  charge generation
              processes within active volcanoes, (2) the  relative contributions to
              self-potential observations from  elevation and fluid flow, (3) whether deep
              intrusions can be  detected on active volcanoes such as Miyake-Jima and Mammoth
               Mountain and (4) The stability of SP anomalies as dikes cool  and become more
              resistive yet retain sufficient heat to  drive fluid and gas flow.    This
              project brings together the efforts of two laboratories  that have
              complementary expertise, research capabilities and  equipment.  Results of the
              research should define  the usefulness of this method for determining the
              location  of new and existing dikes and sills for volcanic hazard 
              identification.  Through the exchange of ideas and  technolo gy, this project
              will broaden our base of basic  knowledge and promote international
              understanding and  cooperation.  ***
