Title       : The Role of Oceanographic Features and Prey Distribution on Foraging Energetics
               and Reproductive Success of the Antarctic Fur Seal, Arctocephalus Gazella
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a9726567

Award Number: 9726567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Costa costa@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Goebel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726567  COSTA  Marine coastal and pelagic environments of the Southern  Ocean
              are characterized by seasonal high productivity. Over  the last several decades
              it has become clear that these  environments, while generally productive, also
              undergo  considerable inter- and intra-annual variability.  Consequently,
              available prey resources for vertebrate  predators can be highly variable
              spatially and temporally.  This spatial and temporal variability of prey
              resources has  been measured empirically for the northern South Shetland 
              Islands region of the Antarctic Peninsula since the late  1980's. The Antarctic
              fur seal, a sub-polar migratory  otariid with a short lactation period, is an
              increasingly  dominant marine predator of the South Shetlands region. Its  life
              history is pattern is characterized by foraging trips  alternating with short
              visits to provision a single  offspring; this allows scientists to measure
              maternal  investment on the same temporal and spatial scale as  measurements of
              distribution and abundance of prey. This  project will quantify the foraging
              costs and maternal  investment associated with changes in strategies observed
              in  populations of South Shetland Ataractic fur seals. Energetic  costs and
              benefits of different foraging patterns with  simultaneous measurement of
              energy expenditure, food intake,  dive depth, dive duration, time of day, and
              dive frequency,  swim speed and foraging location will be accomplished using 
              state of the art techniques. These measurements will  coincide with small and
              large scale oceanographic surveys to  be conducted by the National Oceanic and
              Atmospheric  Administration's Antarctic Marine Living Resources program,  which
              is also contributing to the support of this project.  The research will allow
              scientists to link biological  characteristics (prey composition, distribution
              and  abundance) and physical characteristics of the foraging  environment with
              foraging success, maternal investment and  reproductive success for a
              free-ranging marine ve rtebrate  predator.
