Title       : GABA-B Receptor Antagonism and the Chemistry of Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9726779

Award Number: 9726779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Emmeline Edwards                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85875              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ursula Staubli ursula@cns.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                         LAY ABSTRACT                                    
              Principal Investigator:  Staubli, Ursula  Proposal Number:    IBN-9726779     
              This  proposal  is  directed at neuronal  mechanisms  underlying  memory 
              processes,  with  the eventual aim  of  understanding  and  addressing  memory
              disorders such as those associated  with  aging  and disease. The target of the
              research is GABAB, a receptor of y-  aminobutyric   acid   (GABA),   the  
              brain's   main    inhibitory  neurotransmitter  known  to  exert a  powerful 
              influence  on  the  occurrence  of  long-lasting  synaptic  plasticity  changes
                that  subserve learning. Our interest in the GABAB receptor emerged from  the
               earlier  findings  that selective  antagonism  of  the  5-HT3  (serotonin) 
              receptor  subtype in awake  behaving  rats  causes  a  reduction   in  the 
              firing  rate  of  a  subset  of   hippocampal  interneurons,  thereby 
              facilitating  the  induction  of  synaptic  plasticity and causing a robust
              memory enhancement (Staubli &  Xu,  1995;  Reznic & Staubli, 1997). Our
              hypothesis is that  the  final  mediator in the above cascade of effects
              appeared to be the  GABAB  receptor.    The  proposed  experiments will use a
              selective  GABAB  receptor  antagonist  with  a significantly higher affinity 
              for  post-  vs.  presynaptic  receptors. The immediate goals are four-fold:  1)
               to  characterize  the  different roles of pre- vs. postsynaptic  GABAB 
              receptors  in modulating synaptic plasticity, thereby  reconciling  the 
              apparently  contradictory findings  mentioned  above;  2)  to  establish  the 
              concentration range over  which  GABAB  antagonism  promotes the formation of
              different forms of memory; 3) to  assess  whether  GABA8  antagonist 
              administered  systemically  to  freely  moving  rats  facilitates the induction
              of long-term  potentiation  (an  intensively studied form of synaptic
              plasticity suspected  to  be  the substrate for certain forms of memory) in
              hippocampal area  CA1; 4) to examine whether bil ateral intrahippocampal
              infusion  of  GABAB  antagonist  facilitates  both  long-term  potentiation 
              and  memory in the same animal, at the same time.    The  knowledge  obtained
              from this work will be  invaluable  for  extracting  key  neurobiological
              principles  towards  a  rationale  design  of compounds directed at memory
              disorders associated  with  aging and disease.
