Title       : Distributing Data with Distributed Objects: A Prototype for a Plant Names
               Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9726686

Award Number: 9726686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter F. Stevens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9139,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  This project will prototype and implement an Internet-based  data exchange
              architecture, the "Authority Data Server"  (ADS), which will nucleate a global
              information system for  taxonomic data in support of biodiversity researchers 
              worldwide.  The ADS prototype will use leading-edge  informatics technologies,
              such as the Common Object Request  Broker Architecture (CORBA) and Java, to
              replicate shared  community data -- initially among three institutions: The 
              Harvard University Herbaria, The Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew  (UK), and The
              Australian National Herbarium.  These  institutions have formed a consortium
              whose goal is to make  the combined plant names data from the Gray Herbarium
              Index  (New World plant species), Index Kewensis (global plant  species), and
              Australian Plant Names Index available as a  shared and replicated authority
              resource on the Internet as  the combined "Plant Names Index."    This SGER
              proposal requests funding to implement a proof-of-  concept using data from
              Royal Botanic Garden's "Authors of  Plant Names" - a community authority work
              endorsed by the  International Working Group on Taxonomic Databases as the 
              core data set.  A functional prototype ADS system will  demonstrate the
              feasibility of the larger "Plant Names Index"  as well as provide a working
              example of a distributed object  approach to authority data distribution. The
              establishment of  the latter will increase the adoption and integration of on- 
              line taxonomic authority files at research institutions  worldwide.  The
              resulting architecture and methods will be a  significant contribution to the
              development of the US  National Biological Information Infrastructure (NBII)
              within  the context of an international collaboration which is  unprecedented
              in the history of the biodiversity informatics  community.
