Title       : Polymer-Polymer Interactions, Phase Behavior, and Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2000   
File        : a9726484

Award Number: 9726484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Paul drp@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9726484  Paul    The rational development of multicomponent polymer blends (or
              alloys)  requires an understanding of the polymer-polymer interactions involved
               and how to control them in order to generate materials with useful  mechanical
              properties, obtain optically clear mixtures. (miscibility),  disperse impact
              modifiers in a brittle matrix, reactively compatibilize  immiscible mixtures,
              etc.  This proposal outlines a program for  obtaining quantitative information
              on the interactions between pairs of  a number of important polymer repeat
              units. The methodology involves  experimental observations of the phase
              behavior of blend systems that  are analyzed in terms of appropriate theories
              of mixing combined with a  mean field binary interaction model.  The
              experimental methods involve  copolymer composition mapping, the critical
              molecular weight method,  quantitative analysis of phase diagrams, light
              scattering, and neutron  reflectivity.  Specific objectives involve (a)
              comparison of  interactions of acrylate and methaclylate monomer units having
              various  pendant groups with other polymers, (b) effect of bromine atoms in the
               repeat unit on interactions with other polymers, (c) development of  reactive
              copolymers that are miscible with styrene/acrylonitrile  copolymers (SAN) for
              use in reactive compatibilization of engineering  thermoplastics with ABS
              materials, and (d) comparison of polymer-polymer  interfacial thicknesses
              measured by neutron reflectivity with those  predicted from theory using
              interaction energies determined in this  program.    The neutron reflectivity
              studies will be performed on pairs of  commercially important polymers like
              polycarbonate, poly(phenylene  ether), etc. with copolymers, e.g., styrene with
              acrylonitrile, maleic  anhydride, etc. The experiments will be done in
              collaboration with the  National Institute of Standards and Technology and
              industry.  In  addition, the research will make a systematic study of the
              kinetics of  phase separation of selected blends using  a recently constructed
              light  scattering apparatus.  This will provide accurate assessment of spinodal
               temperature-composition curves for use in evaluation of interaction  energies
              as well as information about polymer-polymer diffusion  coefficients.  %%%  The
              results of this fundamental research will be quantitative  information about
              interactions between polymer repeat unit pairs for use  in designing
              homogeneous or phase separated polymer blends (or alloys)  that either are or
              may be of technological importance.  This research  will provide a valuable
              educational experience for students at all  levels including postgraduate, PhD,
              undergraduate, and high school.  ***
