Title       : Aggregate and Distributive Analyses of Birth Order Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a9726886

Award Number: 9726886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446430             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Zajonc   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research follows a prediction made by the PI more than twenty years
              ago that SATs, which were then alarmingly dropping, would continue to decline
              for four years, and that the trend would reverse itself in 1980. In particular,
              the hypothesis held that aggregate SAT trends follow aggregate national birth
              orders. Not only was this prediction confirmed, the reversal occurring exactly
              in 1980 (which was also a reversal for national trends in birth order) but
              remarkably consistent with it were data on the A-levels collected in the United
              Kingdom and on the Iowa Basic Skills scores. The prediction derives from the
              confluence model of intellectual development which focuses on the changing
              intellectual environment in the family during the children's growth years and
              explains differences in intellectual maturity of children of different birth
              ranks and family sizes. The proposed research seeks to examine data on
              aggregate intellectual performance in a number of countries to test the
              generality of the relationship found between aggregate trends in birth order
              and intellectual performance scores. Research will also inquire into collective
              values, stereotypes, and attitudes toward birth order focusing on specific
              populations, such as teachers, parents of teen-agers, prospective parents, and
              high school students. An important derivation from the data and theory is the
              phenomenon of collective potentiation. It was found that cohorts that include
              large proportions of first born manifest high standards of excellence, and the
              entire group performs at a more advanced level than cohorts with small
              proportions of first borns. The dynamics of this phenomenon, not only in the
              area of intellectual performance and birth order, but in other collective
              domains, will be extensively studied in the United States population, and in
              Poland, Japan, and possibly China.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
