Title       : Turonian (Upper Cretaceous) Angiosperm Flowers: Structure, Systematics and
               Phylogenetic/Evolutionary Significance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9726824

Award Number: 9726824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Crepet wlcl@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin C. Nixon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726824   Crepet     Turonian (Upper Cretaceous) angiosperm flowers: structure,
              systematics and phylogenetic/evolutionary significance    The flowering plants
              (angiosperms) are the most economically important, ecologically diverse, and
              species rich plants on Earth today.  However, our understanding of the origins
              and early history of diversification of this important group has been hampered
              by a relatively poor fossil record and, especially,  few fossilized flowers,
              the source of the best characters for identification.  Previous studies by Drs.
              Crepet and Nixon uncovered an extraordinarily rich assemblage of angiosperm
              reproductive structures from early Upper Cretaceous (Turonian) localities in
              northern New Jersey, which may be the richest deposits of angiosperm floral
              remains.  Over 100 taxa have been discovered to date.  The age of the sites (90
              MYBP) places them in the early history of major angiosperm radiations, and
              offers the potential to discover additional unusual and phylogenetically
              significant extinct forms.  Already these fossils provide a stunning array of
              floral innovations and are the oldest documented examples of numerous features
              such as sympetaly, magnoliid receptacular cups, apparent nectar-producing
              staminodia, various forms of stamen and anther modifications, and viscin
              threads.  The fact that these highly adaptive characters are represented in the
              same deposits as a rich insect fauna presents an unusual opportunity to infer
              modes pollination biology at a time when such relationships might have been
              significant in flowering plant success.  Because of the quality and detail of
              preservation, these fossils can be placed into phylogenetic perspective with
              the use cladistic analyses to select among hypotheses of relationships to
              modern flowering plant groups.  Analysis also will be used to test fossil
              reconstructions of disparate, unattached organs.  In addition, these studies
              will provide test cases for various aspects of cladistic theory such as the
              effect of missing data on an alyses and the significance of fossil mosaics
              (so-called missing links).  The techniques of scanning and transmission
              electron microscopy will be used, and the work will include and a significant
              amount of curation and databasing effort.  The project will provide a large
              amount of unique data that will be relevant to many other scientists including,
              particularly, angiosperm systematists and pollination biologists.  The analyses
              should move us one step closer to understanding angiosperm relationships, early
              diversification, and success.
