Title       : US-Japan Joint Seminar: Intelligent Distributed Autonomous Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1998      
File        : a9726539

Award Number: 9726539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh F. VanLandingham hughv@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 5921,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726539  VanLandingham    This award supports the participation of American
              scientists  and engineers in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Intelligent  Distributed
              Autonomous Power Systems, to be held in Hakone,  Japan from July 12-18, l998. 
              The co-organizers are  Professors Hugh VanLandingham of Virginia Polytechnic 
              Institute and Osami Tsukamoto of Yokohama National  University in Japan.  The
              seminar will focus on: (a)  distributed intelligence which includes sensing, 
              forecasting, telecommunications, computers and control; (b)  DC and
              dual-frequency AC bus technology; (c) demand side  management, time of use
              pricing; (d) renewable energy,  photovoltaics; (e) electric vehicles, battery
              and other  storage devices; (f) load forecasting; (g) fuel cells, 
              microturbines; (h) building energy efficiency; and  environmental impact
              assessment.    Power systems of the future will have different requirements 
              due to customer choice and concerns about environmental  degradation resulting
              from the generation and consumption of  electricity.  Their choice may be based
              on a demand for high  quality delivered with a high degree of reliability, 
              environmental concerns and costs.  In order to study the  feasibility and
              functioning of such distributed utilities of  the future, the concept of
              Intelligent Distributed  Autonomous Power System is proposed.  It will be
              composed of  several autonomous power systems that are loosely connected. 
              These units will be responsible for their own load and  supply of electricity,
              but can and will depend on outside  sources for their normal operations.  These
              systems will  typically be small and will serve small towns or parts of  large
              cities.  The topics identified need to be explored to  understand the set-up
              and performance of these Intelligent  Systems.  The exchange of ideas and data
              with Japanese  experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to  advance
              their own work, and will set the stage for future  collaborative projects. 
              Seminar organizers have made a  special effor t to involve postdoctoral
              researchers.  The  proceedings of the meeting are expected to be made available
               on both universities' Web pages.  ***
