Title       : Synthesis and Characterization of Solid Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1998     
File        : a9726689

Award Number: 9726689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Boncella boncella@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell S. Drago  (Principal Investigator former)
              Michael Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1238,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award is made to Dr. Russell S. Drago of the Chemistry Department,  
              University of Florida, for investigation of a new method to measure and  
              control the acidity of solid acid catalysts.  The award is in the   Technology
              for Sustainable Environment component of the EPA/NSF   Partnership for
              Environmental Research, and support is provided by the   Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program and the   Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities.  Solid acid catalysts substituted   for strong
              acid solvents and reagents can reduce toxic wastes associated   with many
              industrial processes, such as alkylation, that require sulfuric   acid or
              hydrofluoric acid to promote reaction.  Results of calorimetric   titrations
              and adsorption isotherms will be used to determine equilibrium   constants and
              enthalpies for various reaction sites on the solids.  When   coupled with
              spectroscopic and reactivity data, reaction thresholds and   optimum solid
              acidities will be determined for reactions of interest.    Sol-gel methods will
              be used to prepare a series of solid acids that   incorporate different high
              oxidation state elements into the silica   structure.  The effect of element
              changes and systematic changes in the   synthesis variables on acidity will be
              determined and correlated with   selectivity of various solid acid catalysts
              for isomerization of alkanes.    Non-porous and microporous solids with similar
              acid strengths will be   compared.  The petroleum industry uses hydrofluoric
              and sulfuric acids to initiate   many reactions that alter the arrangement or
              length of molecular carbon   chains.  Solid acids that can replace these
              aqueous acids provide   inexpensive and reusable substitutes in many areas of
              refining.  In this   study, a systematic approach to assessing the
              effectiveness of solid   acids in various reactions will be developed.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
