Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Studies on Cluster Structure, Motion and
               Reaction Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9726311

Award Number: 9726311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19500              (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Lisy j-lisy@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9726311  Lisy    This award supports a two year collaborative research  project
              between Professor James Lisy of the University of  Illinois in Chicago and
              Professor Tamotsu Kondow of the  Toyota Technological Institute in Chiba,
              Japan.  The  researchers will undertake a study on cluster structure,  motion
              and reaction dynamics.  They plan to characterize the  physical and chemical
              properties of a variety of small  molecular aggregates, or clusters, of known
              size and  composition.  The project capitalizes on the spectroscopic 
              techniques developed at Illinois, with the chemical reaction  dynamics methods
              from Japan, and would be extremely useful  in a systematic study of
              structure-reactivity correlations.  An important area of investigation involves
              the study of  molecules adsorbed on transition metal cluster ions, a model  for
              fundamentally and technologically significant catalytic  processes.    The
              project brings together the efforts of two major  laboratories that have
              constituted different parts of the  process.  The Americans have expertise in
              infrared studies  of a wide variety of gas-phase, mass-selected, solvated 
              metal ions, and are interested in extending the  spectroscopic studies of
              solvated cluster ions to include  more complex metal ions such as transition
              metals.  Japanese  expertise is in the area of metal cluster ion production and
               they plan to develop a continuous source of transition metal  ion and cluster
              ions over the next two years.  Techniques  developed between the two groups
              should enhance the  likelihood of obtaining significant new results, over 
              isolated investigations by either group.  Through the  exchange of ideas and
              technology, this project will broaden  our base of basic knowledge and promote
              international  understanding and cooperation.  ***
