Title       : Orientation and Function in Self-Organized Protein Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  2000   
File        : a9726132

Award Number: 9726132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419000             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Scott Saavedra saavedra@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program,
              focusses on the use of a new method for probing the  structure and orientation
              of protein films formed on well  characterized surfaces.  Professor Saavedra
              and his colleagues at  the University of Arizona will use integrated optical
              waveguide-  attenuated total reflection and total internal refection 
              fluorescence techniques to characterize heme protein films prepared  on
              Langmuir-Blodgett films and self-assembled polyion films.  The  focus will be
              to develop correlations between heme protein  orientation, functional
              properties, and direct electron reactions.   Long-term objectives of this work
              involve use of these protein  films in molecular device technologies such as
              bioanalytical  sensing, energy storage/conversion, and bioseparations.    A new
              method using integrated optical waveguides has been developed  for studying the
              structure of heme proteins on surfaces.  Professor  Saavedra and his colleagues
              at the University of Arizona developed  this very sensitive method to
              characterize thin protein films  formed on well characterized surfaces.  These
              proteins form films  on these surfaces through controlled electrostatic
              interactions.   The properties of these thin protein films are projected to
              have  uses in areas such as bioanalytical sensing, energy  storage/conversion,
              and biospecific separations.  The development  of new molecular devices for
              applications in several biotechnology  areas is the long-term goal of this
              work.                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
