Title       : Ferrar Large Igneous Province Study (FLIPS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2001       
File        : a9726137

Award Number: 9726137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip R. Kyle kyle@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Office of Polar Programs of the  National Science
              Foundation, supports an international  collaborative research project involving
              New Mexico  Institute of Mining and Technology, USA, and the British  Antarctic
              Survey (BAS).  The objective is to understand the  origin, emplacement, and
              evolution of Jurassic (180 million  year old) basaltic rocks in Antarctica
              which formed when the  Gondwana supercontinent started to disintegrate.  The 
              research team will test a new unified model for this 180  million year magmatic
              activity in which the magmatism is  caused by a single mantle superplume and is
              a major factor  in continental rifting.  Within Antarctica, the Jurassic 
              basaltic rocks are divided into two provinces: Ferrar Large  Igneous Province
              (FLIP) and the Dronning Maud Igneous  Province (DMIP) (the official US name for
              Dronning Maud Land  is Queen Maud Land - the foreign term will be used for 
              purposes here because the project is collaborative with  BAS).  The origin of
              the FLIP is problematical and a plume  origin has generally been discounted
              because of its lateral  distribution over 3000 km along the Transantarctic
              Mountains  and also in southern Australia.  The FLIP is characterized  by
              unusual geochemical compositions, which has been  attributed to their origin
              from an enriched mantle source.  In the model being investigated by this
              research team, the  FLIP magma would have been significantly contaminated in an
               upper continental crustal magma chamber (probably the Dufek  Intrusion)
              whereas the DMIP has distinctly mantle-like  chemical characteristics but still
              shows some evidence of  modification by crustal material.    In this research,
              the team will examine and sample the rocks  of the DMIP and rocks of the FLIP
              in the Theron and  Pensacola Mountains and Dronning Maud Land.  The team will 
              conduct an integrated study of the age, geochemistry, and  structural
              relationships of the FLIP and DMIP.  Radiometric  age determinations will
              examine the age relationship  between  the FLIP and DMIP.  Models for upper
              crustal contamination  of the FLIP magmas will be tested using isotopic studies
              and  geochemical modeling.  Other studies, conducted by BAS  collaborators,
              include a regional aerogeophysical survey to  determine the size and shape of
              the Dufek Intrusion and a  detailed survey will search for a feeder dike system
              from  the body.
