Title       : Synthetic Uses of Novel Reactive Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1997   
File        : a9726455

Award Number: 9726455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore Cohen cohen@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Professor Theodore Cohen, of the Department of Chemistry at the   University of
              Pittsburgh, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular   Chemistry Program
              for his studies of metallo-ene cyclization reactions.    Both the insertion of
              titanocene into allyl phenyl sulfides and the   tandem additions of homoallyl
              and bis(homoallyl) metals to dienes afford   substrates for titana-ene
              cyclizations.  These are carried out   stoichiometrically, but may be adapted
              for the cyclopolymerization of   conjugated dienes through the use of excess
              diene, affording robust   ladder polymers.  This work is complemented by
              Professor Cohen's   investigation of allyl phenyl sulfides as substrates for
              the preparation   of allyl Grignard reagents, which in turn permit the
              synthesis of a wider   variety of substrates for metallo-ene cyclizations. 
              Reductive lithiation   of phenylthioethers affords homoallyl- and
              bis(homoallyl)lithiums,   offering access to anion-accelerated ene cyclization
              reactions through   their addition to dienes.  With the support of the Organic
              and Macromolecular Chemistry Program,   Professor Theodore Cohen, of the
              Department of Chemistry at the   University of Pittsburgh, is developing new
              and efficient methods for the   synthesis of cyclic organic compounds.  Through
              the discovery and   exploitation of new reactions of particular classes of
              organometallic   compounds (compounds containing bonds between metal and carbon
              atoms),   Professor Cohen readily accesses complex cyclic structures of utility
              in   the synthesis of natural products and fine chemicals.  These reactions  
              may be readily adapted to permit the synthesis of `ladder` polymers which  
              display important physical and chemical properties, such as heat and   chemical
              resistance, imparted by their unique structural features.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
