Title       : Structure and Function of the Insect Mushroom Body in Sensory and Motor
               Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9726957

Award Number: 9726957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda M. Kennedy                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Strausfeld flybrain@manduca.neurobio.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9107,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 The brain of insects contains a prominent pair of centers known  as the
              mushroom bodies.  These structures have been implicated in  discrimination of
              odors important for feeding and mating behavior,  and the anatomical
              organization has been suggested to be a  repeated arrangement of an essentially
              simple wiring pattern.  More recent studies now suggest that the mushroom
              bodies play a  central role in a much wider variety of functions, including 
              integration of vision and smell, memory of place, and motor  control.  Along
              with these disparate functions, the structure of  the mushroom bodies may have
              far more internal partitioning into  locally functioning regions.  This project
              uses a combination of  anatomy, physiology, and behavior to examine the sensory
              signals  in uniquely identified nerve cells, and the connections of these 
              neurons to further processing pathways.  A novel marking method  will allow
              recording from single neurons in behaving insects, and  later recovering the
              location and form of those active individual  cells.     Using a comparative
              approach among species representing key  evolutionary lineages, these studies
              will clarify the  organizational ground rules of a brain center that has
              ancient  origins.  The demonstration of important roles for the mushroom 
              bodies in integrating sensory information leading to behavioral  action may
              suggest some bases for the extraordinary evolutionary  and ecological success
              of the insects.  The impact will extend  beyond neuroscience into areas of
              ecology and evolution, and  perhaps also to pest control in agriculture.
