Title       : Magnetic Refrigeration: A Benign Environmental Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9726822

Award Number: 9726822
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence H. Bennett lbennett@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Mavriplis  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the proposed research is to develop a magnetic refrigeration
              system that can operate in the range of ambient atmospheric temperatures and to
              determine the applicability of magnetic refrigeration to practical consumer
              refrigeration systems.  The potential advantages of such a system are the
              prevention of environmental damage caused by harmful working fluids involved in
              existing systems and the reduction of energy consumption resulting from the
              significantly improved energy efficiency inherent in the utilization of the
              magneto-caloric effect. Magnetic refrigeration offers a significantly different
              thermodynamic approach than existing compression refrigeration systems since it
              does not depend upon a condensable working fluid.  Successful application to
              automotive air conditioning would have an environmental benefit by reducing
              engine load and saving fuel while employing no environmentally damaging working
              fluids.  The objective of this project is to investigate the system
              requirements for a magnetic refrigerator operating in the temperature range 0
              to 40 degrees C and to produce an instrumented laboratory research test
              platform for a magnetic refrigerator.  The magnetic field will be produced by
              an adjustable-field "magic ring" assembly made from commercial
              high-energy-product permanent magnets.  The refrigerant will be a
              "superferromagnetic" nanocomposite, which has the potential of being designed
              to match the thermodynamic cycle being employed and which has no hysteretic
              losses.  The heat transfer agent will be an environmentally safe fluid, such as
              an inert gas.  A bellows is expected to provide the appropriate movement of the
              heat transfer fluid over the nanocomposite embedded in a porous material.  In
              the course of this project, the choices of materials, heat exchange
              arrangements and fluids will be explored for the various applications of
              magnetic refrigeration.  
