Title       : Humoral Immunity of Long-lived Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a9726771

Award Number: 9726771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306320             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Armstrong pbarmstrong@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Quigley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB9726771  Armstrong, Peter  Quigley, James  Humoral Immunity of Long-lived
              Invertebrates      Lay Abstract    Survival of any animal requires efficient
              means to thwart the invasion of a myriad of different potential pathogens.  As
              a result, most animals have evolved a variety of different defense strategies
              for their protection.  These include the very complex adaptive immune system of
              mammals as well as less complex, innate defense mechanisms represented
              frequently in lower animals.  The present research focuses on a particular
              defense system of invertebrates and utilizes the American horseshoe crab
              (Limulus polyphemus) as a model system.  This animal, which lacks the
              antibodies and lymphocytes that are the core elements of adaptive immune
              systems, nevertheless has within its blood system components that provide
              resistance to pathogens.  One system involves the plasma protein,
              (2-macroglobulin, which is able to bind to microbial proteases in the blood
              stream.  Not only does the bound (2-macroglobulin inhibit the proteases, but
              also blood cells recognize, remove and degrade the complexes thus formed.  A
              second system involves a second plasma protein, limulin, which has the ability
              to bind to and lyse foreign cells that enter the blood stream.  The two systems
              are functionally interrelated since protease-reacted (2-macroglobulin can
              enhance the lytic activity of limulin.  The present studies include three
              objectives to define basic features of these systems.  (1) The receptors on the
              blood cells that bind the protease-(2-macroglobulin complexes will be isolated
              and characterized.  (2) Factors that effect the binding and pathway of uptake
              of the complexes by the cells will be described.  (3) The molecular mechanism
              by which protease-(2-macroglobulin complexes and other factors regulate the
              lytic activity of limulin will be defined.  These studies will not only allow
              us to understand these systems in Limulus but may also lead to predictions of
              similar functions for related proteins found in the b lood of more complex,
              higher organisms.
