Title       : The Fabrication and Physical Properties of Integrated Metal and Semiconductor
               Nanocrystal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9726597

Award Number: 9726597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $944510             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Paul Alivisatos alivis@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,1589,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9726597  Alivisatos    This FRG/GOALI project is multidisciplinary, involving
              elements  of Chemistry, Physics, Engineering and Materials Science.  Professors
              A. Paul Alivisatos and James R. Heath at UCB and UCLA,  respectively, are
              collaborating with R. Stanley Williams at  Hewlett-Packard Laboratories. The
              aim of the project is to lay  the groundwork for the demonstration and the
              development of  nanocrystal(NC) and nanocrystal array(NCA) based devices by
              first  developing techniques for synthesis of NC-based thin films  appropriate
              for device applications, and by understanding and  optimizing the properties of
              NC/x interfaces. A variety of  potential applications, ranging from phosphors
              to photovoltaics  to electronic switching and storage devices, are envisioned
              for  these materials. The approach involves two aspects. The first is  the
              development of techniques for integrating  nanocrystals and  nanocrystal
              assemblies into technologically relevant  environments. The second is the
              development of a physical picture  of how the integrated systems operate.
              Chemical techniques for  fabricating nanocrystal integrated systems and
              examining their  structural characteristics will be developed. Their optical 
              properties will be interrogated with time and frequency resolved 
              spectroscopies. Temperature dependent electron transport,  photovoltaic, and
              capacitance measurements through integrated NC  and NCA systems will be carried
              out using contacts produced by  electron-beam lithography. Particular effort
              will be spent on  controlling and characterizing the interfaces in these
              various  systems. The project is co-supported by four NSF programs, and  the
              MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities).  %%%  This project addresses
              forefront research issues in an  interdisciplinary area of science and
              engineering having high  technological relevance.  The research will contribute
              basic  knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of  materials and
              devices, and will provide improved understanding   and a basis for designing
              and producing improved materials and  structures for devices of the future.  An
              important feature of  the program is the integration of research and education
              through  the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically 
              significant area.  ***
