Title       : POWRE: Dissecting an RNA-Protein Interaction VISITING RESEARCHER
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1997 
File        : a9726943

Award Number: 9726943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52885              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan A. White swhite@brynmawr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1166,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9726943  White   This is a POWRE Visiting Researcher award.    The Principal
              Investigator will spend a full sabbatical year of research at the Scripps
              Research Institute in the laboratory of Dr. James R. Williamson.  The host
              laboratory was chosen because Drs. Williamson and White have shared interests
              in RNA structure and RNA recognition by proteins, and because they are both
              working on the yeast L32 system.  Briefly, yeast ribosomal protein L32 binds to
              its unspliced or spliced transcript to inhibit splicing or translation and thus
              is an autoregulatory protein.  During the past six years, Dr. White's
              laboratory has discovered that model L32 RNAs as small as 24 nucleotides bind
              L32 at nanomolar affinities, making this system an attractive target for
              structural studies.  The Williamson laboratory is currently engaged in NMR
              studies of L32 RNA and its binding protein.  The proposed research will provide
              more biochemical data that will complement the structural data.  The two
              questions specifically addressed are hydrogen bonding status of potential non
              Watson-Crick pairs and localization of amino acid residues critical for RNA
              binding.  The first set of experiments will address the question of hydrogen
              bonding in the L32 RNA's internal loop.  The L32 RNA adopts a stem-internal
              loop-stem structure and the internal loop is critical for protein binding and
              is composed of purines.  The previous structure-mapping experiments show that
              some bases in this region are stacked, but that particular purine N7 positions
              are accessible to chemical modification.  A pair of juxtaposed GA dinucleotides
              is conserved as is a potential G:U pair bordering the internal loop.  The RNA
              will be chemically modified at the base positions that normally participate in
              Watson-Crick hydrogen bonding.  Comparisons of denatured and folded L32 RNA
              will indicate whether the folded RNA is protected from chemical modification by
              virtue of hydrogen bonding.  This detection of chemical modification by primer
              extension will be an import ant and versatile new technique for the White
              laboratory.  Secondly, a powerful new genetic screen will be used to determine
              which L32 amino acids contact particular RNA nucleotides.  A two-plasmid system
              will be used to find suppressor proteins that restore binding to mutant RNAs. 
              The reporter plasmid will encode the sequence for the L32 binding site just
              upstream of a beta-galactosidase gene.  RNA sequences deficient in protein
              binding will be chosen.  The gene for the randomly mutagenized L32 protein will
              be expressed on the other plasmid, the repressor.  If the protein variant fails
              to bind to the L32/beta-galactosidase transcript, then beta-galactosidase will
              be produced.  However, if the protein does bind the chimeric transcript, the
              binding will block access to the ribosome binding site and little if any of the
              protein will be produced.  Suppressors will be identified by a blue/white
              colony color test and by measuring repression ratios.  Ultimately a map which
              links a particular RNA nucleotide with a particular amino acid will result.  At
              the same time, the Williamson group will be working to solve the structure of
              the L32 protein and its RNA complex by NMR.  This two-pronged approach of a
              genetic screen and structure determination should prove to be a powerful one. 
              Setting up of the screen will bring new techniques to Dr. White's group when
              she returns to Bryn Mawr.  The opportunity to undertake a full year as a
              Visiting Researcher at the Scripps Research Institute which is provided by this
              POWRE award will enable Dr. White to make progress on the biochemistry of the
              L32c system, learn new techniques, collaborate with structural biologists, and
              interact with the very stimulating scientific community at Scripps.   ***
