Title       : Synaptic Competition Between Inhibitory Intracortical Synapses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a9726944

Award Number: 9726944
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369810             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gina Turrigiano Turrigiano@Brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9726944 TURRIGIANO     Much of the development of the mammalian central
              nervous system occurs after birth, and requires experience in order for
              functional circuits to form.  A central problem in neurobiology has been to
              elucidate the rules by which experience, in the form of patterned neural
              activity, determines which synaptic connections are maintained and which are
              lost.  An important hypothesis is that neurons compete with each other in an
              activity-dependent manner for the establishment of synaptic connections.  This
              is thought to occur through competition between synapses for limiting
              quantities of a neurotrophic agent that is essential for maintenance of the
              synapse.  Presynaptic neurons that are successful at exciting the postsynaptic
              neuron obtain more neurotrophic agent and therefore out-compete neurons that
              are not.  Although this model has generated much interest, it has not yet been
              directly tested.       Cortical circuits have both inhibitory and excitatory
              synaptic connections.  Inhibitory connections, where electrical activity in a
              presynaptic neuron inhibits electrical activity in the postsynaptic neuron, is
              essential for the proper functioning of cortical circuits, but despite this
              importance most research to date has concentrated almost exclusively on
              elucidating the rules by which excitatory synaptic connections are formed. 
              While the rules for formation of inhibitory connections have not been
              established, an understanding of these rules is crucial for understanding the
              genesis of cortical circuits.  The goal of Dr. Turrigiano's research project is
              to ask whether the formation of inhibitory synaptic connections involves
              competitive mechanisms, and to ask whether this competition occurs through the
              activity-dependent uptake of a trophic agent.  These experiments will help to
              complete our understanding of neural circuit development, and will test a
              prominent model for how activity wires up the mammalian central nervous system.
