Title       : Invasion of North Temperate Forest Soils by Exotic Earthworms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a9726869

Award Number: 9726869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Groffman groffmanp@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Fahey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Bohlen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT      This project will test the global hypothesis that earthworm
              invasion of north temperate forests will have large consequences for nutrient
              retention and uptake in these ecosystems. Furthermore, it is suggested that
              invasion of new forest habitats by non-native earthworms will be an important
              component of change in ecosystem processes in many northeastern forests in the
              coming decades.  Previous research has shown that invasion of forests by exotic
              earthworms dramatically alters forest floor structure and potentially affects
              key nutrient cycling processes, such as nitrification. However, it is not clear
              how the dramatic physical changes in forest soil caused by earthworm invasion
              relate to overall system-level nutrient uptake, fine-root production or foliar
              chemistry.  Four main hypotheses will increase understanding of this
              potentially important process in forest ecosystems.  Our predictions are that
              earthworm invasion will:    1. Increase hydrologic and gaseous losses of N and
              decrease retention of exogenous N.  2. Alter soil nutrient-supplying (N and P)
              capacity with consequences for plant nutrient demand and foliar nutrient
              contents and ratios.  3. Change the vertical distribution, production and
              functioning of fine roots.  4. Produce different responses depending on the
              species of earthworm invading.    These hypotheses will be addressed with a
              two-pronged approach.  The first approach will involve controlled introductions
              of earthworms into experimental forest plots.  These plots will provide insight
              into the transition that occurs immediately following earthworm invasion.  The
              second approach will involve comparing forest stands already invaded by
              earthworms with adjacent stands lacking earthworms, viewing these stands as
              endpoints along a gradient of earthworm invasion.  To expand the generality of 
              findings, experiments will be conducted in forest at two different geographic
              locations, one in eastern and the other in central New York.  This work will
              document the obvious a nd expected decline in forest floor depth and
              redistribution of surface organic matter in the soil profile following
              earthworm invasion, will then determine how these changes affect the ability of
              these forests to retain exogenous N and provide nutrients to support plant
              growth.  Retention of atmospheric N will be assessed by tracing the movement of
              small additions of 15 N and Br' through the top 30 cm of the soil profile. 
              Hydrologic nutrient losses will be measured using zero-tension lysimeters and
              gaseous N losses using field chambers and soil cores.    This research will
              provide new information on a critical but overlooked factor in the study and
              management of north temperate forests.  The influence of earthworms on
              biogeochemistry in natural ecosystems, especially forests, has received little
              attention in North America.  Results will allow the determination of  whether
              earthworm invasion will be a factor influencing the long-term productivity of
              these forests and whether earthworms will influence the response of these
              forests to other factors, such as nitrogen deposition, climate change and
              exotic plant invasions.
