Title       : Advanced IMAC Methodology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9726721

Award Number: 9726721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerker Porath porath@engr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor J. Hruby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Guzman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                F97 Abstract - Molecular Biochemistry  Jerker Porath/Roberto Guzman  MCB
              9726721                                               1. Technical            
              This study is intended to explore and improve adsorption/desorption methods
              which are based on phase distributions as they are governed by the interactions
              between proteins  and metal ions immobilized in gels such as cross-linked
              agarose. The  Immobilized Metal ion Affinity (IMA) principle is presently
              underdeveloped in comparison to Ion Exchange. Only two simple chelating ligands
              (imino diacetate (IDA) and nitrilo triacetate (NTA)) are presently in common
              use. They meet only modest demands.   Immobilized hard and soft metal ions used
              in this study offer distinct advantages, since they can serve as nuclei for 
              affinity adsorbents of higher order of complexity with carbohydrate
              specificity, phosphate selectivity and more.  Displacement and carrier
              displacement chromatography will be attempted later with a new kind of affinity
              displacers obtained by enzymatic degradation of dextran gel derivatives. 
              Present studies are focused on protein chromatography on gels substituted with
              ligands that form chelates with iron, manganese, calcium and lanthanides.
              Adsorbents based on cross-linked agarose are synthesized to meet requirements
              for chromatography of proteins on hard immobilized metal ions of this kind. The
              interactive ligands should contain metal coordinating oxygen atoms.
              Carboxymethylated amines, condensed amino derivatives of 8-hydroxyquinoline and
              salicyl-aldehyde are selected as typical examples of such ligands. Mannich and
              Michael condensation reactions are used to introduce the aromatic functions
              into the gel-bound amino ligands. Synthetic hybrid gels containing agarose and
              polyethylene imide are used in cross-links, in the presence and absence of
              metal ions, in attempts to increase metal ion selectivity. The quality of the
              absorbents is assessed by the determination of selectivity, capacity and the
              hydrodynamic properties of chromatographic  beds (flow-rate pressure
              relationships). Affinity displacement chromatography are developed with
              chelators as displacers. Soluble chelators of different strength are used as
              competitors to the substances to be purified for the metal interaction sites
              (the affinity centers of the absorbent), and chelators bound to carrier
              polymers of various molecular size as spacer displacers.  The studies are aimed
              at determining the capacity for isolation of various metal binding proteins and
              phosphoproteins, with priority set to test the separation of iron and manganese
              binding proteins present in bovine choroid plexus - an organ believed to
              prevent toxic metal ions from entering the brain.     2. Non-Technical         
                 IMAC (Immobilized Metal Ion Affinity Chromatography) is a chromatographic
              method that utilizes strong affinity between solutes in the sample medium and
              metal ions fixed to a solid, granular support.   Only a few metal ions such as
              zinc, copper and nickel that have specific affinity for histidine side chains
              in the proteins that have so far been used.  This study is aimed to broaden the
              field of IMAC to include other metals and other affinity groups in proteins.
              Preliminary studies have shown that phosphate and carboxylate groups are
              affinity targets for immobilized "hard" metal ions such as tripositive iron and
              calcium. Phosphoproteins and calcium binding proteins are substance categories
              of profound biological importance. Group selective IMAC methods for these kinds
              of proteins are developed in this study with the aid of specifically
              synthesized adsorbents for affinity elution, maximizing the resolving power. 
              Soluble chelators of different molecular size and structure are used as
              competitors for binding.  Manganese is a metal likely to show chromatographic
              protein affinity behavior between calcium and iron. The  isolation of manganese
              bound proteins from bovine choroid plexus is being tested, using adsorbents
              containing fixed iron and/or lanthanides such as europium.   These metal- bindi
              ng proteins are presumably the vehicles for protecting the brain from heavy
              metal ion damage, and the understanding of their properties is physiologically
              important.
