Title       : Dissertation Research: Decoupling Complexity: An Archaeological Investigation of
               Three Chacoan Great House Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2001        
File        : a9726342

Award Number: 9726342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith W. Kintigh kintigh@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Keith Kintigh, MS Nancy Mahoney will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her research is to understand how
              prehistoric Native Americans in the Chaco region of the US achieved the high
              degree of social complexity which is manifest in the archaeological record. At
              its height in the early second millennium AD, the Chaco culture covered an area
              of over 120,000 square kilometers of the Colorado Plateau. Archaeologically the
              system is defined by a distinctive architectural style which ostensibly forms a
              three-tier settlement hierarchy. At its core in Chaco Canyon, several
              monumental `great houses` were four stories tall and contained over 600 rooms.
              The geometric ground plans and distinct masonry techniques suggest they
              required considerable planning, labor and skill to construct. Surprisingly,
              despite decades of study it is still not possible to determine the functions
              they served. At a second level smaller great houses are distributed across the
              wider Chaco region and associated with each are a series of small pueblo
              dwellings. Similarity of architectural styles, material remains and as well as
              traces of ancient roads which connected great houses indicates a complex
              culture which integrated large numbers of people in some form of hierarchical
              social structure.  Archaeologists however do not understand the degree to which
              centralized power existed, how it was maintained or what practical purpose it
              served. Some have argued that the `Chaco Phenomenon` was primarily ritual in
              nature, that individual small great houses were essentially independent and
              that the largest great houses in Chaco Canyon itself were occupied only
              sporadically for religious functions. Others have postulated a much greater
              degree of centralized control and believe that the system worked to store and
              distribute subsistence resources across a desert area in which rainfall varied
              markedly and unpredictably from year to year and place to place.  MS Mahoney
              has noted that very little research has been conducted at secondary great
              houses. She argues that through analysis of behavior at individual great houses
              and associated pueblos, and then comparison among great house-pueblo systems,
              it will be possible to reconstruct the essential aspects of the broader social
              organization. With NSF support she will study data from two great house-pueblo
              complexes and continue excavation at a third to collect comparable material.
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on the impressive
              achievements of prehistoric Native Americans and will assist in training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
