Title       : Accelerator-Based Fast Neutron Brachytherapy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9726657

Award Number: 9726657
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351138             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacquelyn C. Yanch jcyanch@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9726657  Yanch  This proposal is on research to develop accelerator-based,  fast
              neutron brachytherapy for the treatment of tumors.  Radiotherapy using neutrons
              has been shown to be effective  in treating a number of tumor types including
              advanced  tumors of the brain.  However, the use of external beams of  neutrons
              has also led to unacceptable healthy tissue  complications.  In this research,
              damage to healthy tissue  would be avoided by using a very small bachytherapy
              tube,  which delivers neutrons from a small accelerator coupled to  a flexible
              positioning device.  Using a small accelerator,  instead of an external beam of
              neutrons, has important  advantages since it: (1) eliminates storage and
              handling  problems since this neutron source can be turned off when  not in
              use, (2) maintains a constant intensity when in use,  and (3) can produce a
              neutron energy spectrum that can be  somewhat tailed for tumor size, and (4)
              can deliver therapy  in a much shorter period of time than that of other
              methods  under consideration.  Preliminary studies by the  investigator have
              indicated the feasibility of this  technique, but also indicated a heating
              problem, which  requires active cooling during use.  The current research 
              would then investigate the physical and engineering  feasibility of this
              therapy approach.  The major elements of  this proposed research include: (1)
              design and testing of a  new prototype tube to enhance heat removal, including
              full  evaluation of cooling failure conditions, (2) neutron and  photon
              dosimetry in a tissue equivalent phantom over a range  of particle currents and
              particle energies, including the  duel ion chamber method for mixed field
              dosimetry at large  distances from the source and radiochromic film dosimetry 
              close to the source, and (3) design of a gantry system and  moveable treatment
              couch to produce a practical and reliable  positioning system which provides
              complete freedom for  locating the brachytherapy tube at any orientation.  ***
