Title       : Reconstructing Hybrid Speciation in Paeonia Section Paeonia by Phylogenetic
               Analyses of Adh Gene Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9726838

Award Number: 9726838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tao Sang sang@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726838   Sang    Reconstructing hybrid speciation in Paeonia section Paeonia by
              phylogenetic analyses of Adh gene sequences     This research will explore a
              new approach, phylogenetic analysis of single or low copy nuclear genes, to
              reconstruct hybridization events in speciation in the section of peonies. 
              Large numbers of plant species are suggested to be of hybrid origin, and
              currently there is difficulty in detecting and analyzing results of  reticulate
              evolution.  For these reasons Dr. Sang's study should have broad applications
              for the study of other organismal groups.  Peonies (Paeonia, Paeoniaceae),
              known as "queen of herbs" in Greece and "king of flowers" in China for over a
              thousand years, are ornamentally and medicinally valuable plants.  The largest
              section of the genus, section  Paeonia, consisting of approximately 27
              herbaceous species distributed widely from eastern Asia to the Mediterranean
              region, has been taxonomically problematic due primarily to complex
              hybridization within the section.  Dr. Sang has chosen to use single or low
              copy number alcohol dehydrogenase gene sequences(Adh1A and Adh2) identified in
              putative non-hybrid species of section Paeonia as molecular markers.  For the
              putative hybrid species, the alleles of each locus will be amplified by locus
              specific PCR primers, cloned, and sequenced.  The sequences will be aligned
              with those of the non-hybrid species for phylogenetic analyses.  If the
              parental alleles are maintained and cloned at each locus from a hybrid,
              phylogenetic analyses should provide a precise reconstruction of relationships
              of the parental lineages, and changes in chromosome numbers (ploidy levels) and
              taxonomically important characters such as degree of dissection of leaflets,
              length of staminodial disks, number and shapes of sepals, corolla shapes,
              number of flowers per stem, and root shapes can be traced.  Field work to
              collect new plant material is planned in France, Italy, Spain, Turkey, and the
              Caucasus Mountains.  An accurate phylogenetic re construction and a better
              understanding of morphological evolution of section Paeonia will permit a
              better classification of peonies.
