Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Computer-Aided Study of the Rapid Shrinkage of
               Glaciers in the Himalaya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a9726704

Award Number: 9726704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Raymond charlie@geophys.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard B. Conway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin D. Waddington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
Program Ref : 1304,5921,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726704  Raymond    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor Charles Raymond of the University  of Washington and
              Professor Masayoshi Nakawo of the  University of Nagoya in Japan.  The
              researchers will  undertake a computer-aided study of the rapid shrinkage of 
              glaciers in the Himalaya. Glaciers are retreating especially  rapidly in many
              tropical and sub-tropical mountain regions.  Over the last two decades,
              glaciers in the Himalaya show  mass balance rates that are amongst the most
              negative of any  region of the world.   The losses of glacier mass are 
              indicative of climate warming over the last half century.  However,
              quantitative interpretation of the retreats in  terms of past climate changes
              requires elucidation of the  processes that relate the masses and lengths of
              glaciers to  climate.  The researchers will use a combination of models  that
              predict the mass balance of a glacier from climate  input and the
              redistribution of ice mass by glacier flow.  The mass balance models will be
              based on field observation,  by the Japanese, of environmental characteristics
              peculiar  to the Himalaya.  These include accumulation predominantly  in the
              summer and retardation of melting by extensive thick  covers of rock debris. 
              The glacier geophysics group at  Washington will aid in the adaptation of ice
              flow models to  the Himalayan glaciers under study.  ***    This project brings
              together the efforts of two groups that  have complimentary expertise and
              research capabilities.  Results of the research should quantify the
              significance of  the disappearance of glaciers as an important indicator of 
              global climate change.  The results should also help  indicate the degree to
              which the shrinkage of debris covered  glaciers can  pose flood hazards for
              down-stream areas.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project 
              will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote  international
              understanding and cooperation.
