Title       : Multi-Site I/UCRC's: Assessing Compatibilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1998 
File        : a9726306

Award Number: 9726306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa R. Behrens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  EEC-9726306  BEHRENS      It is not unusual for Industry/University
              Cooperative Research Centers to form partnerships between two or more
              universities.  These partnerships provide access to more research expertise
              than is resident at a single university and hence create stronger centers. 
              Although the research strengths of each university and the degree to which the
              research integrates is typically well understood before two or more
              universities join together to form a center, the managerial and administrative
              issues may not be.  Differences in organizational culture, management
              philosophy and bureaucratic procedures, if not addressed, can break up an
              otherwise fruitful partnership.  The objective of this project is to develop a
              tool, for use by two or more universities planning to enter into a partnership,
              to focus discussions on these non-research related issues.  This tool would use
              the business alliance lifecycle model based on a marriage metaphor developed by
              Kantor et.al. as a conceptual framework.  The tool would be an annotated
              checklist containing items that potential partners must discuss before entering
              into a partnership, such as what the "target market" for the envisioned center
              is.  Included under each item would be a short discussion about why
              consideration of that item is important.
