Title       : Historical Inference of Biogeography Through Phylogenetic Reconstruction of Arid
               Asian Faunal Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9726064

Award Number: 9726064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan Larson larson@wustlb.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Robert Macey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore J. Papenfuss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5939,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726064  Larson    Endemic species are those that are found only in very small
              areas.  They may be of conservation concern especially if their small habitat
              areas are altered or come under threat.  It is thought that endemic species may
              form in one of several ways.  In one of these mechanisms, a population of a
              species becomes separated from other populations by geological changes (e.g.
              formation of new mountain ranges, land bridges across open water), and this
              isolated population becomes a new species.  This species-forming process can be
              traced, in theory, by examining the history (phylogeny) of the species and the
              earth history of the region in which the species occur.    In this project,
              Allan Larson, J. Robert Macey and Theodore Papenfuss will examine the
              phylogenetic relationships of selected groups of fish, lizards and snakes that
              have endemic species in one or more of the Central Asian deserts.  These
              deserts have arisen through relatively recent and dramatic earth history
              events.  The researchers will reconstruct the phylogeny of the species in these
              groups by analyzing DNA sequences.  The phylogenies will then be interpreted in
              the context of the geographic history of the desert regions, to determine
              whether there is a direct relationship between the geological events forming a
              region and the appearance of an endemic species in that region.  The research,
              which involves several scientists and students in countries encompassing the
              desert regions, should lead to a broader understanding of how endemic species
              are formed and persist.
