Title       : Advanced Optimization and Cost Estimation for Utilities and Interruptible
               Customers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9726577

Award Number: 9726577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gwendolyn C. Owens                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116482             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Luh Peter.Luh@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9726577  Luh    Scheduling power systems and performing inter-utility power
              transactions are important activities to supply reliable, economic, and clean
              power.  The economics of scheduling and transaction decisions, however, are
              significantly affected by uncertainties, including inaccurate forecasted
              demand, uncertain unit availability, and the random occurrences of bilateral
              power transaction opportunities.  The impact of uncertainties propagates to
              utilities' industrial customers with interruptible load, as their prices or
              consumption limits may be changed forcing them to alter their resource
              allocation and personnel commitment.      To reduce the cost of electricity
              through effective managing uncertainties and to provide reliable price
              estimates for industrial customers with interruptible load, a coalition of
              University of Connecticut (UConn), Northeast Utilities (NU), Taylor & Fenn, and
              Praxair is formed.  The specific objectives of the proposed research are:    1
              . To develop an effective stochastic-fuzzy optimization method for the
              short-term scheduling and transaction problem to minimize cost, reduce solution
              variance, and manage risks.  2. To further improve the above results by
              developing a new generation of optimization approaches based on a synergistic
              combination of "Lagrangian relaxation" and neural networks for better and
              faster resolution of larger and more complicated problems - problems covering a
              larger number of units, with three levels of reserve, or with a longer planning
              horizon.  3. To develop methods to accurately and robustly estimate the costs
              for providing bundled or unbundled electricity products and services, and to
              explore other means for a utility to better serve its industrial customers with
              interruptible load.    The optimization of large-scale, mixed-integer uncertain
              systems such as the scheduling and transaction problem considered here for
              near-optimal cost with low variance is theoretically important and practically
              challenging.  The foundations needed t o be laid for and the potential benefits
              of neural networks for such applications are intriguing and fascinating.  Based
              on our excellent results obtained thus far, we believe that the proposed
              research shall not only help utilities cut costs, reduce variance, and provide
              better products and services for interruptible customers, but also open up a
              new generation of neural optimization approaches for other applications in
              power systems and beyond.
