Title       : The Impact of Genome-Size Variation on Floral Evolution in Silene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1998     
File        : a9726580

Award Number: 9726580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Meagher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726580  Meagher    The evolutionary basis of flower-size variation in insect
              pollinated species has been an area of active interest and investigation in
              recent years.  Results from our studies of the dioecious plant Silene latifolia
              suggest that specific changes in cell DNA content are related to flower-size
              evolution.  The first major objective of this study is to determine the nature
              of the genetic changes associated with genome-size variation.  In order to gain
              further insight into genetic mechanisms underlying flower size, we plan to
              measure the magnitude of the relationship between changes in DNA content at
              specific sites on chromosomes to changes in flower size.  Results from this
              part of the study will establish the precise physical relationship between
              these characters.  Our second objective of the proposed study is to determine
              the generality of this relationship between flower size and genome size by
              expanding our survey to include species from other sections of the genus
              Silene.     Results from this work will help to determine the relationship
              between non-coding DNA and evolution of morphological characters.  From a
              classical viewpoint, variation in morphological characters is thought to be
              based on variation at genetic loci that code for specific proteins.  Our work
              is looking at morphological variation in a different way, and we aim to
              demonstrate that non-coding DNA is important in morphological evolution.  This
              work also has applied implications as well.  There is a growing interest in
              identifying quantitative trait loci (QTL) in plant and animal breeding for
              purposes of targeting efforts for stock improvement.  An underlying assumption
              in such efforts is that QTL will be based on coding genes that could ultimately
              be manipulated through breeding or genetic engineering.  Our work would suggest
              that QTL could in fact be based on alternative forms of DNA variation that
              would require different strategies for alteration and development.
