Title       : Retrospective Analysis: Measuring the Historical Magnitude of Turbidity Plumes
               Using Archived Imagery and Application of Lake Surface Temperature/Water
               Quality Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9726680

Award Number: 9726680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $559055             (Estimated)
Investigator: W.Charles Kerfoot wkerfoot@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith W. Budd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9726680  Kerfoot    Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement
              of Opportunity (NSF 97-  38)for Coastal Studies in the Great Lakes.  This is a
              collaborative research project   between investigators from ten academic and
              government research institutions.  The   research is being conducted under the
              auspices of the NSF Coastal Ocean Processes   (CoOP) program and the NOAA
              Coastal Ocean Program.    This collaborative, 5-year research program will
              focus on the importance of episodic   events on nearshore-offshore transport
              and subsequent ecological consequences. The   study seeks to 1) determine what
              processes control the cross-margin (inshore to offshore)   transport of
              biological, chemical, and geological materials in the coastal margins of the  
              Great Lakes, and to 2) develop and test scientific strategies for assessing,
              quantifying, and   predicting the impacts of multiple stresses both natural and
              anthropogenic, in the Great   Lakes or selected coastal sub-regions.    A tight
              coupling between contaminated sediments and overlying water exists in lakes and
                coastal ecosystems through the process of sediment resuspension. Satellite
              observations in   Lake Michigan illustrate an annually recurrent episode of
              nearshore-offshore transport, a   10 km wide plume of resuspended material
              extending over 200 km along the southern   shores of the lake. Preliminary
              evidence indicates that this episodic event may be the major   mechanism for
              cross-margin sediment transport in Lake Michigan.  This type of event   impacts
              recycling of biogeochemically important materials (BIMS), ecosystem responses, 
               cross-isobath transport in the Great Lakes. The program results will be
              applicable to   similar events in many coastal areas.    This comprehensive,
              interdisciplinary study will implement an integrated observational   program
              and numerical modeling effort to identify, quantify, and develop prediction
              tools   for the winter-spring resuspension event and to assess the impact of
              this event on the   tra nsport and transformation of BIMS and on lake ecology. 
                This component of the study focuses on a retrospective study of the southern
              Lake   Michigan spring coastal plume using remotely sensed data. Advanced Very
              High   Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) visible and thermal infrared data will
              form the basis of   the retrospective study, whereas higher resolution imagery
              (e.g., Landsat MSS and   Landsat TM images, CZCS images, and available aircraft
              data) will monitor specific   events of short duration. The objectives are to
              assess the relationship of winter ice   formation, coastal plume development,
              and thermal bar movement to cross-margin   transport phenomena in southern Lake
              Michigan; to determine the timing, duration and   extent of river plumes on a
              seasonal and interannual basis; and to utilize historical surface   water
              quality data for empirical comparisons with the remotely sensed data.
