Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Novel Characterization of Humic Substances and
               Their Role in the Behavior of Environmental Toxic Substances Using HPLC/MS/MS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9726617

Award Number: 9726617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger A. Minear r_minear@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 5921,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726617  Minear    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor Roger Minear of the University of  Illinois,
              Urbana-Champaign and Professor Saburo Matsui of  Kyoto University in Japan. 
              The researchers will undertake a  study of novel characterization of humic
              substances and  their role in the behavior of environmental toxic  substances. 
              The underlying hypothesis of the overall  research effort is that natural
              organic matter, and humic  substances as a subset, affect the environmental
              toxicology  of anthropogenic compounds through complex interactions that  can
              affect membrane transport and mechanisms of  toxicological reactions. 
              Following separation by membrane  fractionation and employing size exclusion
              columns and other  partitioning principles, samples will be analyzed using high
               performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) interfaced with  tandem mass
              spectrometry (MS/MS). This work should advance  knowledge about humic
              substances and their combination with  selected environmental contaminants.   
              It is anticipated that characterization of molecular weight  and fragmentation
              patterns will be obtained at a level  leading to information regarding actual
              molecular weights  not previously available.  The goal is to develop new 
              processes to enhance the identification of the specific  molecular structure of
              humic materials.  This project brings  together the efforts of two laboratories
              that have  complementary expertise, research capabilities and  equipment.   The
              University of Illinois brings expertise in  the isolation and concentration of
              natural organic matter  and humic substances plus new approaches to the
              cooperative  research endeavor.  The Japanese researchers have an ongoing 
              research effort on the study of micropollutant effects in  Lake Biwa, the
              largest fresh water body in Japan that isof  great economic importance to
              several major cities including  Osaka and Kyoto.  Recent acquisition of major
              equipment,  along with the state-of the-art analytic al capabilities of 
              researchers at Kyoto University, will offer opportunities  for advanced studies
              of drinking water research and advanced  toxicological techniques.   Through
              the exchange of ideas  and technology, this project will broaden our base of 
              basic  knowledge and promote international understanding and  cooperation.  ***
