Title       : Late Transition Metal Photochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9726435

Award Number: 9726435
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. McMillin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program supports research in inorganic photochemistry by Dr. David R.  
              McMillin, Chemistry Department, Purdue University.  A major objective is   to
              use luminescent probes to gain insight into the requirements for  
              intercalation of transition metal complexes into DNA.  Various   subsituents
              will be added to Cu(II) porphyrins in order to tailor the   excited state
              lifetimes and oxidizing abilities of these luminescent,   charge transfer
              compounds.  The interaction of the copper compounds with   hairpin-forming
              oligonucleotides will provide information on base and   sequence dependence of
              DNA-binding interactions.  Pt(II) terpyridines   that are very sensitive to
              electronic changes will be used to identify   factors affecting excited-state
              decay processes and to distinguish two   types of adduct
              formation--intercalation and covalent bonding--with   form-B DNA.  The
              charge-transfer excited state of the intercalated   complex is quenched by
              guanine, so the experiments will also provide   indications of possible
              nuclease activity.  Transition metal complexes can insert into a helical DNA
              strand   disrupting its structure and reactivity and can break the strand
              itself.    Controlling the binding of these complexs so that disruption or
              cleavage   occurs at particular sites on the DNA chain has important
              pharmaceutical   implications.  In this research, luminescent probes will be
              developed to   identify the type and location of metal complex binding to DNA
              or   DNA-like proteins.  This research also has some relevance to the  
              development of temperature-sensitive luminescent paints.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
