Title       : The Eyes of Nye
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a9726190

Award Number: 9726190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1195718            (Estimated)
Investigator: David Rabinovitch DRabinovitch@kcts.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Brock  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jeff Gentes  (Principal Investigator former)
              Burnill F. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. McKenna  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Erren Gottlieb  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              William S. Nye  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : KCTS Television
	      401 Mercer Street
	      Seattle, WA  981094640    206/443-6717

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9726190   Brock        KCTS, Seattle's PBS affiliate, is producing a series of
              three one-hour prime-time science education television specials starring Bill
              Nye.  The specials will be aimed at a family audience and will be designed to
              promote informal science learning through an entertaining presentation of
              science in everyday life.  Topics currently being considered for the specials
              are The Science of Sports, The Science of Learning, and The Science of the
              Future, thought other topics, such as Pseudo Science, also are being
              considered.  Each program will maintain the entertainment values of enthusiasm
              for science so prominent in the Bill Nye the Science Guy series but will have a
              strong narrative element and air of suspense as Bill embarks on a journey of
              discovery, greater depth of content and presentation, and longer uninterrupted
              segments.  The programs will be supported by a multi-pronged outreach program
              to reach parents and children through local PBS stations and science museums,
              community organizations serving disadvantaged populations and, possibly, a
              tie-in with a national chain of quick family restaurants.    Many of the same
              team that created Bill Nye the Science Guy will work on this project including
              Bill Nye;  Elizabeth Brock, Executive Producer; and Erren Gottlieb and James
              McKenna, producers.   The production team will work with fourteen scientists
              and science educators who will advise the project on presentation and outreach.
               This group also will review and comment on all scripts and drafts of outreach
              material.
