Title       : Photochemistry and Photophysics of Transition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1998  
File        : a9726999

Award Number: 9726999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Demas jnd@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9183,9198,BIOT,EGCH,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program provides continued support to Dr. James N. Demas of the Chemistry  
              Department, University of Virginia, for research on use of luminescent  
              transition metal complexes for sensors and molecular probes.  Dr.   Benjamin
              DeGraff of James Madison University will collaborate on this   research which
              will involve undergraduate as well as graduate and   postdoctoral students. 
              New complexes containing Ru, Re, Os, and Ir will   be synthesized and tested as
              sensors for oxygen gas, carbon dioxide, and   acidity.  Heterogeneous behavior
              in solution (e.g., soluble polymers,   vesicles) and in solid supports (e.g.,
              polymers, silicas) will be   examined in order to understand microheterogeneous
              interactions that   affect sensor probe performance.  Many methods will be used
              to determine   the photophysics and photochemistry of the new systems and how
              they are   perturbed by interaction with surfaces, including time resolved
              emission   spectroscopy, transition absorption spectroscopy, steady-state  
              luminescence, global luminescence decay analysis, gas solubility and   oxygen
              diffusion measurements, dynamic polarization anistropy   measurements,
              solvatochromic probes, temperature dependence studies,   crystallography and
              molecular modeling.      Oxygen, carbon dioxide, and acidity levels change
              during many common   biological and industrial processes.  By monitoring the
              levels of these   chemicals, the amount of reaction products or impurities can
              be   determined.  The goal of this research is to develop stable, durable  
              sensors that could be used in many industrial, medical, and environmental  
              applications.  The luminescent compounds investigated are potentially   useful
              in biomedical monitoring, fluoroimmunoassay, industrial process   control, wind
              tunnel sensors, biological oxygen demand, bioreactors, and   environmental
              monitoring.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
