Title       : Investigation of Composite Facilitated Transport Membranes for Separations of
               Unsaturated Hydrocarbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9726277

Award Number: 9726277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Noble nobler@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl A. Koval  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher N. Bowman  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                    Abstract    Proposal No:   CTS-9726277  Proposal Type:  Investigator
              Initiated  Principal Investigator:  Richard D. Noble  Affiliation:   University
              of Colorado, Boulder      This grant is awarded through the Separations and
              Purification Program sub-element of the Interfacial, Transport and Separations
              Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division.  The principal
              investigator is Dr. Richard Noble at the University of Colorado, Boulder.  The
              investigators propose to develop an understanding of the separation mechanisms
              involved in facilitated transport membranes.  The novel aspect of the research
              is the development of composite membranes where a fluorinated ion-exchange
              component is present within the pores of a porous hydrophobic component.  
              Sodium and/or silver are ion-exchanged onto these composite membrane and the
              separation of olefins from paraffin's will be tested.  The investigators
              characterize the interfacial transport along the ion exchange region of the
              polymer composite and determine its role in overall membrane flux and
              selectivity characteristics.    The separation of very similar chemical species
              that differ very slightly in molecular weight, is of tremendous importance to
              the chemical, petroleum processing and fine chemicals industries.  Traditional
              chemical processes such as distillation are not very effective.  Membranes hold
              promise for such separations but to be commercially feasible, significant
              advances in membrane design have to be made.  This research addresses composite
              membrane design for the separation of these species.  If successful,
              implementation would lead to significant cost savings to the chemicals and
              petoleum processing industries.
