Title       : Reactions and Stereochemistry of Organometallic Compounds Related to Asymmetric
               Synthesis and Catalytic Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1999  
File        : a9726423

Award Number: 9726423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Faller jack.faller@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. John W. Faller, Chemistry Department, Yale University, is supported   by the
              Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for   studies
              related to asymmetric and regioselective synthesis and catalysis   using metal
              complexes. New strategies will be developed for asymmetric   synthesis based on
              the use of readily available racemic ligands followed   by treatment with an
              inexpensive chiral poison to selectively deactivate   one enantiomer of the
              racemic mixture. The remaining ligand enantiomer   will be employed to prepare
              chiral metal catalysts. This general strategy   has been demonstrated for
              asymmetric hydrogenations and will be extended   to a number of other systems
              including a series of titanium-alkoxide   catalyzed reactions. More effective
              poisons will be developed and will be   applied to the preparation of chiral
              catalyst for a broad range of   asymmetric reactions that have conventionally
              used noble metal catalysts   prepared from enantiomerically pure phosphine
              ligands. In reactions where   dimers are active species, the conventional
              approach has involved the   dimerization of enantiomeric monomers. The
              possibility of enhancing   enantioselectivity through the use of
              pseudo-enantiomeric complexes,   which are composed of bimetallics containing
              different chiral ligands,   will be explored. Hemilabile ligands will be used
              to control the   stereochemistry in catalytic intermediates and to provide
              stoichiometeric   reagents for preparation of homoallylic alcohols by allyl
              addition to   aldehydes.  An object which is not the same as its mirror image
              (e.g. a left compared   to a right handed glove) is said to be chiral.  Many
              pharmaceutical and   agricultural  chemicals are chiral and often only one of
              the two mirror image molecules   is desired. Since it is difficult to obtain a
              single mirror image, the   production of such molecules is an important goal in
              contemporary   chemistry. In this project new strategies toward solving the
              problem of   `asymmetric synthesis` will be applied to a broad range of
              reactions and   new, more economic preparations of important molecules will be
              developed.   In addition to the chemical research, this project has the
              important   objective of training young scientist in the areas of metal
              catalysis and   asymmetric synthesis.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
