Title       : Evolution of Eye Regression in Cavefish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9726561

Award Number: 9726561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Jeffery   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726561  Jeffery    The purpose of this project is to study the genetic basis of
              eye degeneration in a vertebrate animal.  As a model system, we will use the
              fish Astyanax mexicanus.  The Astyanax system is well suited for studying eye
              degeneration for the following reasons.  First, during the last ice age,
              surface dwelling Astyanax, which have large eyes, were isolated in caves.  The
              descendants of these cave-dwelling Astyanax subsequently lost their eyes.  Both
              surface and cave dwelling Astyanax populations have been collected and are
              currently available for research in my laboratory.  Using these animals we will
              compare eye development and degeneration in animals with and without eyes.
              Second, eyeless Astyanax are found in at least 29 different caves, and some of
              these cave dwelling populations appear to have lost their eyes independently.
              Therefore, we can study the genetic basis of eye degeneration under potentially
              different environmental and evolutionary conditions.  Third, surface and cave
              dwelling Astyanax are easily cultured in the laboratory, breed readily, are
              inter-fertile, and the eye structure of the surface fish is similar to that
              found in humans.  Thus, Astyanax can be used as a convenient experimental
              system to help understand human eye degeneration.  This proposal has three
              objectives. First, we want to determine the evolutionary history of eye
              degeneration in different populations of cave dwelling Astyanax.  This will be
              done by comparing DNA sequences of surface and various cave dwelling
              populations.  The results will answer the question of whether eye degeneration
              appeared only once or many times during the evolutionary history of these
              animals.  Second, we want to determine the mechanisms of eye degeneration at
              the tissue level, that is which eye tissues (lens, retina, cornea, etc.)
              actually degenerate.  This will be done by examining cell proliferation and
              cell death in degenerating eye tissues. These results will allow us to focus on
              specific genes that function in vario us eye tissues.  Third, we want to
              identify the genes involved in eye degeneration.  The existence and function of
              previously identified eye genes will be studied in surface and various cave
              dwelling Astyanax populations.  This objective is intended to establish the
              genetic basis of eye degeneration.    The significance of this project spans
              the areas of evolutionary biology, developmental biology, and function of the
              visual system.  In evolutionary biology, this project is significant because it
              will define the genetic basis of an evolutionary change which may have occurred
              multiple times during the last ice age.  The open question of whether parallel
              changes in evolution are controlled by the same or different mechanisms and
              genes will be answered.  In developmental biology, this project is significant
              because it will investigate the mechanisms underlying developmental changes
              during evolution.  There is little current understanding of how development of
              organ systems is modified during evolution, and we expect to fill this void. 
              Finally, this project is significant in regard to visual system function
              because it addresses the genetic basis of eye degeneration.  Some of the
              mechanisms and genes underlying eye degeneration in Astyanax may be the same as
              those involved in visual system deficiencies in humans.
