Title       : Quantum-State-Specific Neutral Time-of Flight: A New Probe of the Correlated
               Product Energy Distribution in Photodissociation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1999  
File        : a9726267

Award Number: 9726267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alec M. Wodtke wodtke@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 0000,1318,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program   of
              the Chemistry Division, Wodtke will develop his new experimental   method,
              studying quantum-state specific neutral time-of-flight (QSSnTOF),   to measure
              simultaneously the internal and translational energy of   photochemical
              reaction products.  Work on ketene will be continued at a   number of new
              photolysis wavelengths in order to show the validity of   Restricted Phase
              Space Theory (RPST), which had been developed to fit the   previously acquired
              data.  Additional experiments are proposed on BH3CO,   a simple Lewis
              acid:Lewis base complex that exhibits many bonding   characteristics of metal
              carbonyls.  The QSSnTOF method will be applied   to other species, such as O
              (singlet D) and NH (X triplet sigma minus) in   order to help unravel channels
              in ozone and HNCO photolysis.  %%%  Photodissociation, the process in which
              molecules fall apart as a result   of absorbing light, is one of the most basic
              of chemical processes.    These studies of Prof. Wodtke will examine in a very
              detailed way what   happens to the fragments of molecules which dissociate
              after absorbing   light.  The results will be analyzed and compared with
              theoretical models   in order to test the ranges of their validity.  Such
              studies have   wide-ranging impact, particularly in understanding reactions
              occurring in   the earth's atmosphere, but also on such processes as take place
              in   photochemical reactions anywhere, such as in the manufacturing or  
              environmental degradation of materials.                                        
                        Á>?¢                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
