Title       : Neural Mechanisms of Dominance Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2001     
File        : a9726819

Award Number: 9726819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Edwards biodhe@panther.gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     Social  relationships among animals influence their behavior,  and  do 
              so  by  affecting the neural circuits and responses  that  control  behavior. 
              A  primary  link  between  social  status  and  behavior  occurs through the
              release of neuromodulators that  have  both  widespread  and targeted effects
              within the nervous  system.  One   neuromodulator,  serotonin,  has  been 
              implicated  in   the  expression  of  social  ordering behaviors  in  a  wide 
              range  of  vertebrates  and invertebrates, including primates, rodents,  fish 
              and  crustaceans.  The  neural mechanisms  that  link  serotonin's  effects  to
               the expression of dominance status have been  studied  most   thoroughly  in 
              crustaceans,  particularly   lobsters   and  crayfish.         During  the
              current grant period the social dominance  status  of   a   crayfish  was 
              found  to  predict  the  effect   of   the  neuromodulator  serotonin on the
              neural circuit  for  the  taiflip  behavior.  Serotonin enhances the response
              of  the  Lateral  Giant  (LG) tailflip command neuron to its normal
              mechanosensory input in  isolated  crayfish and in socially dominant crayfish,
              and inhibits  the  cell  in  subordinate  animals. The differences  result 
              from  corresponding   differences  in  the   population   of   serotonin 
              receptors.         The  present  proposal continues this research by
              determining  the  sources  of  serotonin that modulate LG  in  freely  behaving
               animals,  and by asking where and how serotonin has its  different  effects 
              on  LG  in the animals of different social status.  Blood  levels  of serotonin
              in freely behaving crayfish will be  measured  during  fights,  and  the
              responses of LG to serotonin,  serotonin  agonists   and   antagonists  will 
              be  measured   with   standard  electrophysiological techniques.
