Title       : Molecular and Morphological Studies of Evolution in the Gelidiales (Rhodophyta)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9726170

Award Number: 9726170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84940              (Estimated)
Investigator: D. W. Freshwater freshwaterw@uncwil.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9726170  Freshwater    The red algal order Gelidiales contains many
              economically important species; gelidialean algae are a principal source of
              agar, widely used in the food and cosmetics industry and in microbiological,
              biochemical and genetics research.  However, the group as a whole, and species
              within it, have been difficult to identify and classify. Traditional
              classifications of red algae, including the Gelidiales, have been based on
              particular life history types, and characteristics of the developmental
              morphology of the female reproductive system.  Developmental characteristics of
              the female reproductive system and related stages in the life history are
              thought to be useful in classifications of red algae, because changes in these
              characters would prevent cross-breeding between changed and unchanged algal
              populations (reproductive isolation), leading to the formation of species and,
              ultimately, lineages of species (clades). Independent data are needed to test
              the idea that these reproductive characters are useful in classification, and
              also are needed to provide a means of classifying algae for which, as in many
              Gelidiales, information from reproductive systems is hard to obtain or
              interpret.  In this study, D. Wilson Freshwater will document the vegetative
              morphology and reproductive strategies of key gelidialean taxa, and will
              reconstruct the phylogenetic history of these taxa on the basis of both these
              characters and DNA sequence data from several nuclear and plastid genes.  The
              work is expected to result in a robust reconstruction of the phylogenetic
              history of the Gelidiales and evaluate the utility of life history and
              reproductive characters in reconstructing this history, in Gelidiales and in
              other red algae.
