Title       : Evolution of Genetic Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9726433

Award Number: 9726433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Cheverud   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Cheverud   9726433     The effects of genes may differ depending on which genes
              are present at other loci. This phenomenon is known as epistasis. The
              collective effect  of epistatic interactions on gene effects is referred to as
              the effect  of genetic background. An important problem in microevolution and 
              speciation revolves around whether this genetic background itself  evolves,
              thereby changing the effects of the genes placed in them.  Whether a particular
              genetic variant is favored or not depends on which  genetic background it is
              expressed in. In previous studies, we have  found substantial epistasis among
              genes affecting adult body size in the  cross between Large (LG/J) and Small
              (SM/J) mouse strains. Thus, whether  a gene makes an individual larger than
              average depends on which other  genes are present (the genetic background). We
              have also found  differential effects for jaw characters, meaning that whether
              a specific  gene affects both overall jaw size and local jaw traits depends on 
              either the genetic or environmental background. The presence of  epistatic
              interactions facilitates the evolution of the genetic  background.    In the
              proposed work, we will examine the opportunity for genetic  background
              evolution in two experiments. First, we will test for genetic  interactions
              between specific loci affecting the size and shape of the  jaw and their
              varying genetic backgrounds, represented by 200  independent full-sib families.
              This will allow us to determine whether  differential effects on sets of jaw
              characters are due to genetic or  environmental backgrounds. If the
              differential effects are due to  genetic background, then it is possible for
              the multiple effects of  single gene loci (pleiotropy) to evolve. Second, we
              will prepare a  series of replicate recombinant inbred lines from the cross of
              Large and  Small mouse strains. With epistasis, it is expected that these 
              recombinant inbred lines will evolve different genetic backgrounds. This  will
              be tested by mating males from sever al inbred strains into each of  the Large
              x Small recombinant inbred lines. If the effect of these  "migrant" males
              differs depending on which recombinant inbred strain it  is mated to, the
              genetic background of the recombinant inbred strains  has evolved. The effect
              of mutations, or migrants, entering each strain  will vary, depending on the
              genetic background. The evolution of genetic  background during population
              divergence and/or speciation can result in  the same gene (introduced by
              migration or mutation) having a different  effect in different subpopulations
              resulting in the evolutionary  divergence and even reproductive isolation of
              the populations, even  under similar selection pressures.
