Title       : Various Properties of Natural and Triggered Lightning Discharges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9726100

Award Number: 9726100
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $554870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir A. Rakov rakov@ece.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin A. Uman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9726100  Rakov        While the phenomenon of lightning has been observed for
              some time, many  aspects are unknown.  The overall objective of this research
              is further improvement  in the existing knowledge of the physical processes
              comprising the lightning  discharge. Both experimental and theoretical studies
              are planed.  The experimental  studies will be conducted at the International
              Center for Lightning Research and  Testing at Camp Blanding, Florida, and at
              the Lightning Observatory on the  University of Florida campus in Gainesville. 
              Camp Blanding contains unique  facilities for artificial lightning initiation
              (triggering) from overhead thunderclouds.          For both triggered and
              natural lightning discharges, electric and magnetic  fields will be measured.
              Channel-base currents will be additionally measured for  triggered lightning. 
              Optical images of lightning channels will be obtained with a  variety of video,
              still, and streak cameras, and with a digital optical system.  GPS  timing will
              allow the correlation of these measurements with the National Lightning 
              Detection Network reports and to the occurrence of Schumann resonance
              transients.   Attempts to initiate and characterize more energetic and
              potentially sprite-producing  positive lightning will be made.  Detailed
              mechanisms of lightning initiation from an  ungrounded object and of lightning
              attachment to ground will be studied.   Measurements of electric and magnetic
              fields at eight stations, seven of them  between 5 and 500 meters of the
              triggered-lightning channel, will be used to infer  the distribution of charge
              density and current on the lightning channel and to  validate or refute
              existing lightning models.  The first attempt to study  experimentally the
              lightning energy in order to resolve the long-standing controversy  on its
              magnitude will be made.          Overall, the results of the proposed research
              will provide new insights into  the physics of various lighting processes with
              implications for other areas of  Atmosp heric Sciences, including atmospheric
              chemistry (energy available for trace  gas production by lightning) and the
              interaction of lightning with the upper  atmosphere (in particular, the
              production of sprites by positive lightning).  ***
