Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Novel Multifunctional Peptides in Insects and
               Their Role in Cellular Immunity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a9726205

Award Number: 9726205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Strand   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9726205  Strand    This award supports a two year collaborative research 
              project between Professor Michael Strand of the University  of Wisconsin and
              Professor Yoichi Hyakawa of Hokkaido  University in Japan.  The researchers
              will undertake a study  of novel multifunctional peptides in insects and their
              role  in cellular immunity.  The investigators believe that the  biological
              activities reported for PSPl and GBP reflect a  multifunctional role for this
              family of peptides in response  to invasion by infectious agents.  They plan to
              characterize  the function of these peptides in insect immunity.  The  specific
              objectives are:  (l) compare the functional  activities of PSPl and GBP in
              P.includens and P.separata;  (2) isolate a PSPl cDNA and characterize its
              expression  during wounding and encapsulation; and (3) develop an in  vitro
              system for production of PSPl/GBP and investigate its  processing.  The
              long-range goal of the research is to  understand the function of these
              peptides in invertebrate  immunity.     This project brings together the
              efforts of two  laboratories that have complementary expertise, research 
              capabilities and equipment.  Both researchers were studying  different
              biological processes related to parasitism in  larvae of noctuid moths and
              converged upon the same  hemolymph peptide as the biological effector molecule
              for  stimulating plasmatocyte spreading and for retarding  development through
              altering juvenile hormone level.  The  planned experiments will enable the
              researchers to work  together to understand the functions of this family of 
              peptides.  Events associated with formation of hemocyte  clots and capsules are
              fundamentally conserved across most  insects and many other invertebrates. 
              Therefore, results of  this research will be relevant to many taxa and will
              provide  an important foundation for future comparative studies.  Through the
              exchange of ideas and technology, this project  will broaden our base of basic
              knowledge and promote  international understandin g and cooperation.  ***
