Title       : US-Japan Joint Seminar: Abnormal Flow Phenomena in Turbomachines-From Avoidance
               to Suppression and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1998      
File        : a9726626

Award Number: 9726626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Katz katz@titan.me.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9726626  Katz    This award supports the participation of American scientists 
              and engineers in a U.S.-Japan seminar on Abnormal Flow  Phenomena in
              Turbomachines -- From Avoidance to Suppression  and Control, to be held in
              Osaka, Japan from October 26-29,  l998.  The co-organizers are Professors
              Joseph Katz of Johns  Hopkins University and Oshinobu Tsujimoto of Osaka 
              University in Japan.  The seminar will focus on the  underlying flow
              mechanisms, available means to detect,  compute and measure them, as well as
              existing and potential  future effective countermeasures for them.   
              Turbomachines are being used in increasingly more severe and  demanding
              conditions in order to meet higher performance  requirements and a wider range
              of applications.  Under such  conditions, various kinds of "abnormal" flow
              phenomena, such  as rotating cavitation, rotating stall, surge, and massive 
              flow separation occur.  Besides having adverse effects on  the performance and
              causing increased levels of vibrations  and noise, these abnormal phenomena can
              and do regularly  lead to component and system failures.  Thus, in addition to
              meeting conventional design targets,  such as improvements in the performance
              and efficiency, it  is becoming increasingly important to understand the 
              underlying mechanisms causing these abnormal phenomena and  develop effective
              counter-measures against them.  The  participants  will develop clear
              identification of the  dominating flow phenomena and recommended strategies for
               avoidance, suppression and control.  The U.S. researchers  are experienced in
              theoretical, computational and  experimental research tools while the Japanese
              have  expertise in the fundamental and practical aspects of flows.  The seminar
              brings together researchers from academia,  industry and government.  In
              addition, postdoctoral  researchers will be included.  The exchange of ideas
              and  data with Japanese experts in this field will enable U.S.  participants to
              advance their own work, and will set the  stage for fu ture collaborative
              projects.  ***
