Title       : MOTI: Decision Making with Incomplete Information in an Integrated Product and
               Process Development Enterprise -- A Management Decision Tool for Cost Modeling
               & Affordability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9726027

Award Number: 9726027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124756             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ladislav J. Kohout kohout@cs.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Zenz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest L. McDuffie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chun (Chuck) Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hsu-Pin (Ben) Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5374      MANAGEMENT OF TECHNOLOGY PRGM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9726027  Kohout    A systematic accounting of incomplete or conflicting
              information, constraints, and consequences has not been adequately addressed in
              the propulsion industry during engineering design and planning.  This impacts
              any affordable aeronautics propulsion system incorporating new technology or
              product development, the analysis of cost, and realistic and reliable cost
              /benefit analyses in the design phase, which for advanced jet propulsion
              systems involve determining the affordability of a design that has never before
              been manufactured, and making technical/business decisions based on incomplete,
              uncertain data.  In the case of incomplete information, commonly used
              parametric techniques provide limited assessment capabilities.  The use of
              probabilistic evaluations has improved the handling of certain types of
              uncertainty and has been applied recently in the aeronautics industry for the
              handling of likelihood.  However, its use is limited to cases where an adequate
              historical base exists upon which to base probabilistic studies A new
              methodology is needed to provide an effective assessment of advanced
              technology, as well as the uncertainty, i.e., confidence, in the solution, to
              enable the identification and prioritization of high payoff and high risk
              research and product development areas.  The link between advanced concepts and
              accrued benefit to the aeronautics propulsion industry is forged by the
              capability to perform realistic and appropriate cost/benefits assessments, at
              the component level, and up through the system level.  This new approach to
              supplement the parametric and probabilistic tools has focused on the
              application of fuzzy logic theory to the decision-making process.  The use of
              fuzzy attributes for cost models and affordability applications addresses the
              problem of the limited (or unavailable) data in the situation of materials with
              limited characterization data, processes with limited empirical data, and
              manufacturing processes with little or no manufacturing base.  T he use of
              verbal descriptors parallels the knowledge-gathering exercise and will provide
              the ability to assign different levels of accuracy, precision, or certainty to
              each element, such as cost, material input, or processing condition.
