Title       : Collaborative Research: Organization of Nucleotide Diversity in the Inversions
               of Drosophila pseudoobscura
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9726825

Award Number: 9726825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen W. Schaeffer sws4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Schaeffer  9726825    The research goals of this project are to test hypotheses
              about the genetic   forces that modulate variation of chromosomal alterations
              that modify gene   order known as inversions.  The chromosomal inversions on
              the third   chromosome of Drosophila pseudoobscura have figured prominently in
              the   literature of evolutionary biology for more than fifty years.  They have 
               proven to be a very useful model system for studies of geographic   variation,
              natural selection, gene flow, and genetic drift.  The inversions   seem to
              represent a clear case of adaptive selection because they vary in   frequency
              with the environment, form classical clines, and in some   populations there
              are seasonal cycles of inversion frequency.  The   objective of this proposal
              is to determine how selection acts on the   genetic contents of inversions
              within and among D. pseudoobscura   populations.  This research will
              discriminate between various models of   selection by analyzing nucleotide
              diversity of nine PCR amplified markers   uniformly distributed on the third
              chromosome of D. pseudoobscura.  The   nine markers will be sequenced in D.
              pseudoobscura strains collected from   four populations that span an inversion
              frequency cline.    Studies of molecular evolution over the past two decades
              have focussed on   the genetic forces that shape diversity of single genes and
              have not   considered if selection maintains assemblages of linked genes on  
              chromosomes.  It is an open question whether the association of genes on  
              particular chromosomes within the genome happened due to selection or  
              accident.  Inversions provide an important mechanism to maintain the  
              association of genetic diversity distributed across long distances of  
              chromosomes.  This project will provide valuable data on the genetic forces  
              that modulate the evolution of large segments of the genome in natural  
              populations.
