Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Experimental and Theoretical Studies on Stucture
               and Catalytic Activity of di- and Polynuclear Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a9726789

Award Number: 9726789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50148              (Estimated)
Investigator: Iwao Ojima iojima@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keiji Morokuma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9726789  Ojima    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor Iwao Ojima of SUNY, Stony Brook,  Professor Keiji
              Morokuma of Emory University and Professor  Eiichi Nakamura of the University
              of Tokyo in Japan.  The  researchers will be undertaking experimental and
              theoretical  studies on structure and catalytic activity of di- and 
              polynuclear metal complexes.  Professor Ojima has been  designing and
              developing new and efficient homogeneous  catalytic reactions promoted by
              heterobimetallic catalyst  systems, that provide useful synthetic methods for
              organic  synthesis.  He has discovered silylformylation and various 
              silylcarbocyclizations and has been trying to elucidate the  most plausible
              mechanisms for these catalytic processes.  His collaborations with theoretical
              chemists, who have  experience in analyzing the problems in homogeneous 
              catalysis and di-/polynuclear metal complex systems, will  provide insight into
              the theoretically predicted pathways.    This project brings together the
              efforts of three  laboratories that have complementary expertise, research 
              capabilities and equipment.  Professor Ojima's expertise is  in organometallic
              chemistry and homogeneous catalysis.  Professor Morokuma is a theoretical
              chemist who can uniquely  deal with the catalytic cycles of transition metal
              catalyzed  processes.  Professor Nakamura has a wide range of expertise  in
              experimental as well as theoretical research.  It is  anticipated that this
              trilateral collaborative research will  disclose novel mechanistic aspects of
              the catalysis of di-  and polynuclear metal complexes, which are very likely to
               imply new organometallic species in the catalytic cycle.  This information
              will stimulate the exploration of new and  significant organometallic
              transformations and help in the  design of highly regio-, stereo- and
              enantioselective  catalyst systems with applications in industrial processes. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project  will broaden o ur
              base of basic knowledge and promote  international understanding and
              cooperation.  ***
