Title       : SGER: Toward a Better Understanding of Engineering Design Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9726836

Award Number: 9726836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yan Jin yjin@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chunming Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen C-Y. Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  This research project seeks to contribute to the scientific foundation of
              engineering design by developing a conceptual framework that can be used to
              study, correlate and compare existing engineering design models, which may
              obtain from widely different perspectives.  The resulting framework will
              consist of a design concept interchange language with rigorous mathematical
              evaluations.  This interchange language will be used to explain the rationales
              and correlate the concepts used in different models.  The mathematical
              evaluations will be used to explicate underlying assumptions of various design
              models and to evaluate their validity and limitations.  Six to ten engineering
              design models will be selected from engineering, decision theory, and
              artificial intelligence fields for this research.  The framework will be
              developed based on the critical review of these selected design models.  An
              interdisciplinary research team, including engineers, mathematicians, and
              decision theorists, is assembled to develop this framework for engineering
              design models.       Design is the essence of engineering profession; and
              engineering design has been a topic for researchers from different disciplines.
               Some of them are from various engineering disciplines, others from decision
              theory or artificial intelligence fields.  Although a number of engineering
              design models have been proposed to date, little cross reference exists in
              these models and communication among the researcher has been difficult.  It is
              commonly recognized that the lack of communication among researchers has become
              a major obstacle for the progress of engineering design research.  If
              successful, the results of this research project will provide a common language
              and framework for engineering design researchers to share their insights and
              results in order to identify gaps between the models and directions for the
              future research.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
