Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Heat and Mass
               Transfer in Complex Internal Flow Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9726615

Award Number: 9726615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24934              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Georgiadis georgia@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Buckius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0510604   Analytic Tools                          
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9726615  Georgiadis    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor John Georgiadis of the University  of Illinois,
              Urbana and Professor Ken Okazaki of the Tokyo  Institute of Technology in
              Japan.  The researchers will be  undertaking studies relating to magnetic
              resonance imaging  (MRI) of heat and mass transfer in complex internal flow 
              systems.  The research involves systematic non-invasive  measurements with MRI
              in order to accomplish the following  objectives:  (l) the flow field in a
              class of complex  internal structure (fixed microchannels) will be 
              characterized as a function of hydrodynamic conditions and  degree of
              structural disorder.  Pressure-driven, laminar,  and incompressible flows
              through fixed solid matrices with  complicated interstitial space will be
              considered and (2)  under conditions of objective 1, the temperature and the 
              dispersion of miscible fluid will be quantified during  convective transport in
              the same geometries.  MRI  measurements will be compared to the results of
              direct  numerical simulation via Lattice Boltzmann methods, and will  be used
              to improve existing models of convective transport.     This project brings
              together the efforts of two  laboratories that have complementary expertise,
              research  capabilities and equipment.  The two groups have access to  mutually
              complementary MRI facilities with the Japanese MRI  scanner designed for higher
              magnetic field strength, and  thus higher resolution.  The proposed work will
              contribute  to fundamental knowledge in the areas of advanced  diagnostics and
              will also demonstrate the feasibility of  combining experimental MRI and
              numerical tools to analyze  complex thermohydrodynamic systems encountered in
              the design  of industrial devices.  Younger scientists will also be  included
              in the project.  Through the exchange of ideas and  technology, this project
              will broaden our base of basic  knowledge and promote international
              understanding and  cooperation.  ***
