Title       : RUI: Mutational Analysis of 16S and 23S Ribosomal RNA Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9726951

Award Number: 9726951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen L. Triman k_triman@email.fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      Office of the Provost
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  Triman  9726951  A detailed understanding of the roles of specific
              nucleotides in the structure,  assembly and processing of the bacterium
              Escherichia coli's 16SrRNA and 23S rRNA ribosomal RNAs is the ultimate goal of
              these studies.  The general approach outlined here involves the study of seven
              specific base pairs in 165 rRNA and one specific base pair in 23S rRNA. These
              base pairs represent sites in which conditional mutations have been identified
              that confer loss of expression of a selectable marker (spectinomycin-resistance
              or erythromycin-resistance) Each of the mutations disrupt a G-C base pair in or
              near a region of rRNA involved in interaction with a ribosomal protein. 
              Genetic studies of these mutations will involve (1) introduction of
              compensatory second-site alterations by site-directed mutagenesis, (2)
              determination of the phenotype conferred by A-U replacement of each specific
              G-C base pair disrupted by the primary mutation, and (3) determination of the
              phenotype conferred by the compensatory alteration in the absence of the
              primary mutation. Restoration of base pairing at a given position is predicted
              to confer full drug resistance if the mutant phenotype is due to disruption of
              pairing. Failure to restore drug resistance is taken as evidence that the
              primary mutation has disrupted some other structural interaction in which the
              site is involved. Thus, the genetic approach can be used to either confirm the
              importance of specific base paired nucleotides in the secondary structure of
              rRNA or to identify unanticipated structural roles for those nucleotides. 
              These genetic studies are designed to determine the importance of specific
              nucleotides by assessment of the structural and functional impairments of rRNA
              molecules resulting from expression of base substitutions at these positions. 
              Databases of ribosomal RNA mutations identified to date are also maintained. 
              On-line access to these database is being improved by implementing a query form
              and a data submission form and by provid ing a Webserver.  In addition,
              undergraduate students will be involved in all aspects of this project.    This
              research and database is important because the ribosome is responsible for the
              translation of messenger RNA, the initial product of genes, into proteins in
              all living organisms.
