Title       : Collaborative Research:(EGB) Multisubstrate Biodegradation Kinetics of Plycyclic
               Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) in NAPL-Contaminated Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1998  
File        : a9726687

Award Number: 9726687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107665             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lily Y. Young lyoung@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Bartha  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1584,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9726687  Bartha    This project is designed to investigate the chemical,
              physical, and microbiological processes governing the behavior of mixtures of
              polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in NAPL-contaminated soils.  PAHs are
              an important class of organic pollutants that are commonly associated with
              multicomponent organic contaminants such as coal tar, creosote, and diesel
              fuel.  These contaminants commonly exist as non-aqueous phase liquids (NAPLs). 
              A clear understanding of underlying mechanisms and a comprehensive
              compositional modeling approach is essential to understanding the impacts of
              these contaminants on a larger scale and over a long time periods.  The
              specific objectives of this project are: (I) to gain insights about relative
              biodegradabilities and substrate interactions of PAHs in sole and
              multi-substrate systems, (ii) to relate biodegradation rates in NAPL
              contaminated systems to the thermodynamic phase equilibrium and dissolution
              kinetic processes governing bioavailability, and (iii) to construct an
              integrated mathematical model of PAH behavior in NAPL-contaminated soils and to
              validate model formulation through experimentation using PAH-NAPL-contaminated
              soils.  Experimental studies are designed to explore the interrelation of PAH
              dissolution and biodegradation, and to observe the presence or absence of
              substrate interactions under various conditions of initial substrate
              concentrations and proportions.  One aim is to ascertain the extent to which
              kinetic parameters inferred from sole substrate experiments can be used in
              conjunction with a mathematical formulation that captures substrate interaction
              effects to describe what happens in a system with multiple PAH substrates.  A
              novel aspect of this work is the use of synthetic NAPLs as models organic
              liquids to simulate multicomponent contaminants such as coal tars, which
              permits control in experimental design and analytical characterization.
