Title       : Research on Blue and Near Ultraviolet Diode Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9726938

Award Number: 9726938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arto V. Nurmikko arto_nurmikko@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9726938  Nurmikko  The PI proposes a research program whose objective is to
              focus on specific areas of basic and applied semiconductor science to aid in
              the the continued development of the group III-nitride based semiconductor blue
              lasers and extension of such devices to the near ultraviolet.  Further progress
              in this field of vast technological potential requires systematic scientific
              efforts.  The PI identifies and addresses two critical areas in the proposed
              program: (a) the study of optical gain and related radiative processes in the
              nitride quantum wells for optimizing the active region of the laser and
              implementing a low threshold device design, and (b) development of
              understanding at a microscopic level of the p-type ohmic contact problem.  In
              addition to the overall idiosyncracies of a widegap semiconductor, both of
              these problem areas are impacted by the complex and rich microstructure of the
              nitride heterostructures.  In the planned work we thus also look for key links
              between the crystal microstructure and optoelectronic properties which are
              presently poorly understood.  Apart from our early results on nitride-based
              diode light emitters, the PI takes advantage of our experience with bluegreen
              II-VI semiconductor lasers where the issues of gain, device design, and
              contacts were successfully pursued by the PIs for advancing these quantum well
              diode devices.  Significant differences and distinct challenges do, of course,
              exist in the nitrides; however, given the common features that are shared by
              wide bandgap semiconductors at a fundamental level provides a very useful base
              of comparison for quantitatively and scientifically meaningful comparisons,   
              The proposed research takes advantage of special capabilities and techniques
              adapted to the study of both nitride-based heterostructures and diode laser
              devices.  For example, advanced laser-based spectroscopic techniques, including
              ultrafast real-time spectroscopy will be applied to study the optical gain and
              dynamics of a high density lo w dimensional electron-hole pair in a disordered
              system such as the InGaN QW where electronic localization effects are
              important.  The techniques include high spatial resolution probes such as
              near-field optical microscopy.  For the p-type contact studies, in-situ
              deposition of metallization and InN heterostructures in UHV environment is
              proposed as a means to study the microscopic properties of the metal-nitride
              interface in order to optimize a low resistance contact for diode laser
              application.  ***
