Title       : POC Production and Export in the Indian Ocean Sector of the Southern Ocean: A
               US-China Collaborative Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1999 
File        : a9726186

Award Number: 9726186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $513926             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia H. Pilskaln   (Principal Investigator current)
              Fei Chai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9726186  Pilskaln     This proposed work is a study of the biological
              production and export flux of biogenic matter in response to ventilation of
              intermediate and deep water masses within the Polar Front zone.  It is a
              collaborative work between the University of Maine and the Chinese Antarctic
              Research Expedition (CHINARE).  The shipboard work is proposed for the Chinese
              antarctic resupply vessel off Prydz Bay in the Indian Ocean sector.   In the
              austral Spring, this region experiences phytoplankton blooms that are thought
              to be the result of nutrient transport by the ventilation of intermediate and
              deep water masses.  On an annual basis, it is believed that such blooms are the
              primary source of particulate organic carbon and biogenic silica flux to the
              ocean bottom.  At this time however no data exists on the amount of particulate
              organic matter that sinks through the water column, leaving the quantitative
              relationships between production and export largely undefined in this region.  
              The initial phase of the work consists of setting out a time-series sediment
              trap mooring at approximately 64 deg S latitude and 73 deg E longitude to take
              advantage of  the historical data set that CHINARE has obtained in this area
              over the past decade.  The biweekly to monthly trap samples will be analyzed
              for their organic constituents, and in conjunction with primary productivity
              observations will provide the basic data from which export values can be
              derived.   This work will be carried out in collaboration with the State
              Oceanic Administration of the People's Republic of China, and the Chinese
              Antarctic Research Expedition.  In addition to providing time on the antarctic
              resupply vessel, the SOA will sponsor the shipboard primary productivity
              experiments and the supporting hydrographic measurements.  The collaborating
              American scientists will provide guidance in making these observations to
              standards developed for the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study, and provide the
              hardware for the moored sediment trap.   There will be a mutual sharing between
              the U.S. and Chinese investigators of all samples and data sets, and the data
              analysis will be carried out jointly.  ***
