Title       : US-Japan Cooperative Science: Complexity Theory for Strategic Goals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9726724

Award Number: 9726724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth W. Regan regan@cse.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jin-Yi Cai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan L. Selman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mitsunori Ogihara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9726724  Regan    This award supports a three year collaborative research
              project  between Professor Kenneth Regan of SUNY, Buffalo and Professor  Osamu
              Watanabe of the Tokyo Institute of Technology in Japan.  The researchers will
              undertake a study of complexity theory for  strategic goals.  The main
              objective is the development of more  refined tools for analyzing the
              complexity of computations than  are currently most commonly employed in the
              field.  Particular  areas to be investigated include:  (1) linear and
              quasi-linear  time reductions between problems, (2) low-level circuit-based 
              classes and reductions, often with quasi-linear bounds on circuit  size, (3)
              average-case complexity, including a determination of  which of  several
              competing polynomial-time formalisms is best  suited for lower time bound
              analysis, and (4) a new theory of one-  way functions that realize certain
              concrete polynomial complexity  gaps, such as being quasilinear-time computable
              but not  inevitable in less than quadratic time.     This project brings
              together the efforts of scientists, in both  countries, that have complementary
              expertise and research  capabilities. The development of a more acute analysis
              of  computational costs should help gauge its practical effectiveness  now, and
              its strategic potential as a guide for future  investigations.  Extending
              theories of (quasi-)linear time and of  low-level classes and reductions should
              provide a precise  understanding of what facets of problems make them hard  to
              solve  and how these facets are related between problems.  It is further 
              expected that it will be possible to understand the relationship  between
              average-case complexity and the nature-and-distribution  of such hard
              instances.  Through the exchange of ideas and  technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge  and promote international understanding
              and cooperation.  ***
