Title       : ECOHAB: Algicidal Bacteria and the Regulation of Gymnodiniumbreve Blooms in the
               Gulf of Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9726260

Award Number: 9726260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163929             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Doucette greg doucette@ccgate.ssp.nmfs.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 4444,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Blooms of the toxic dinoflagellate Gymnodinium breve occur in coastal waters
              throughout much of the Gulf of Mexico, but are especially problematic along the
              Florida coast where these annual events last at least 3   months and exact a
              large toll on the regional economy with losses estimated at about $20 million
              per episode. The current project is aimed at beginning to elucidate the role of
              algicidal bacteria in promoting the decline and dissipation of G. breve red
              tides along the Florida Gulf coast. The hypothesis that algicidal bacteria
              specific for G. breve are present in microbial assemblages indigenous to the
              Florida Gulf coast is tested using a straightforward, previously successful,
              approach which involves isolating bacteria that prohibit or interfere with the
              growth of G. breve. Isolation media used select for bacteria requiring G. breve
              derived organics, a characteristic of several previously described algicidal
              bacteria. A formulation supporting growth of bacterial strain 5N 3, a strain
              lethal to G. breve is  also tested. Bacterial isolates with algicidal activity
              specific for G. breve are characterized with classical and molecular
              techniques. The latter will provide small subunit (ssu) rRNA sequence data,
              which will be used during a follow up study to design and develop
              oligonucleotide probes for these bacterial strains.  The work proposed herein
              represents the first attempt to investigate the association between algicidal
              bacteria and HABs in U.S. waters. This project is anticipated to result in the
              isolation and identification of a bacterial strain(s) which inhibits
              specifically the growth of the Florida red tide dinoflagellate, G. breve.
              Sequencing of the ssu rRNA gene and the subsequent development of rRNA probes
              will provide a means by which to track populations of these bacteria in
              controlled (e.g., mesocosms) as well as natural systems, and thus to better
              assess their involvement in promoting bloom decline. Finally, the knowledge
              gained from this study is an essential first step in critically evaluating the
              potential use of algicidal bacteria as a means of controlling or regulating
              HABs, a process currently underway in other countries severely impacted by
              algal blooms (e.g., Japan)                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
