Title       : Replacement of Induced Mutant Resource Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1997   
File        : a9602641

Award Number: 9602641
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $850000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Paigen ken@jax.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson Laboratory
	      600 Main Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0602000   Facilities - Replacement                
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Jackson Laboratory (TJL), located in Bar Harbor, Maine, is the recipient
              of ARI funds for the replacement of existing research space for the Induced
              Mutant Resource (IMR).  Established in 1992, the IMR is a national center for
              the cryopreservation and distribution of transgenic, targeted mutant, and
              chemically induced mutant mice.  Current services of the IMR that occur in
              separate facilities include:  importation of mice of unknown health status,
              cryopreservation of embryos, and the maintenence and inbreeding of mice which
              require unusual health safeguards or breeding paradigms.  However with rapid
              growth, the integration of these processes are imperative to the success of the
              IMR which is increasingly important to the conduct of biological research in
              all areas, and cannot be achieved under existing conditions.  The configuration
              of the facilities presents serious limitations to quality control functions
              that now require separate, duplicative embryo transfer facilities and animal
              colonies.  The lack of adequate space hinders the IRM from accepting strains
              for preservation as cryopreserved embryos or gametes, and from developing and
              implementing new methods for rederiving animals.  This project is part of a
              larger effort of TJL to construct a permanent facility for the IMR. 
              Specifically, NSF funds will be used to replace research space for the SPF and
              Cryopreservation facilities. Consolidating these functions will allow the TJL
              to accept strains for cryopreservation only, increasing the number of strains
              the IMR can preserve, while keeping costs of the repository manageable. As an
              important component of the Laboratory's strategic plans for research and
              educational growth, the replacement structure will facilitate recruitment
              efforts in building programs in developmental biology, molecular genetics and
              neurogenetics and behavior.  Research will be enhanced as well as advanced
              training programs where research personnel have access to the IMR's cornucopia
              of induced mutant models.  This project will ensure the viability of this
              scientific reserve.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
