Title       : U.S.-India Collaborative Research: Low-Temperature Studies of Hall Effect and
               Specific Heat in Amorphous Alloys, Award in Indian Rupees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a9602975

Award Number: 9602975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27097              (Estimated)
Investigator: A K. Majumdar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst Tech Kanpur
	      
	      Kanpur, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9602975  Majumdar  Description: This is a U.S.-India research collaboration in 
              condensed matter physics/materials science under the direction of  Donald
              Naugle, Texas A&M Research Foundation and A.K.  Majumdar, Indian Institute of
              Technology, Kanpur.  The proposed  research entitled Low Temperature Studies of
              Hall Effect and  Specific Heat in Amorphous Alloys will determine the
              correlations  between the electrical and magnetic properties of metallic
              glasses.   While considerable progress has been made in cataloging and 
              explaining electrical transport in paramagnetic glassy metals, the  relative
              importance of nonmagnetic processes and those associated  with magnetism and
              magnetic scattering processes in amorphous  magnetic alloys has not been
              completely established.  The U.S.  group has been among the most active
              studying electron transport  and surface chemistry of nonmagnetic amorphous
              alloys, and the  Indian group has been a major factor in the study of electron 
              transport in magnetic glassy metals.  The expertise and  experimental
              capabilities of the two groups are highly  complementary and will combine well
              to accomplish the research  objectives.     Scope:  In the United States the
              study of amorphous metals had, at  one time, been far more intensive than in
              India.  However,  research priorities in the United States have shifted to
              other areas.   Presently, no research programs are funded solely for the study
              of  amorphous metals.  The main effort on this topic in India and  perhaps
              worldwide will be performed by Majumdar and his group  at Kanpur.  U.S.
              collaboration will insure access to major  experimental research on amorphous
              metals, access to the resulting  technology at low cost, and the furthering of
              basic understanding  on transport in amorphous alloys.        ***
