Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Development of Materials with Ultra-Fine Grain
               Sizes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9602919

Award Number: 9602919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29275              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence G. Langdon langdon@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1771,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9602919  Langdon    This award supports a three-year collaborative research 
              project between Professor Terence G. Langdon of the  University of Southern
              California in Los Angeles and  Professor Minoru Nemoto of Kyushu University in
              Japan.  This  research investigates processing parameters and  microstructural
              characteristics that are associated with  ultrafine grained materials,
              including the influence of  microstructure and concurrent microstructural
              evolution on  the mechanical properties of materials at elevated  temperatures.
               The research employs a new processing method  "equal channel angular pressing
              (ECA)" to create  nanocrystalline metal and magnesium alloys.  Past 
              experiments have established that metallic alloys with  ultrafine grain sizes
              in the nanometer range have the  potential for high ductilities and
              superplastic-like flow at  relatively low temperatures.  ECA provides a
              capability for  producing intense plastic straining that can refine the  metal
              alloy grain size into the nanometer range.  Aluminum  and aluminum-based alloys
              and copper and magnesium alloys  are selected for the study because this
              selection allows an  evaluation of the role of stacking fault energy and its 
              effects on dislocation networks and grain boundary  structure.    This
              collaboration will facilitate the extensive expertise  in mechanical testing of
              the Americans with the considerable  experience in microstructural analysis of
              the Japanese.  The  research could lead to a new processing technique for 
              deformation processing of nanocrystalline materials and  could impact future
              metal alloy processing in the metal  forming industries.  Through the exchange
              of ideas and  technology, this project will broaden our base of basic 
              knowledge and promote international understanding and  cooperation.  ***
