Title       : Renovation and Repair of Plant Growth Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  1998   
File        : a9602594

Award Number: 9602594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Olmstead olmstead@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Research in Plant Sciences at the University of Washington represents a
              long-standing interdisciplinary program encompassing fundamental and strategic
              research goals and emphasizing a diverse array of research organisms and
              experimental approaches.  Research performed involves investigations reflecting
              the diversity of natural habitats in the Pacific Northwest, ranging from marine
              algae to old-growth forests, and includes basic research into the fundamental
              nature of plant growth and diversity and applied research addressing questions
              important to the economic well-being of society at large. Traditional centers
              of plant science research include the Department of Botany and the College of
              Forest Resources, but the expanding interest in plant science now includes
              research in Zoology, Biochemistry, Genetics and the Center for Urban
              Horticulture. The link that connects individual research programs in all of
              these units is the plant growth facility centered around the botany greenhouses
              that include a central greenhouse, a plant laboratory, and  five plant growth
              chambers.   Existing plant facilities, constructed  in 1939 and 1949, represent
              an aging infrastructure badly in need of repair.  The 1949 vintage electrical
              supply system is inadequate to handle the needs for artificial light and other
              technical advances that are standard in modern greenhouses.  Growth chambers
              are approximately 20 years old and are unreliable and need replacing.  Funding
              from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will be used to partially
              support the University's effort in modernizing plant facilities needed to aid
              researchers in the pursuit of conducting leading edge research.  Renovations
              will consist of:  upgrading utility systems, exterior glazing, and benching;
              replacing outdated growth chambers with modern ones capable of supporting
              research activities requiring controlled growth environments; and installing
              new equipment and controls needed to maintain  environmental conditions
              throughout the year.  Improvement to the infrastructure of the greenhouses and
              the addition of new growth chambers will accommodate all aspects of research
              and research training for the future.                                          
                  แผ                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
