Title       : U.S.-Nordic Cooperative Research on the Dynamics of Disoriented Chiral
               Condensates (Theoretical Physics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1996 
File        : a9602108

Award Number: 9602108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Ellis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph I. Kapusta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5914,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professors Paul Ellis and Joseph Kapusta  , plus a
              postdoctoral associate and two graduate students  from the University of
              Minnesota, to collaborate in  theoretical physics research with a group of
              scientists from  the Universities of Bergen and Oslo in Norway and the 
              University of Copenhagen in Denmark, under the coordination  of Eivind Osnes of
              the University of Oslo.  The Nordic  scientists are part of a large Northern
              European  Collaborative `Project on Relativistic Heavy Ion  Collisions.`  The
              general objective of that regional project  is a better understanding of
              high-energy heavy-ion  collisions, with particular emphasis on the properties
              of  excited nuclear matter. It is providing theoretical support  for
              experimental work by others dealing with energetic  collisions of complex
              atomic nuclei.  The specific  involvement of the US researchers is studying the
              dynamical  mechanisms of hadronization of the quark gluon plasma.  Ultimately
              this will lead to a detailed description of  hadronization, allowing
              conclusions to be drawn regarding  the observable signals of hadronization. 
              Broadly speaking, this research involves the theoretical  study of nuclear
              collision at the highest energies available  to experiment, which are expected
              within a few years to  produce a Quark-Gluon Plasma.  There is little basis yet
              for  predicting reaction dynamics in the presence of a phase  transition, and
              this research is attempting to provide  theoretical insight into the evolution
              of the Quark-Gluon  Plasma.  It will also seek to define possible signals of 
              hadronization and chiral symmetry breaking and restoration,  and evaluate the
              sensitivity of the signals to underlying  assumptions about the equation of
              state and correlation  functions.  Results of the proposed studies will
              increase  knowledge of the structure of extended, stronglyinteracting  matter
              at very small scale, which is relevant to  understanding of the early universe,
              among other phenomena.  The results will also be very useful in planning and 
              evaluating future heavy ion experiments in large  accelerators.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
