Title       : Renovation of Biology Research Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1996    
File        : a9602604

Award Number: 9602604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224760             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Hoerter hoerterj@ferris.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim K. Colvert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Olukemi Adewusi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prabhakara Shetty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ferris State University
	      
	      Big Rapids, MI  49307    616/796-0461

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Funding from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will enable Ferris
              State University to renovate research space to support the Department of
              Biology's need to provide modernized laboratories for faculty research and
              research training in biotechnology. This project is part of a larger effort to
              renovate the 38 year old Science Building.  Inadequate facilities have been an
              impediment to current investigations  focusing on four major areas of study:
              (1) near-ultraviolet light radiation damage, (2) cytokine regulation, (3) free
              sterols in the interorgan lipid transport system in the snail, and (4)
              mitochronrial ATP synthase and cholorplast ATP synthase.  Due to inefficient
              space, few students can enroll in the biotechnology program, thus limiting
              opportunities for them to learn techniques in recombinant DNA, protein
              purification procedures, cell and tissue culture and immunology. The lack of
              adequate research space has discouraged faculty to establish long-term programs
              that involve undergraduates.  Funds will be used to reconfigure laboratories,
              update electrical and plumbing systems, and provide a centralized area for
              equipment. Fixed equipment consisting of fume hoods, casework, benches and
              storage cabinets will be installed to improve research utility.  More efficient
              space for faculty members and students, as they conduct various experiments,
              will be accessible once renovations are completed. In addition to expanding
              research opportunities for eight faculty members and forty students, the
              project will  strengthen the department's ability to compete for extramural
              support, and  eliminate the need for faculty to seek summer research
              appointments off campus.  Improved laboratory space will enhance the quality of
              the biotechnology research training program, and provide a foundation for a
              research honors program.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
