Title       : Computer Information Systems Research Facilities Infrastructure Modernization
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9602317

Award Number: 9602317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277645             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marion Harmon harmon@cis.famu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sterlin Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Franklin D. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Founded in 1887, Florida A&M University (FAMU), a Historically Black
              University, is one of the three oldest institutions of higher education in the
              State of Florida.  FAMU has been successful in producing minority students
              interested in pursuing advance degrees in scientific and engineering
              disciplines, including computer science.  Faculty and students of the
              Department of Computer and Information Science are currently engaged in basic
              research involving software engineering, real-time systems, parallel computing,
              artificial intelligence, object-oriented databases, computer architecture, data
              encryption and stimulation.  Research and training activities are performed in 
              the Benjamin Banneker Building Unit A, a facility that was constructed in 1966.
               Present conditions, such as the lack of required communication and utility
              infrastructure impedes progress in conducting state of the art research in
              computer science.  Inadequate ventilation, and air conditioning often results
              in equipment failure and poor network connectivity does not facilitate access
              to computer equipment. To rectify these problems, the National Science
              Foundation and FAMU will establish a partnership to renovate research and
              research training laboratories in the Banneker Building. Renovations will  not
              only consist of remodeling lab space, upgrading the electrical and
              telecommunications infrastructure, and improving the HVAC and lighting systems,
              but will provide the necessary modifications to ensure the facility is
              compliant with ADA regulations.  Upon completion,  the project will enhance the
              ability of faculty to compete for extramural funding, continue to attract
              outstanding student scholars and faculty, and facilitate in the increase of the
              nation's minority doctorates in the sciences, engineering, and mathematics.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
