Title       : FSML: Institutional Planning to Upgrade Laboratory Facilities at a Tropical
               Rainforest Research Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9602577

Award Number: 9602577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia C. Wright Patricia.Wright@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                      Ranomafana Biological Station is located in Ranomafana  National
              Park(RNP) in southeast Madagascar. The station is  operated by the Institute
              for the Conservation of Tropical  Environrnents (ICTE)affiliated with the State
              University of  New York and Stony Brook. The station property has been  leased
              to ICTE and the University of Antananarivo for 99  years by the Association
              Nationale pour la Gestiondes Aires  Protegees (ANGAP), the park service of
              Madagascar. Over one  hundred faculty-level researchers and nearly twice that 
              nurnber of students, most from US universities, have  conducted research at
              RNPsince the station was built in  1989.    Madagascar is a megadiversity
              country, one of the five  countries in the world that contain the most species
              of  plants and animals. Ranomafana National Park is one of the  highest
              biodiversity sites in Madaga'scar. The Ranomafana  Biological Station (RBS) is
              the only major biological  research station in the rain forest of  sites
              Madagascar.  Much of the flora and fauna of Madagascar is endemic and  many
              taxa are living representatives of lineages usually  existing elsewhere on
              earth only in the fossil record.  Therefore the rain forest at RNP serves as an
              excellent  comparison to some of the better-studied rain forest sites  in the
              neotropics, Africa and Asia.    The Ranomafana National Park protects 41,500 ha
              of rain  forest, half of it pristine. The biodiversity of the park  was
              virtually unknown when researchers started focussing on  the area 10 years ago.
               Much of the research effort during  the first 10 years at the RBS has been
              devoted to the  essential work of systematists. However, considerable  research
              has also been conducted on behavioral ecology of  mamrnals and birds and
              important community dynamics such as  seed-dispersal, pollination, predation
              and phenology.    This large body of information has been collected at a 
              biological station that has neither electricity nor running  water. Most of
              these data come from observation-based fi eld  research because processing and
              analysis of sarnples and  data are severely restricted by the primitive
              laboratory  facilities.  This project will allow the RBS leardership to  carry
              out the comprehensive planning necessary to upgrade  the laboratory and living 
              facilities at the RBS. The  results of this planning grant will be a report
              that details  how best to expand the research  facilities to accomrnodate 
              long-term researchers using technically-oriented  methods  that take advantage
              of existing and  developing research  technology.  Aquatic ecologists,
              systematists, behavioral  ecologists, community ecologists, and  conservation 
              biologists will participate in planning the biological  station upgrade so that
              they can improve the quality and  quantity of data they collect.
