Title       : Renovation of Martin Chemistry Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9602340

Award Number: 9602340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merlyn D. Schuh meschuh@davidson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Davidson College
	      102 North Main St.
	      Davidson, NC  28035    704/894-2000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Founded in 1837, Davidson College is a private, highly selective undergraduate
              liberal arts college in North Carolina.  The College has a history of
              excellence in preparing students for careers in science, and is included in the
              -Oberlin Group+ as one of the 50 liberal arts colleges that contributes
              significantly to the training of U.S. scientists.  An average of 56 percent of
              the graduates in the sciences and mathematics enroll in graduate or
              professional schools. The Chemistry program continues to offer an excellent
              training environment for students interested in pursuing chemical research. 
              However, the major weakness in the program is the lack of adequate, safe and
              functional research and research training space in the Martin Science Building
              that houses the Department.  Although structurally sound, laboratories in the
              1948 building are inadequate for current research needs and do not comply with
              ADA standards.  The National Science Foundation and Davidson College will form
              a partnership in renovating research laboratories located on the second floor
              of the Martin Building.  Work will include renovation, repair, or replacement
              of laboratory casework, fume hoods, and fixed equipment.  New finishes,
              lighting, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems are included for the
              following labs:  Organic chemistry research, Physical and Analytical research,
              three faculty research labs, shared instrument rooms and a prep room. 
              Primarily, this project will locate related disciplines together with shared
              support spaces, allowing greater interaction that will foster a convergence of
              goals for all fields of chemistry.  An exciting and safe research environment
              will be created, which will encourage student and faculty collaborative
              studies, increase the number of student scholars, and add to the future
              scientific infrastructure of the Nation.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
