Title       : Renovation of Research Laboratories in Carver Hall
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9602792

Award Number: 9602792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $715666             (Estimated)
Investigator: Connie R. Walton waltoncr@alpha0.gram.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chester L. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Muddapu Balaram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grambling State University
	      
	      Grambling, LA  71245    318/274-3811

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Founded in 1901, Grambling State University (GSU), a historically black
              university, is the recipient of an award for the renovation of Carver Hall. 
              Constructed in 1958, Carver Hall is home to the Departments of Biology,
              Chemistry, Physics, Mathematics and Computer Science.  Realizing the importance
              of providing students with opportunities to gain research experiences, GSU
              continues to develop research programs that have been key to their success in
              preparing students for graduate studies.  However, current research
              laboratories in Carver Hall are inadequate to support modern research and
              research training activities.  Deficiencies include: the improper functioning
              of fume hoods, insufficient electrical outlets, poor ventilation, antiquated
              plumbing, and inadequate bench space that places severe constraints on research
              personnel and hinders productivity.  Funds from the ARI Program will be used to
              renovate thirteen laboratories and relocate two labs that are housed in a
              portable building.  The renovations involve removing asbestos, upgrading
              existing and installing new fume hoods, correcting structural problems,
              upgrading heating and cooling systems, and installing communication wiring. 
              Extensive plumbing and electrical work will be performed as well as installing
              gas, compressed air and vacuum lines.  Improvements will be made to the
              drainage system of the animal facility and the animal housing area will be
              partitioned to allow for the housing of more than one species.  This project
              will allow faculty to continue to conduct innovative research, assist in the
              recruitment of outstanding faculty and students, and aid in increasing the
              number of underrepresented scientists in the nation.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
