Title       : Renovation of the University of Oregon Zebrafish Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1997   
File        : a9602828

Award Number: 9602828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith E. Eisen   (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Weston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles B. Kimmel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Postlethwait  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Monte Westerfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The last decade has witnessed an explosion in the understanding of vertebrate
              nervous system development, largely based on work from a few models of genetic
              organisms.  Developmental and genetic research on the nervous system on the
              newest of these models, the embryonic zebrafish, began at the University of
              Oregon.  International interest in this organism has grown tremendously,
              primarily based on the success of the university's Institute of Neuroscience 
              research program demonstrating that zebrafish studies provide new insights in
              the cellular, molecular and genetic mechanisms underlying vertebrate nervous
              system development.  Current facilities have posed a threat to the success of
              the Institute's research program in isolating zebrafish mutations affecting
              developmental processes. The shortage of functional and efficiently organized
              space impairs the Department's ability to conduct research and accommodate
              numerous graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and visiting scientists
              seeking advanced training.  Funding provided by the ARI Program will be used to
              upgrade electrical, plumbing and mechanical systems, upgrade the facility's
              current flow-through water system to a recirculating water system and  install
              an anechoic chamber. Consolidation and modification of facilities will increase
              the carrying capacity of the facility, allowing for the maintenance of all
              mutant lines.  This project will have an impact on the Department's ability to
              develop a more diverse body of research personnel as well as maintain its
              leadership role in zebrafish research.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
