Title       : Marketing the Genetic Revolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1997      
File        : a9602107

Award Number: 9602107
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149605             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen Buchanan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates ethical issues arising from the  commercial
              exploitation of emerging genetic technologies.  In the  near to far future, it
              is likely that a wide range of genetic  tests will become available to detect
              disease or genetic  predisposition or to locate individual position along the
              normal  range of distribution of various traits.  Genetic interventions  will
              include both direct gene change and the creation of drugs to  mimic or change
              genetic expression.  Commercialization of these  technologies will transform
              the market.  Depending on public  policy and personal choices, individuals may
              be able to enhance  their or their progeny's natural endowments, or to sell
              copies of  their genes.  As this market expands, other social institutions, 
              like families and educational systems, will feel the effects.  The objectives
              of this project are (1) to identify the chief  ethical issues that will arise
              as market forces play an  increasing role in the deployment of genetic
              technologies; and  (2) to formulate the types of ethical considerations that
              ought  to be taken into account by policy makers in deciding whether or  in
              what ways to regulate the genetic marketplace.  The project  methodology is
              reflective ethical analysis (REA).  REA involves  the identification and
              careful reconstruction of public and  policy debates concerning how individual
              and social institutions  should respond to these new developments.  The ethical
              principles  and factual disputes underlying these positions are identified. 
              Relevant existing empirical studies are examined to respond to  what may have
              been taken to be ethical disputes.  The need for  additional empirical research
              is noted.  Techniques for balancing  conflicting ethical principles are applied
              to remaining ethical  conflicts.  In cases of intractable disagreements,
              unacceptable  options may still be excluded and a range of ethically acceptable
               options may be identified.  Research results will be prepared for  publication
              in at least two primary articles dealing with the two  objectives above.  They
              will meet high standards of scholarship,  but they will also be presented in a
              form which is accessible to  a broad audience of policy advisors and policy
              makers.  Additional publications targeted at specific professional and lay 
              audiences will also be prepared.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
