Title       : Renovation of Biological Sciences Building at UMBC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1996 
File        : a9602734

Award Number: 9602734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lasse A. Lindahl lindahl@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Department of Biological Sciences is one of the premier departments at the
              University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC).  The undergraduate research
              experience, particularly in the sciences, has been identified as an
              institutional priority.  In addition, plans have been developed to focus
              efforts on a small group of programs at the graduate level, including programs
              in Biology.  Programs encompass a wide breath of research and training with
              foci in Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology; Neurobiology; and
              Ecology and Environmental Biology.  Ensuring the quality of undergraduate and
              graduate research programs in the department is instrumental to the success of
              the University's goals.  However, quality is threatened by the Department's
              occupancy of an antiquated structure that was never designed as a research
              facility.  Having the distinction of being the oldest building on campus,  many
              of the mechanical systems, such as HVAC,  plumbing, and electrical,  are
              outdated and have reached their functional life span.  Laboratories in their
              existing configuration cannot accommodate changes in programs or research
              thrusts without major modifications to the facility.  Because of poor
              ventilation, and the lack of a dedicated instrumentation room, equipment is
              stored in the main corridor, obstructing passage to other rooms.   As part of
              the comprehensive renovation plan, NSF funds will be used to renovate existing
              research and research training laboratories.  Renovations will include:  a
              complete overhaul of the building's utility systems, replacement of fixed
              equipment,  and the creation of research support rooms. Modular research labs,
              the renovation's  key feature, will increase training opportunities, expand
              program flexibility, and facilitate communication and research collaborations. 
               As the most culturally diverse of all the Maryland colleges and universities,
              many under-represented minorities are encouraged and given opportunities to
              pursue advanced studies in the sciences, which is evident by the success of the
              Meyerhoff Scholarship Program.  This Program is designed to recruit and retain
              minority students that demonstrate an aptitude and interest in science and
              technology.  Renovation of the facility is vital to the continual training of
              scientists for the 21st century and to the realization of UMBC's goal to become
              a top public research institution.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
