Title       : Replacement of Environmental Technology Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a9602271

Award Number: 9602271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra Von Meier   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean A. Falbo  (Principal Investigator former)
              W. J. Rohwedder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joe E. Armstrong  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Sonoma State University
	      1801 East Cotati Avenue
	      Rohnert Park, CA  949283609    707/664-2156

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0602000   Facilities - Replacement                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                In 1975, a pioneering Environmental Technology Center (ETC) was built at
              Sonoma State University, one of the 22 campuses in the California State
              University System.  Originally the Center housed laboratories, instrumentation,
              resource materials for research and research training in energy management,
              renewable energy education, and sustainable development technologies
              applications. Determined as seismically unsound twenty years later, the center
              was demolished, severely curtailing research and training programs.  Funding
              from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will aid the institution in
              its endeavor to replace the facility.  Specifically, funds will be used to
              replace the existing space dedicated to environmental science research.  The
              project is unique in that it will not only provide research space, but will
              itself be the subject of on-going study.  Faculty and students will evaluate
              the ETC's own sustainable architectural design and will evaluate the best
              available energy efficiency, renewable energy, and environmental technology. 
              Designs include: -smart building+ control and management technologies,
              environmentally sensitive building materials, passive solar heating and cooling
              systems, and solar electric technology.  The new facility will be located at
              the Sonoma State University's EarthLab, a site on campus that has been
              developed into an outdoor laboratory for the study of agroecology.  The ETC and
              the EarthLab will complement each other, providing research opportunities
              consistent with the department's interdisciplinary approach.  By emphasizing
              the connections of fundamental science and practical applications for a
              sustainable future, this project will assist the department in preparing
              graduates to participate in the diffusion of environmental science and
              technology.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
