Title       : Assessing Resource Utilization and Trade Among Prehistoric Rio Grande Glaze
               Paints Using Lead Isotope Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9602123

Award Number: 9602123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41877              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Habicht-Mauche judith@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Russell Flegal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Habicht-Mauche and A. Russell
              Flegal will collect lead samples from prehistoric mines in the Galisteo Basin
              area of central New Mexico and conduct lead isotope analyses on both these and
              lead glazes on prehistoric ceramics also excavated in the same general area.
              Because lead consists of 4 isotopes and the relative frequencies of each change
              through radioactive decay over time, isotopic signatures may often be used to
              fingerprint individual lead deposits. The mixture of lead ore with other
              ingredients during ceramic manufacture makes sourcing studies using trace
              elements of little value. However such mixing does not affect isotopic ratios
              and therefore such analysis permits, in principle,  archaeological ceramic
              materials to be matched with lead source. In this first stage of an envisioned
              long term project, the team will conduct a feasibility study to determine
              whether variation in isotopic ratios is greater between lead sources than
              within each and if matching between source and glaze is possible.  In late
              prehistoric times the Pueblo Indians of the U.S. Southwest developed large
              scale chiefdom level societies which linked individuals and towns together in
              extensive interaction networks. One of the fundamental hallmarks of this
              transformation, which occurred ca. 1350 A.D. was the development of widespread
              networks of community craft and resource specialization and systems of
              long-distance trade which linked the towns and provinces in the northern Rio
              Grande region in a series of shifting sociopolitical and economic alliances.
              While it is clear that such interaction existed, archaeologists do not know
              whether or not these towns were essentially egalitarian or whether they were
              arranged in a hierarchical fashion. For example,  certain villages and
              districts apparently dominated glaze ware production, trading their products
              widely throughout the valley and beyond. Unfortunately the details of this
              production and distribution are not well understood and the proposed research
              will, hopefully provide a powerful tool to trace interactions over a broad
              area. It should be possible to determine, for example, whether a single village
              or small set of villages controlled access to raw materials and if a single
              economic network or a multiplicity of networks existed. The results of this
              project will increase our understanding of the emergence of complex societies
              in the United States and will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
