Title       : Renovation of Terrestrial and Aquatic Ecology Research Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1996 
File        : a9602813

Award Number: 9602813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364565             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Y. Shapiro bio shapiro@emuvax.emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Hannan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert K. Neely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine E. Bach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter N. Reinthal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jamin Eisenbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0602000   Facilities - Replacement                
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Biology Department at Eastern Michigan University (EMU) is undergoing a
              rapid expansion in research and research training. Much of this surge in
              research is attributed to the activity of six faculty members and their
              students in the areas of plant ecology, insect ecology and reproductive
              behavior, and the ecology and phylogeny of fishes. Investigative studies are
              performed in a 92 year-old greenhouse and designated facilities in the Hover
              Building.  The greenhouse has long outlived its functional usefulness, and
              research space for ecological studies involving fish research has not been
              renovated since the building was constructed in 1940.  Because no other
              facilities exist at EMU for maintaining either plants or fish, research has
              been severely restricted, critical experiments in existing projects are not
              feasible, and research activities undertaken in botanical and ecological
              courses have been hampered.   Funding from the ARI Program will be used to
              replace greenhouse and aquarium rooms into a single structure.  The combined
              terrestrial and aquatic facility will include three separate rooms for
              maintaining specific greenhouse conditions, a terrestrial ecology laboratory
              and an aquatic ecology laboratory. The renovated facility will improve the
              quality of research programs and significantly strengthen the Biology
              Department's overall curriculum that is designed to include a research
              component in numerous courses in botany, zoology and ecology. With the ability
              to complete research projects on campus, rather than  work in rented greenhouse
              space elsewhere, or in distant field locations, faculty will be available to
              provide more training opportunities for students. Eventually, these changes
              will increase the quality and number of applicants to the Department, both as
              undergraduates and graduates, and will enhance EMU's ability to attract and
              retain quality faculty.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
