Title       : U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research: New Directions in Stochastic Optimal
               Control; Non-Standard Optimality Criteria, Algorithms, and Software Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1996  
File        : a9602939

Award Number: 9602939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmanuel Fernandez emmanuel@sie.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9602939  Fernandez    This U.S-Mexico award will support Prof. Emmanuel
              Fernandez  of the University of Arizona in a research collaboration  with Prof.
              Rolando Cavazos Cadena of the Universidad  Autonoma Agraria in Saltillo,
              Mexico.  The investigators  intend to develop a collaborative program that
              integrates  innovative research activities and algorithmic software 
              development in stochastic control.  In particular, the  collaborators intend to
              pursue optimal decision and control  problems for controlled Markov models.   
              Discrete event stochastic dynamic systems (DESDS) constitute  a broad and
              interdisciplinary area of research at the  intersection of systems and control,
              operations research,  and knowledge-based systems.  The focus of DESDS research
               are the complex, man-made systems that form the core of our  technological
              society, for example, telecommunications and  computer networks; production and
              manufacturing systems; and  military and service industry logistics.  A common
              feature  of many of the problems in the field attempts to obtain  rules for
              operating a system, which optimize an appropriate  performance measure, and
              which explicitly take into account  the stochastic and discrete event-driven
              nature of the  problems.  The proposed collaboration will bring together 
              experienced researchers with complementary skills: the  Mexican investigator is
              an expert on the mathematical and  probabilistic theory of stochastic control
              and the U.S.  investigator will contribute his skills in the engineering  and
              management applications of stochastic control models and  techniques, and in
              software development.  ***
