Title       : Renovation of Laboratories in the Daniels and Mathews Chemistry Building
               University of Wisconsin-Madison
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1996 
File        : a9602212

Award Number: 9602212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Fleming Crim fcrim@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This ARI award, with substantial matching support from the State of Wisconsin,
              will be used to renovate research laboratories for the Chemistry Department on
              the campus of the University of Wisconsin at Madison.  Specific floors of the
              Daniels and Mathews Buildings, constructed 29 and 33 years ago respectively,
              are targeted for renovation.  Standards for the practice of modern experimental
              chemistry have changed dramatically in the 30 years since the construction of
              the department's facilities at UW-Madison.  Existing research space lacks
              adequate ventilation for synthetic chemistry, chemical storage, and large
              instrumentation spaces with appropriate infrastructure for analytical and
              physical chemistry.  Current space is inefficiently configured for a safe
              working environment.  Renovations will include: installing fume hoods and
              distillation enclosures, upgrading ventilated chemical storage areas,
              increasing safety measures, creating facilities for small instrumentation, and
              installing a chilled water cooling loop for major equipment.  This project will
              provide well designed and modern space for programs in biologically related
              fields of chemistry, synthetic chemistry, polymer chemistry, and in the
              chemistry of surfaces and interfaces.  Clustering of research groups, currently
              dispersed throughout the building, will facilitate intellectual interactions,
              enhance access to shared instrumentation, and improve the safe handling of
              hazardous materials.  UW-Madison's Chemistry Department maintains distinguished
              programs of excellence in both graduate student training and research and has
              done so consistently over a period of many decades.  This renovation project
              dramatically enhances the Department's ability to continue to achieve this
              level of excellence in future years.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
