Title       : Reclaiming & Upgrading Research Laboratories in Crawford Hall, Bowie State
               University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1996 
File        : a9602748

Award Number: 9602748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225494             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine J. Davis edavis@bowiestate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chuka Ajene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome O. Schorr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Hargett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas M. Council  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowie State University
	      14000 Jericho Park Road
	      Bowie, MD  20715    301/860-3555

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Bowie State University, a Historically Black University in Maryland, is the
              recipient of ARI funds for the renovation of research and training laboratories
              in Crawford Hall.  Constructed in 1968, the building is home to the science
              departments on campus, including Computer Science that claimed research space
              designated for Biology.  With the construction of a new facility specifically
              designed for the needs of Computer Science, the current space assigned will be
              reclaimed by the Biology Department.  Renovations entailing the installation of
              laboratory benches, cabinets, an autoclave, additional electrical outlets and
              water deionizers are necessary to  make the space functional for research
              purposes.  In addition, two rooms will be renovated as support facilities, a
              darkroom and a sterilizer room.  This project directly impacts ongoing research
              programs in molecular and cellular biology.  Designated research space will be
              available for some faculty who are presently conducting research off campus. 
              Renovated facilities will assist the University in its endeavor to establish a
              sound research program in biology, biochemistry, and structural biology that
              serves as the core of the biological science program. Recognized as a NSF 
              -Model Institution for Excellence,` the project will enhance the University's
              efforts in expanding research opportunities for minority students and will
              encourage them to pursue advanced studies in science.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
