Title       : Benedict College Science Research Renovation (Relocation) Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1999  
File        : a9602664

Award Number: 9602664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $544190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juanita S. Scott   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Benedict College
	      Harden and Blanding Sts
	      Columbia, SC  29204    803/256-4220

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Benedict College, a Historically Black College in South Carolina, is the
              recipient of ARI funds to renovate biology and chemistry research and research
              training facilities. The Department of Biology and Physical Sciences has been
              instrumental in producing under-represented scientists, and in order to sustain
              this course, it is imperative that the physical infrastructure is improved.
              Alumni Hall, a structure constructed in the mid 1960's, is home to the
              department where the majority of the laboratories reside.  Dispersed space
              consisting of modified classrooms, shared between research and instructional
              activities will be consolidated, relocated, and upgraded as designated research
              laboratories. Funds will be used to reconfigure space, remove asbestos, upgrade
              utility infrastructure, and install fume hood, casework and benches in the
              building.  The renovations are required to support research programs that
              concentrate on molecular biology, genetics, biochemistry, and analytical and
              environmental chemistry.  Upon completion, this project will provide modern
              space for instrumentation and technology to support present and future research
              and training activities.  Beneficiaries include five faculty members and their
              students who will utilize five research laboratories, a research training
              facility, and research support laboratories consisting of a cold room, a tissue
              culture room, and storage space.  Consolidating scattered space in a
              centralized location will promote shared usage of equipment and facilities more
              effectively, and facilitate collaborative projects.  This project will increase
              the College's potential to attract, retain and develop a high caliber of
              faculty; recruit and retain high achieving students, and increase of number of
              minority students entering and succeeding in graduate school, and subsequently
              pursuing research as a career.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
