Title       : FSML: Hakalau Forest Biological Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9602547

Award Number: 9602547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135342             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard A. Freed lfreed@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Hawaiian islands have an extraordinary endemic biota. Modern  ecological and
              evolutionary studies of this biota are limited by  logistic problems of  remote
              locations and the absence of field stations near those  locations. Critical
              conservation studies of endangered species are  similarly limited. With initial
              funding from the World Environment and  Resources Program of the John D. and
              Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation,  the University of Hawaii is constructing a
              biological field station at  Hakalau Forest National Wildlife Refuge on the
              Island of Hawaii. The  33,000 acre refuge, located at 6000 ft elevation on the
              eastern slope  of Mauna Kea, contains 6 species of Hawaiian Honeycreepers in
              old  growth ohia-koa forest, 5 additional species of native birds, the hoary 
              bat, and 6 species of endangered or candidate plants. This will be the  first
              field station in the state of Hawaii that is located in a remote  area near the
              significant biota and that is designed for education as  well as research. The
              objective of this proposal is to complete  construction of two major buildings
              and outfit the station with an  initial phase of appropriate furnishings and
              equipment.    Funds would be used to finish a dormitory building that can sleep
              20  people and a main building that has a kitchen, large dining\all purpose 
              room, 2 offices, a laboratory, and a workroom. The current state of the 
              buildings is advanced framing. The remote location requires rural  technology
              for production and storage of electricity, and for  collection and use of
              water. The location also requires wheel-drive  vehicles. Furnishings for the
              buildings include office furniture,  chests of drawers, and tables and chairs
              for meeting and dining. The  general design of the finished facility provides
              user friendly  conditions for long-term residents: vehicles to get to remote
              study  sites; simple but comfortable sleeping and eating conditions; gathering 
              places; power, space, and equipment for working indoors during the  evening and
              du ring inclement weather; a cellular telephone; and a  washing machine.    The
              first phase of new scientific equipment includes computer  workstations. These
              will enable residents to be productive during  evenings and foul weather. The
              computers will also be the sites of  curation of long-term data sets that
              documemt the ecological  heterogeneity on established study areas on the
              refuge. They will  eventually be integrated with a series of weather stations
              in  established study areas and a GPS\GIS system as part of a future second 
              phase of equipping.
