Title       : Renovation of Laboratory Space in the Chemistry Department for Biomolecular
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1996   
File        : a9602708

Award Number: 9602708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Okamura william.okamura@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Werner G. Kuhr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Morton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore R. Holman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Y. Switzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Scientific and technological advances at the molecular level are providing
              dramatic new approaches to address critical problems at the interface between
              biology and chemistry.  These advances may well redefine current boundaries
              between existing fields, and cross fertilization of ideas across traditional
              disciplines will allow the development of new successful collaborations in
              biotechnology and advanced molecular materials.  Molecular biological
              approaches are used in several research laboratories in the chemistry
              department at the University of California - Riverside (UCR).  However, faculty
              are dispersed in many locations within Pierce Hall, in which space for
              chemistry was constructed in 1965.  The building lacks certain core facilities
              necessary for the conduction of faculty research in the following areas:
              inorganic chemistry, chemistry of biomaterials, receptor-ligand binding
              chemistry, synthetic organic chemistry, and nucleic acid chemistry.  A
              partnership between the NSF and UCR will be established to develop the required
              research infrastructure to provide a physical focus for extension and
              development of collaborative efforts across tradition boundaries in chemistry. 
              Improving the research infrastructure in Pierce Hall will involve the
              renovation of 21 research laboratory spaces on the third floor.  Renovations
              include: asbestos abatement, removal of non-code compliant fume hood, sinks,
              and benchwork, upgrade of utility systems to include additional power, steam
              and industrial hot water, reconditioning of HVAC, gas, vacuum and plumbing
              lines, and the installation of casework, fume hoods, and cabinets.  Joint-use
              core facilities including cold rooms, a centrifuge room, multipurpose
              instrumentation rooms, a Level 3 recombinant DNA facility and a hot lab will be
              created.  This project, complementing a previous ARI Chilled Water Project in
              Pierce Hall, will directly enhance the research prospects for five senior
              personnel, eight postdocs, twenty graduate students and eleven undergraduate
              students.  Having modern facilities will improve research training
              opportunities for students with research interests at the Chemistry-Biology
              interface.  Since the university has the largest percentage of minority
              students of any  UC campus, and women comprise over 52% of the UCR student
              body, this project will have an impact on the recruitment of these groups of
              individuals into the physical sciences where both are seriously
              underrepresented.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
