Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Computational Fluid Dynamics for the Design
               and Optimization of Cardiac Assist Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1997      
File        : a9602180

Award Number: 9602180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger D. Kamm rdkamm@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5942,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9602180  Kamm    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Roger D. Kamm,
              Department  of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
              to pursue with Dr. Byoung-Goo Min, Department of Biomedical  Engineering, Seoul
              National University, for 24 months, a program  of cooperative research for the
              development of computational  fluid dynamic methods that can be used to assist
              in the design  and optimization of cardiac assist devices.  The U.S. 
              investigator brings his experience with use of computational  methods for the
              analysis of flow in the cardiovascular system,  using methods appropriate both
              for three-dimensional, unsteady  flows with moving boundaries of the type that
              occur in the  chambers of the artificial heart or the ventricle.  The Korean 
              collaborator and his research team bring to the research their  considerable
              experience in the development of a total artificial  heart, extending from
              fabrication of the device to implantation  and long-term testing in large
              animals.  An important component  of this research is the experimental
              verification and extension  of the numerical simulations using both laser
              Doppler anemometry  and particle image velocimetry.  The combined expertise of
              this  group of collaborators will help in the development of techniques  that
              can be used in the design of the next generation of cardiac  assist devices
              which can be optimized with regard to the flow  field to reduce the tendencies
              for thrombus formation and  hemolysis, while minimizing the power requirements
              of the device.    Previous research on implantable heart assist devices has 
              produced many successes, but has not yet lead to a reliable total  artificial
              heart.  This project is based on the premise that the  next generation of heart
              assist technology will require new tools  that draw upon newly developed
              capabilities in computational  methods and experimentation.  The collaborators
              in this project  expect to develop these computational tools.  The project
              brings  together Korean experts i n biomedical engineering and medicine  and
              U.S. experts in computational fluid dynamics.  Together they  will attempt to
              develop a smaller, more reliable, and more  efficient left ventricular assist
              device.  This project is  relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
              Cooperative Science  Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
              between  U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of 
              scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through 
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  This project  provides an
              international research experience for a U.S. graduate  student.  Korean
              participation is supported by the Korea Science  and Engineering Foundation
              (KOSEF).  ***
