Title       : Renovation of Research Space in the Physical Science Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1996 
File        : a9602663

Award Number: 9602663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lionel M. Raff lionelraff@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Warren T. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mario Rivera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward T. Knobbe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ziad El Rassi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Physical Science (PS) complex houses the Departments of Chemistry and
              Physics on the campus of Oklahoma State University in Stillwater.  Built in two
              parts, 1958 (PS I) and 1969 (PS II) respectively, the structure has
              deteriorated badly from heavy service.  Some space is not suitable for research
              involving experimental chemistry because it does not meet current building and
              safety codes, and in general violates standards for chemical research
              laboratories.  Research laboratories are substandard in fume hood ventilation
              capability, HVAC service, electrical systems, explosion proof and hazardous
              chemical storage facilities, ventilated plumbing systems, and outdated
              laboratory casings.  The Chemistry Department is confronting a critical period
              regarding the maintenance of its present level of research productivity. 
              Senior faculty are retiring, and it will be difficult to replace them with
              young faculty  if modern and safe laboratory facilities are not available. 
              Renovated laboratories are necessary in order to attract and retain faculty
              needed to sustain the Department's current program status.  Funding from the
              ARI Program will assist OSU in its endeavor to renovate a portion of space in
              PS I and PS II to comply with standards required for personnel safety and
              scientific research.  In addition, renovations will entail removal of asbestos
              containing material, installation of new plumbing and electrical services,  new
              acoustical ceilings to reduce noise levels, and new solvent safety cabinets.
              Four research groups investigating the following will be affected:  inorganic
              chemistry and material science, organic and polymer chemistry, analytical
              chemistry, and bioanalytical chemistry.  Joint funding by the NSF and OSU will
              ensure that a safe research facility with markedly enhanced capabilities to
              conduct research and research training will be provided.  OSU and the
              Department of Chemistry seek to establish a basis for continued growth in
              quality and multidisciplinary research.  This ARI project will improve the
              institution's ability to provide the type of environment that will foster this
              growth.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
