Title       : Acquisition of a Dual Purkinje Image Eye Tracker for Use in Cognitive Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9602477

Award Number: 9602477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura A. Carlson LCarlson@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley S. Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gabriel A. Radvansky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 0000,1327,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Laura Carlson-Radvansky and her
              collaborators will purchase a Fourward Optical Technologies dual Purkinje image
              eye tracker and supporting devices. The eye tracker operates by comparing two
              of the four reflections that are produced when light strikes the eye and
              through noting the position of them the tracker records changes in eye
              position. This instrument has high temporal precision and accurate spatial
              resolution. Response time of the eye tracker is 1 millisecond and spatial
              resolution is accurate to 1 minute of arc. Visual fields of greater than 20
              degrees may be tracked. The investigators currently use a limbus reflectance
              eyelid eye tracker and the more accurate Purkinje tracker supplied under this
              grant will increase the range of experiments which can be performed.  Cognitive
              psychologists are concerned with what happens inside the head when humans
              think, remember, talk and look around at the world. Because these events are
              not directly observable, equipment and methods are needed that allow inferences
              to be made about the nature of the processes, representations and structures
              that govern mental life.  The research projects that will use the eye tracker
              are unified in their assumption that cognitive processes are dynamic and best
              understood by sampling behavior continuously across space and time, although
              the specific research questions are quite diverse, spanning the domains of
              visual perception, spatial cognition, memory and attention. The research will
              not only enable the investigation of important issues within each area, but may
              also enable the identification of commonalties across areas. The specific
              research questions address issues including the achievement of perceptual
              stability in visual perception, the coordination of multiple reference frames
              in spatial cognition and the spatial versus temporal nature of map learning. 
              The cognitive science program at the University of Notre Dame is relatively new
              and growing rapidly. It is attracting increasing numbers of undergraduate and
              graduate students and the acquisition of the dual Purkinje image eye tracker
              will further both undergraduate teaching and graduate teaching and research.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
