Title       : Microbiology: Renovation of Central Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1996   
File        : a9602814

Award Number: 9602814
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $603230             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosalie K. Crouch Rosalie Crouch@smfpgw.musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The National Science Foundation and the Medical University of South Carolina
              in a joint effort will  provide resources to modernize the central laboratories
              of the Department of Microbiology and Immunology.  This project is part of a
              larger endeavor by the institution and the State to strengthen the research
              environment of the entire campus. In accordance with the overall strategic plan
              for the University, the department's central laboratories are to be revitalized
              for research in the fundamental areas of environmental biology, bacteriology,
              and molecular virology.  Laboratories, housed in the Basic Science Building, a
              26 year old structure, lack quality space consisting of insufficient fume hoods
              for safely conducting modern molecular biology experiments, and inadequate
              biological containment facilities for using recombinant DNA, tissue culture, or
              biohazardous viruses and cell lines.  The renovations of dysfunctional research
              space into modern facilities will have immediate and long-term impacts on
              research and training in terms of safety, accessibility, efficiency,
              collaboration, productivity, morale, retention and recruitment of high quality
              faculty and students.  The project will provide shared facilities for tissue
              culture, microscopy, computing and instrumentation, as well as more efficient
              and reliable environmental chambers.  The laboratories will be designed to
              promote optimum utilization of resources to enhanced cooperation and
              collaborations among research personnel, and increase the participation of
              faculty and students, including those underrepresented in science, in the
              scientific enterprise.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
