Title       : Renovation of Psychology Department Research Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  1996  
File        : a9602315

Award Number: 9602315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $982110             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick T. Greenaway fgreenaway@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Founded in 1887 as a graduate institution with a distinguished history in
              scientific research,  Clark University has rapidly evolved into a
              university-college, a combination of a small liberal arts college and
              research-oriented university.  This concept promotes the linkage between
              teaching and research, where undergraduates are closely involved in the
              scholarly activities of faculty and graduate students.  This synergetic
              relationship has been important to the success of  the Ph.D. program in
              Psychology.  The program has an excellent reputation, and is recognized as one
              of the institution's lead graduate programs.  The Department resides in Jonas
              Clark Hall, one of the university's keynote buildings.  Constructed in 1889,
              the facility in its existing condition cannot support training and faculty
              research activities.  As a part of Clark's efforts to strengthen its science
              graduate programs, the university has made a commitment to renovate and
              modernize Clark Hall.   Funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program
              will be used to partially support the renovation of research and research
              training space.  The project includes full asbestos abatement, replacement of
              the HVAC system, reconfiguration of research laboratories, and the upgrade of
              electrical and communications services.  Upon completion, the renovations will
              allow full utilization of existing space, accommodate an increased number of
              researchers associated with graduate training, and provide modern access to new
              communication technologies.  Improvements to the HVAC system will raise the
              building to modern research standards, providing ambient conditions throughout
              the year.  Modernizing the facility will strengthen a long-standing and renown
              research program that has had success in integrating undergraduate, graduate
              and faculty research activities.  This NSF project will enable the institution
              and department to purse its vigorous and expanding roles in research and
              research training for both undergraduate and graduate students.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
