Title       : The Cerebral Cortex as a Target of Estrogen and the Neurotrophins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9602029

Award Number: 9602029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. D. Toran-Allerand cdt2@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9602029  Toran-Allerand      The gonadal steroid, estrogen, has multiple effects
              on the brain.   One of its well characterized actions is to regulate the
              activity  of the reproductive axis.  However, an additional action of perhaps 
              even greater consequence, is to influence the growth and  differentiation of
              neurons in the brain.  Recently published  studies by Dr. Toran-Allerand
              revealed that estrogens may be  intimately involved in modulating growth factor
              production in the  brain forming the basis for estrogen's growth modulating
              effects  but ultimately, estrogen also alters cognitive function.  Dr. 
              Toran-Allerand is continuing to investigate the interplay between  estrogen and
              growth factors by studying the signal transduction  pathways elicited by
              receptor stimulation.  In exciting preliminary  results, evidence for receptor
              cross-talk has been found.  These  studies are continuing and have been
              enhanced by investigations to  analyze key elements of the estrogen and growth
              factor systems,  including receptor coupling and protein kinases.  That
              estrogen  interacts in neurons with growth factors and their receptors 
              introduces an important new regulatory system with implications for  the
              development of the neuronal targets of estrogen.  Although sex  differences in
              circulating estrogen and androgen levels during  early life represent an
              important epigenetic influence and appear  to play a crucial role, it remains
              to be determined precisely how  exposure to circulating masculine and feminine
              gonadal steroid  hormone levels are translated into permanent differentiation
              of the  neural circuitry supporting sexually dimorphic behavioral patterns.  
              By stimulating the synthesis of proteins required for neuronal 
              differentiation, survival and maintenance of function, estrogen and  growth
              factors, acting perhaps in concert, as well as reciprocally,  may have
              important and intertwined developmental roles.  Thus,  mediation of estrogen
              action by interactions with locally  synthesized growth factors an d their
              receptors may represent a  universal mechanism by which the effects of
              hormones, such as  estrogen, may exert local control and exhibit both tissue
              and  developmental specificity's.  These studies essentially provide the 
              biological basis for gender differences in behavior among all  animal species,
              including man.
