Title       : Project TIE: Training for Industry Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1997        
File        : a9602349

Award Number: 9602349
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Jane Willis greatzin@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albuquerque Technical Voca
	      525 Buena Vista SE
	      Albuquerque, NM  871064023    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As the semiconductor manufacturing and wafer fabrication industries expand
              throughout  the western US, the demand for highly-skilled technicians grows.
              This expansion creates the  difficult challenge of upgrading course content and
              pedagogy, and providing adequate faculty  development opportunities among
              community colleges, the primary workforce providers, and  high school tech prep
              programs. The Albuquerque Technical Vocational Institute's (TVI) Project  TIE,
              Training for Industry Education, will address this problem by holding twelve,
              five-day  seminars in which up to 120 community college and high school faculty
              perform semiconductor  manufacturing processes in a clean room environment.    
                      TVI's Regional Semiconductor Manufacturing Training Laboratory (RSMT
              Lab) is a  cleanroom that has been built to meet industry demands for
              well-trained semiconductor  manufacturing technicians. Seminars, planned by an
              administrative team of industry (Intel) and  educational (TVI) representatives,
              will be designed to provide hands-on work in TVI's RMST  Lab, dialogue about
              pedagogy, and discussions with semiconductor manufacturing engineers, 
              scientists, and technicians. Participants will receive a resource packet
              containing a technical  manual, bibliography, and information on developing SMT
              degree programs and laboratories.  The target audience is community college and
              Tech Prep high school faculty.             TVI's primary partner in this
              project is Intel Corporation, which has built Fab 11, its  largest plant, in
              Albuquerque. Sandia National Laboratories is a secondary partner. Project TIE 
              will provide faculty a rare opportunity to acquire hands-on experience in
              cleanroom environment.  Improved and enhanced instruction and communication
              among community colleges throughout  the US are anticiDated results as faculty
              take newly-acquired skills and resources to their schools.
