Title       : The Telecommunications and Networking Engineering Technology Education Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1997      
File        : a9602433

Award Number: 9602433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas H. Howell                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Mullett gmullett@stcc.mass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna M. Boivin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Y. Abbott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ladimer S. Nagurney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chandra Roychoudhuri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Springfield Tech Cmty Col
	      Armory Square
	      Springfield, MA  01105    413/781-7822

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Telecommunications and Networking Engineering Technology Education Project  
               Springfield Technical Community College (STCC) is undertaking an Advanced
              Technological Education (ATE) in Telecommunications and Networking Engineering
              Technology Education. The project is a collaborative effort with STCC joined by
              partners: the University of Connecticut, the University of Hartford (CT), and
              the City of Springfield (MA) Public Schools. Its purpose is to develop an
              integrated curriculum, a teacher training model, and a model laboratory which
              meets the training needs of the telecommunications and networking industries in
              the 21st century. Development of the project also includes the active
              involvement of both private industry and other public sector agencies. STCC
              currently offers highly successful programs in Electronic Systems Engineering
              Technology, Computer Systems Engineering Technology, Laser Electro-Optics
              Technology (which also includes photonics and fiber optics) and a variety of
              other cutting-edge high technology programs. The project is developing a
              national innovative model featuring traditional test equipment, evolving
              equipment, a "virtual instrumentation" lab and simulation software to present
              to students both real and simulated field experiences. Further, STCC is
              developing articulation agreements with secondary schools and baccalaureate
              institutions, providing instructors and facilities for teacher training
              workshops, evaluating and assessing the project, and disseminating project
              results. The Project includes a concerted effort to involve women and
              minorities as students in this new technology offering.
