Title       : Replacement and Renovation of Collections Space at the Paleontological Research
               Institution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1996   
File        : a9602797

Award Number: 9602797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142891             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren D. Allmon wda1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendy L. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Paleontological Res Inst
	      1259 Trumansburg Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Paleontological Research Institution (PRI) is the world's only private
              research organization dedicated solely to the science of paleontology.  It
              houses major collections of invertebrate fossils and Recent mollusks and one of
              the nation's largest collections of type and figured fossil specimens.  Due to
              the lack of permanent curation and storage facilities, the collections have
              been  allowed to deteriorate, and have been inaccessible to the research and
              educational communities for many years.  PRI has embarked upon an effort to
              replace and expand current facilities in order to consolidate collections of
              the Institution, Cornell University, and the University of Rochester. 
              Specifically, funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will
              enable PRI to replace existing space that is in poor condition presently used
              to house the collections.  For the first time in almost a century, this project
              will provide the needed space to adequately house and care for  collections,
              and  make them available for research use. As a result, the combined collection
              would be one of the largest and finest in the nation, with particular strengths
              in the Cenozoic of the Western Hemisphere and Paleozoic of the Northeastern US.
               These are both areas of considerable current research interest in the areas of
              environmental and faunal change.  As the largest fossil collection within a 250
              mile radius, the combined collection would have the potential to serve as a
              regional and national center for paleobiological research and education.  Most
              importantly, this project will improve accessibility of three large and
              scientifically important collections of fossil invertebrate and Recent mollusks
              to researchers, educators, and students who have previously not had access to
              them, thus having a direct effect on future research programs, and
              paleontological research on a national scale.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
