Title       : Renovation of Cell Engineering Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1999 
File        : a9602839

Award Number: 9602839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $620000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Meaney dmeaney@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Ducheyne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan S. Margulies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tracey McIntosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Within the School of Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania, scientists
              conduct advanced research on how cells transduce physical stimuli into
              intracellular signals to alter genomic function, and learn how to control the
              process of cell proliferation and remodeling for purposes of engineering new
              tissue constructs.  Typically, the engineering, physical, and life sciences
              separately investigate cellular systems to understand how cells communicate,
              adapt to changing conditions, differentiate, and grow.  Critical breakthroughs
              in cellular engineering occur at the intersection between the life sciences,
              natural sciences, and engineering; these breakthroughs are facilitated by
              forming a  multidisciplinary laboratory environment.  Penn is in a unique
              position to focus the intellectual and infrastructure resource to successfully
              build a basic research program impacting engineering and the sciences.  With 
              assistance from the National Science Foundation, the  University will create 
              the Cellular Engineering Laboratories (CEL) designed to integrate these
              disciplines and cultivate the knowledge of cellular systems to positively
              impact national efforts in biotechnology and bioengineering.  The CEL will be
              created by renovating existing, contiguous research space in the basement of
              Hayden Hall, a structure that was built in 1896.  Most of the services are
              original, and are inadequate to support modern research.  Renovations include:
              the replacement of the electrical power distribution system, installation of a
              new HVAC system, improvement of temperature and humidity controls, and the
              provision for proper ductwork  and piping required for the installation of
              equipment used in tissue culture work.   Cellular Engineering research
              conducted and dispersed in other buildings will be relocated to the newly
              renovated area.  This consolidation will expedite interaction between faculty,
              and provide an interdisciplinary laboratory environment where students from
              different departments can collaborate.  There is strong support to promote
              activity in Bioengineering at Penn, and the institution has invested resources
              to enhance emerging programs with the Biomedical engineering enterprise.  The
              CEL project, coupled with research space within the Institution for Advanced
              Science and Technology, and the Institute of Medicine and Engineering, will
              accommodate faculty and students interested in this emerging field, thus
              creating a new blend of science and engineering.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
