Title       : Market-Based Systems for Workflow Scheduling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9602053

Award Number: 9602053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan W. Leland                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick T. Harker harker@eniac.seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lyle H. Ungar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 0000,9149,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Market-Based Systems for Workflow Scheduling  This proposal presents the first
              year of a plan of research to develop an agent and market-based approach for
              the control of complex production processes, especially those arising in white
              collar and service delivery systems. Such systems are characterized by their
              complexity and by the ability of the service providers to create alternative
              paths through the process by their actions. The goal of this research is create
              theory based on agent and market-based control schemes which will guide the
              implementation of intelligent workflow systems. With these market-based
              schemes, control is decentralized to various human and computer agents (e.g.,
              databases, schedulers, models) that bid for the opportunity to work on various
              service delivery tasks.  Specifically, we wish to develop a general theory for
              market-based control for complex production systems. Building upon the
              literature in service process design and scheduling in operations management,
              agent-based systems in computer science, mechanism design in economics, and
              optimization theory, this research will explicitly deal with the following
              issues that naturally arise in white-collar production systems, but are
              currently not dealt with in the literature: (a) the sequence-dependent nature
              of production systems that limits the use of standard auction/ bidding
              mechanisms (e.g., Vickrey and Ledyard-Groves); (b) the stochastic nature of
              many of these systems and the need for robust control schemes; (c) asynchronous
              communications between the agents in the system, and (d) the need for agents to
              learn and adapt to changing process conditions. In addition, a careful
              analytical analysis will be undertaken to ascertain the relative merits of such
              a market-based schema as compared to more traditional, centralized control
              systems such as optimization-based scheduling models.  The ultimate goal of
              this research is to create a generic technology for adaptive intelligent
              workflow systems based on solid theoretical underpinnings and to test its
              advantages and limitations as compared with more traditional production/
              resource scheduling methods. Through this research, a rigorous approach will be
              taken to model white-collar work as a collaborative effort between multiple
              people and computers.                                          +   _           
                        Ûª? ÑOh ª'  +'ª?0   Ý           +       ]               $       H    
                l        +       ¢       ?                       D       h       +           
                                             R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
