Title       : Dissertation Research: Language Socialization in Rural and Urban Communities in
               Dominica, West Indies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9602870

Award Number: 9602870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5008               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bambi B. Schieffelin bs4@is.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9602870  Paugh  In Dominica, a French creole (Kweyol) dating to early  French
              colonization remains in use along with different  varieties of English (the
              official language). An  urban/rural split exists: the most "standard" English 
              is spoken in the capital town, while Kweyol and different  varieties of English
              are spoken throughout the rural village  population. Though historically
              denigrated by middle-  class urbanites, Kweyol has figured centrally in the
              state's  project of building a unified post-colonial nation since  Independence
              in 1978. But while the attitudes of many  middle-class urban adults towards
              Kweyol are changing, rural  villagers still struggle with restricted skills in
              English  and view Kweyol as a disability. Children growing up  today face a
              sociolinguistically complex environment where  multilingualism is accompanied
              by multiple language  ideologies concerning language choice. How children
              become  communicatively competent in the language(s) and language  ideologies
              of their communities in such a highly variable,  multilingual creole
              environment will be investigated through  a longitudinal child language
              socialization study of six  children (in both town and village). The children's
               naturally occurring speech with various interlocutors during  daily activities
              will be systematically audio-tape recorded,  transcribed, and analyzed. This
              study will investigate the  links between changing language ideologies and
              practices,  language choice and identity construction, and post-colonial 
              nation building in Dominica. It will yield data on  multilingual language
              acquisition, the social organization  of caregiving, processes of language
              maintenance and shift,  and the learning of cultural and linguistic practices
              in a  creole society. It will contribute to several growing areas  of research
              including linguistic ideologies. language and  nationalism, creole
              sociolinguistics, and Caribbean area  studies.  ***
