Title       : Dissertation Research: The Acquistion of Spanish as a First Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9602911

Award Number: 9602911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8375               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nina Hyams hyams@humnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                      To answer the question of how children learn language as quickly as they
              do with such impoverished  input and no explicit instruction, one must assume
              that a great deal of what children come to demonstrate in  terms of their
              linguistic behavior is the product of grammatical knowledge they bring into
              this world with  them. This study seeks to explain the appearance and then
              disappearance of certain non-adult like phenomena of  child Spanish as a
              consequence of this in-born knowledge coming on-line. This study will  focus on
              what preliminary studies have shown to be three intriguing phenomena: the early
              lack of question  formation in child Spanish, the early lack of overt subjects
              in child Spanish as well as the lack of negative  imperative verbs in child
              Spanish. If language acquisition proceeds as quickly and uniformly as it
              appears to  because children are born with highly specified linguistic
              knowledge of the kind characterized by modern  syntactic theory, then the
              emergence of the elements that syntacticians have argued to be crucial to the
              three  constructions mentioned should have consequences for the development of
              these three constructions. Concretely,  certain grammatical elements (known as
              functional categories) and the relationships among them are argued to be 
              crucial for all three of the above constructions. Some of these elements appear
              to be active from the beginning  of child Spanish, but others may not develop
              until after the second birthday. Hence, investigating their  development should
              shed light on the way in which grammar develops in child language as well as
              the explanatory  value of the adult grammatical theories in question.         
              The method used to investigate these developmental consequences is a
              longitudinal study of three  monolingual Spanish-speaking children from the age
              of 1 year, 6 months until 2 years, 6 months. The subjects  will be taped and
              the tapes will be transcribed and grammatically coded, paying special attention
              to three  constructions in que stion. In this way it will be possible to amass
              a large amount of monolingual Spanish child  data and to study language
              development during what appears to be the most interesting and volatile period
              of  the development of child Spanish syntax. An important result of this study,
              in addition to its theoretical  ambitions, will be the construction of a rich,
              longitudinally-collected data base of monolingual child Spanish.  At present, 
              no such database is widely available. The resulting data base would be made
              available to the  CHILDES Data Base (MacWhinney and Snow, 1985), thus providing
              to researchers from many disciplines  (Linguistics, Sociology, Anthropology,
              and Developmental Psychology), an invaluable resource in an extremely 
              widely-spoken language that has been understudied. In the same way that data
              from the three children from the  Brown Corpus (Brown, 1968) have proven to be
              a virtual gold mine of insight into early child language  development, this
              study aims to furnish the international scientific community with a linguistic
              resource of  substantial value.
