Title       : Reformed Mathematics Pedagogy and Laboratory/Technical Activities in Support of
               Aeronautics and Space Technical Education for Community and Technical College
               Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9602456

Award Number: 9602456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259914             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Pazdar pazdar@commnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Wursthorn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Hirschy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Capital Community College
	      401 Flatbush Avenue
	      Hartford, CT  061063757    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              National Aeronautics and Space Administration - American Mathematics Association
              of Two-Year Colleges Project Coalition: A Reform Mathematics Pedagogy and
              Laboratory    The reform pedagogy advocated by the Standards of AMATYC's
              (American Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges) "Crossroads In
              Mathematics" implies significant shortcomings in the way mathematics is
              currently taught in community/technical colleges. Two-year college students do
              not have sufficient access in their mathematics courses to real world
              applications from aeronautics and space technology. The goal of this project is
              to develop a collection of laboratory/technical activities (LTAs) that
              significantly contribute to the way in which mathematics from prealgebra
              through calculus is perceived, taught, and learned in community/technical
              colleges. The LTAs will be developed by community/technical college faculty
              working with NASA Scientists/Engineers at the Kennedy Space Center. The LTAs
              will be based on a wide range of technical problems generated from the science
              of aeronautics and space. In addition, the project will develop Spinoffs from
              the LTAs that extend them into other related mathematical areas. The targeted
              audience includes all community/technical college students of whom
              significantly more than 50% are women and minorities.    "NASA-AMATYC PC" is a
              project coalition involving three organizations: NASA (National Aeronautics and
              Space Administration), AMATYC (American Mathematical Association of Two-Year
              Colleges), and CC-TC (Capital Community-Technical College). This project will
              provide community/technical college students with a collection of real world
              technological applications. These applications will be embedded in a
              pedagogical structure that supports AMATYC's Standards. Evaluation, occurring
              at every stage of the development process, will articulate the LTAs with
              mathematics education at the secondary school, two and four-year college
              levels. Dissemination will take place nationally via brochures, booklets  and
              presentations, and globally on the Internet.
