Title       : Renovation of Chemistry and Geology Research Facilities, Georgia Southern
               University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1997   
File        : a9602776

Award Number: 9602776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise A. Battles dbattles@gsvms2.cc.gasou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bill W. Ponder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fredrick J. Rich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Shedrick Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia Southern Univ
	      P.O. Box 8005
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Georgia Southern University (GSU), a unit of the University System of Georgia,
              is the largest and leading center of higher education in the southern half of
              the State.  Distinguished as having been the fastest growing college or
              university in the United States for the years 1987-1992,  GSU has sustained a
              104% increase in enrollment since 1985.  The University is committed to
              providing academic excellence to a diverse student body, particularly in the
              sciences. Establishing a partnership with the National Science Foundation, GSU
              will  aid the university in its endeavor to improve its scientific
              infrastructure by modernizing the Herty  Building.  Constructed in 1958, the
              facility is home to the Departments of Chemistry and Geology/Geography, and has
              never been renovated.  Funding from the ARI Program, combined with university
              and State funds, will be used to renovate five chemistry and four geology
              laboratories. Geology laboratories support faculty research in geochemistry,
              igneous and metamorphic petrology, sedimentology, invertebrate and vertebrate
              paleontology, economic geology, geomorphology, and palynology. Chemistry
              facilities support faculty and student research and training in physical
              chemistry, organic chemistry, biochemistry and analytical chemistry.  Existing
              research space is antiquated to support current research activities and
              consists of the following deficiencies:  old laboratory benches, inefficient
              space utilization, poor lighting, exposed ductwork and pipes, and outdated fume
              hoods.  Renovations will encompass:  upgrading of electrical, HVAC, and
              lighting systems, installing new lab benches, cabinetry and fume hoods, and
              installing additional fixed equipment.  The renovations will create a more
              efficient, functional, and safe working environment, which will permit the full
              use of geology research equipment currently available.  The project will
              provide facilities capable of supporting the rapidly growing research programs
              of chemistry and geology faculty and students.  The project will continue a
              significant university effort to improve science facilities, and upholds the
              institutional goals and NSF's core strategies by:  1) strengthening  the
              physical infrastructure, 2) integrating research and education, and 3)
              developing intellectual capital by attracting and supporting activities among
              groups and regions that traditionally have not participated as full stake
              holders in science, mathematics, and engineering.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
