Title       : RUI: Stability of Spacetimes with Mild Singularities or Cauchy Horizons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9602068

Award Number: 9602068
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37148              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Konkowski dak@nadn.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : US Naval Academy
	      
	      Annapolis, MD  21402    301/267-6100

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Konkowski will continue and extend her previous  work on spacetimes
              with mild singularities.  Mild  singularities include quasiregular and
              nonscalar curvature  singularities.  In the case of quasiregular singularities,
               particle paths end suddenly with no warning from infinitely-  increasing tidal
              forces, while in the case of nonscalar  curvature singularities some, but not
              all, particles moving  near the singularity feel infinite tidal forces.  A
              study  has already begun of a spacetime with a quasiregular  singularity which
              can be approached only by an incomplete  curve of bounded acceleration.  This
              investigation will be  continued using classical and quantum fields and 
              applications of the singularity conjecture.  In addition,  spacetimes with mild
              singularities due to Siklos and to  Gurses and Sermutlu will be studied.  The
              rather than Ricci  curvature singularities, which are likely to provide more 
              stringent limits on the validity of the conjectures.  Most  of the stability
              tests have involved classical field  techniques.  She will now extend the tests
              to include the  behavior of quantum particles and fields near mild 
              singularities and Cauchy horizons.  It will be interesting,  for example, to
              examine the behavior of a particle wave  packet as it approaches a mild
              singularity or a Cauchy  horizon to study the effects of barrier penetration. 
              It  will also be interesting to broaden the stability  conjectures to include
              the behavior of quantum test-fields  near singularities and Cauchy horizons.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
