Title       : A Computerized Laboratory for Study of Status Generalization and Social Network
               Group Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9602491

Award Number: 9602491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30311              (Estimated)
Investigator: Murray Webster murrayw@bellsouth.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph M. Whitmeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,1327,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Murray Webster and Joseph
              Whitmeyer will purchase computer and related instrumentation of equip a
              laboratory to study social processes. The relevant part of the laboratory
              complex consists of eight small rooms. Participants in experiments are seated
              in separate rooms which also contain a computer terminal, a video camera and a
              monitor for all communication. In this way, communication can be completely
              open or limited networks can be created as needed. Information content, from
              experimenters to participants and between participants can either be veridical
              (true) or controlled. For example controlled disagreements can be created to
              measure performance expectation states. The NSF grant will provide the
              necessary instrumentation including a Gateway P5-200 computer, 8 Gateway P5-120
              computers for terminals, cables to connect the terminals to server, 8 Sony
              video cameras and Panasonic video monitors and other related software are
              equipment.   With this laboratory, the researchers will study two basic social
              process. The first involves status generalization which structures face to face
              interaction around the status characteristics individuals bring with them to
              group situations. Its effects occur in task-focused interaction situations,
              where individuals are together for the purpose of solving problems or achieving
              a goal, such as on a team or a jury. Based on observed characteristics,
              individuals develop performance expectation states which are roughly equivalent
              to ideas of ability to perform whatever task is relevant to a group. A number
              of theories postulate on how these expectation states form and can be altered
              over time and these can be evaluated in controlled situations which the
              laboratory permits. The second research area involves exchange networks and how
              structural power originates and is maintained and expanded within them. Again
              the laboratory will allow the investigators to create controlled experimental
              situations.  This research is important for the light it will shed on
              interaction among individuals This state of the art laboratory will also
              provide a model which is likely to be reproduced in other universities and
              research settings.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
