Title       : Japan STA Program: Observations of Cosmic X-ray Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1996 
File        : a9602568

Award Number: 9602568
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley C. Rubin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0512205   Xray & Electron Beam Lith               
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rubin  9602568    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency 
              of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Bradley Rubin  at the Institute
              of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN)  in Tokyo, Japan.  Dr. Rubin will
              work with Dr. Masaru  Matsuoka, Director of the Cosmic Radiation Laboratory at 
              RIKEN, on a research project entitled  "Observations of  Cosmic X-Ray Sources".
                 The proposed research will investigate the emission of  electromagnetic
              energy occurring in selected x-ray binary  systems with specific emphasis on
              the analysis of data  recorded by orbiting high energy observatories.  Soft
              x-ray  transients are a class of x-ray binaries containing a  neutron star for
              which outbursts of strong x-ray emission  are occasionally observed.  Modeling
              the high energy spectra  in both the quiescent and outburst states is critical
              to an  understanding of the physical structure and outburst  mechanisms of
              these systems.  The analysis will discriminate  between accretion and shock
              powered models of the quiescent  emission and thermal and non-thermal models of
              the outburst  emission.  Research will also focus on another class of x-  ray
              binaries, x-ray pulsars, which emit periodic signals due  to the rotation of an
              accretion powered neutron star.  Emission line observations of these systems
              will be used to  obtain information about the density and ionization  structure
              of the surrounding environment. The result of this  research in its entirety
              will be an improved understanding  of the nature of these enigmatic objects. 
              ***
