Title       : Renovation of the Loeb Laboratory Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1996  
File        : a9602628

Award Number: 9602628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Burris jburris@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) is an independent, non-profit and
              educational institution and America's oldest private marine lab.  Founded in
              1888, the MBL offers a conductive environment for summer investigators and
              advance students from the U.S. and abroad to perform research. Diverse and
              abundant marine organisms found in surrounding waters serve as models for
              exploring fundamental life processes.  In addition to being the summer home of
              American Biology, the MBL hosts major year-round research programs in cell and
              developmental biology, ecosystems studies, molecular evolution, neurobiology,
              and sensory physiology.    NSF funds will be used to improve the mechanical
              systems of the Loeb Building, one of the MBL's five major laboratory buildings.
               Opened in 1969,  Loeb serves as a prime focal point for research activities in
              experimental biology.  It houses facilities for the Ecosystems Center, Boston
              University's Marine Program, and the summer research of the NINDS Laboratory of
              Neurobiology.  In addition to housing research programs, Loeb is  a major site
              where research training courses are conducted.  However  these activities,
              involving the use of electronic equipment to conduct state of the art research,
              require a level of environmental controls that the building's existing
              mechanical systems are incapable of providing.  This modernization will consist
              of upgrading and repairing the existing ventilation systems and controls, and
              replacing the existing chiller with a more efficient unit.  MBL has had a
              commitment to developing the nation's intellectual capital, particularly in the
              area of basic biology, and has been a long term beneficiary of partnerships
              with a variety of institutions across the nation.  This project will help
              strengthen the MBL infrastructure, which will sustain the tradition in Loeb,
              and campus wide, well into the next century.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
