Title       : Research Facilities Modernization for Biology and Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1997   
File        : a9602705

Award Number: 9602705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1502404            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas A. Zavitsas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis M. Curley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel E. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Long Island U Brooklyn
	      University Plaza
	      Brooklyn, NY  11201    718/403-1011

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Long Island University, established in 1926 in Brooklyn, NY,  is the recipient
              of ARI funds to relocate, consolidate, and renovate existing research space for
              the Departments of Biology and Chemistry in Metcalfe Hall.  Constructed in
              1927, research space as currently configured in Metcalfe Hall cannot adequately
              support research in biology and chemistry.  Research activities are dispersed
              over six floors of Metcalfe and between two buildings creating an inconvenient,
              inefficient and discouraging arrangement for research groups. Biology faculty
              and students conduct research in the areas of molecular biology, cell biology,
              microbiology, and developmental biology, as Chemistry faculty and students
              engage in studies involving organic, inorganic, biochemistry, materials
              science, and theoretical calculations. Consolidating disparate spaces into two
              centrally cohesive research facilities will improve the overall efficiency of
              the research enterprise at the University.  In addition to reconfiguring space,
              renovations will include:  the upgrade of plumbing, air conditioning and
              lighting systems, removal of asbestos, the installation of fume hoods, exhausts
              ducts, and ensuring that laboratories meet ADA specifications.  Fixed
              equipment, including an autoclave, cold room and water distiller will also be
              installed.  The creating of focused and integrated research facilities will
              have a major impact on the quality and quantity of scientific research
              performed, and will provide research opportunities not feasible with current
              facilities.  Reflecting the rich ethnic and racial diversity of its urban
              environment, revitalized research facilities will sustain Long Island
              University in its endeavor to provide a quality education for minority students
              and equip all students with the scientific skills needed to compete in a
              changing technological society.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
