Title       : A Planning Project to Further Develop a Multidisciplinary Approach to Great
               Lakes Environmental Studies. May, 1997, Buffalo, New York.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1998  
File        : a9602553

Award Number: 9602553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randal J. Snyder snyderrj@buffalostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hunter Carrick  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kyle Hartman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Freidhoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Brandt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Buffalo
	      1300 Elmwood Avenue
	      Buffalo, NY  142221004    716/878-4000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The structure and function of scientific research and  education at academic
              institutions in the United States is  in a period of great change.  Many
              academic institutions are  considering plans to down-size in terms of staff and
               funding, such that a reevaluation of their overall mission  is necessary
              (Selvin 1995).  One common theme is to focus  the efforts (and talents) of
              multiple investigators,  departments, and institutions in an integrated manner 
              towards problem-solving.  This development may be both a  necessity of limited
              budgets, and a reality of the types of  scientific problems that exist today. 
              This is particularly  true of studies on large ecosystems like the world's
              Oceans  and Great Lakes.  Environmental changes in these systems can  often be
              related to human activities (climate change,  eutrophication of exotic
              species), that often manifest  themselves over large spatial and temporal
              scales with  global implications.  In this way, centers of  multidisciplinary
              academic excellence may be valuable now  more than ever.    The State
              University of New York, College at Buffalo  supports one of the few academic
              field facilities on the  Laurentian Great Lakes.  The field station is operated
              out  of the Great Lakes Center (GLC), which is affiliated with  the School of
              Natural and Social Sciences. This project will  help refine the mission
              statement of GLC establish  collaborative connections with other institutions 
              in the Great Lakes region, and to plan and further develop  the physical
              facilities at our field station.    Objectives for the project are three-fold: 
                1.  To obtain feedback and suggestions regarding the mission  statement for
              the GLC's multidisciplinary Great Lakes  Environmental Studies Program.    2. 
              To facilitate communication and potential collaborations  between the GLC and
              other institutions in the Great Lakes  region, including scientists
              (particularly from field  stations), regulatory agencies, and local government.
                 3.  To produce a written 5- year Strate gic Development Plan  to help guide
              the further development of physical facilities  that support the GLC's program.
