Title       : Prehistoric Coastal Adaptations in Northern Baja California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2000  
File        : a9602959

Award Number: 9602959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97047              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry D. Moore jmoore@csudh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State Dominguez Hills
	      1000 East Victoria Street
	      Carson, CA  907470001    213/516-3300

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Jerry Moore will conduct two
              seasons of field survey and excavation in the Bahia San Quintin and Rosario
              Valley region of Baja California. Covering 630 sq. km. the project area extends
              from sea level to approximately 500 m. elevation and includes a variety of
              vegetational zones. Thus the research should provide information which is
              relevant to understanding the prehistory within other portions of this long
              peninsula. Given its proximity to the United States and the very extensive
              archaeological investigation conducted in coastal regions of US southern
              California, it is surprising that the prehistory of Baja is almost unknown.
              Therefore it provides an excellent context to examine and attempt to validate
              patterns observed to the North. There archaeologists have noted that complex -
              at a hunting and gathering level of subsistence - forms of social organization
              developed. These were characterized by specialized production of socially
              significant items such as shell beads and large scale trade networks. Many
              archaeologists believe that a reliance on stable and productive marine
              resources is primarily responsible for this phenomenon. However other
              archaeologists have noted that resources such as shellfish require significant
              amounts of time to process and prepare for consumption. They also point out
              that complex societies failed to develop in many other resource rich coastal
              areas and therefore other important factors must be involved. Baja California
              with its long coastline and its proximity to southern California makes an
              excellent venue to address this question.  Dr. Moore's project will address
              three basic issues: 1. What is the antiquity of coastal adaptations in the
              region? 2. What is the nature of prehistoric responses to climatic fluctuations
              over the last ca. 12,000 years? and 3. Given current ethnohistoric and
              ethnographic data, what were the basic patterns of settlement and subsistence
              employed in the area. The research will involve: a systematic survey based on a
              stratified sample of the project area; preparation of detailed site plans; and
              collection of selected radiocarbon samples to develop a corpus of absolute
              dates for the region. California State University Dominguez Hills is a
              multiethnic institution of undergraduate education and the project will serve
              to introduce students to archaeological field research and, hopefully,
              encourage them to pursue careers in science.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
