Title       : Toledo Technology Academy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9602431

Award Number: 9602431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lionel J. Sully lionel.sully@eisc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leona M. Hall-Ewig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Edison Industrial Sys Ctr
	      1700 N Westwood Ave-Suite 2286
	      Toledo, OH  436071241    419/531-8610

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Toledo Technology Academy     Toledo's award winning Manufacturing Engineering
              Technology Program, located at the Libbey Skill Center, provides an effective
              school-to-work path for high school students, drawn from throughout a major
              industrial city with its many attendant problems. Through a non-coercive,
              cooperative learning environment, students acquire competencies in design,
              construction, and maintenance of automated manufacturing machine systems.
              Supported by over 80 companies, the two-year, half-day program will form the
              model for a proposed full four-year, all-day high school program encompassing
              two of the five Tech Prep manufacturing engineering technology competency
              profiles. The proposed three-year project will address a key industrial need to
              replace today's aging employees with tomorrow's skilled technical workforce. An
              integrated curriculum, adapted from many existing proven models, will emphasize
              cooperative learning strategies, the Quality School techniques of Glasser and
              others, a full spectrum of real-world work experience for students, laboratory
              expansion, and marketing to solve low student enrollment. Evening adult
              education components, will allow special laboratories provided by industry to
              be used by a larger community population. The UT Community and Technical
              College will offer full articulated associate degree programs for graduates.
              The new technology based high school program is being developed by a strong
              community team consisting of:  Edison Industrial Systems Center, Toledo Public
              Schools, The University of Toledo, Toledo area industrial companies, and the
              Toledo Chapters of the Societies of Manufacturing Engineers and Plastics
              Engineers. Industry support and leadership are vital to the success of this
              initiative providing input into curriculum, providing student and instructor
              mentoring, technical assistance, product and monetary assistance.
