Title       : Replacement & Acquisition of Plant Growth Chambers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a9602211

Award Number: 9602211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367444             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard D. Grimes grimes@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0602000   Facilities - Replacement                
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Washington State University (WSU) is the receipt of funds from the ARI Program
              to replace obsolescent growth chambers for plant science research. 
              Environmental Growth chambers are critical components of the basic
              infrastructure of modern plant biology research.  As faculty expand their
              experimental studies, environmental parameters must be controlled to regulate
              atmospheric gas levels while investigating the effect of global atmospheric
              changes on plant growth, and to produce and maintain transgenic plants while
              studying the mechanisms of gene regulation.  Current growth chambers are 20
              years old and are experiencing intolerable levels of mechanical and electrical
              failures, severely impairing the research and training mission of the Botany
              Department.  It is essential that faculty and student investigators have access
              to modern plant growth chambers equipped with high light intensities, humidity
              control, gas exchange capabilities, and on-line computer monitoring.  This
              award, in addition to funding from the Murdock Charitable Trust and WSU, will
              be used to establish an Environmental Plant Growth Laboratory, a high priority
              research initiative.  The integrated Laboratory will consist of a number of
              different plant growth chambers creating an overall facility with the maximum
              level of flexibility for current and future research needs.  Being of
              sufficient size and diversity will enable investigators to address national and
              international issues of plant biology over the next two decades.  Thus, this
              project will positively impact the research infrastructure and training mission
              of WSU well into the next century.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
