Title       : Renovation and Consolidation of Salk Institute Plant Growth Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1997   
File        : a9602612

Award Number: 9602612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Detlef Weigel weigel@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joanne Chory  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Doerner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Lamb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0602000   Facilities - Replacement                
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award will be used to partially support the renovation and consolidation
              of the Plant Growth Facilities of the Plant Biology Laboratory (PBL) at the
              Salk Institute for Biological Studies. Research interests, represented by four
              groups, include:  the development and physiology, light regulation of plant
              development, plant disease resistance, and molecular and genetic mechanisms of
              growth control.  Existing  growth facilities are housed in a  metal structure
              inadequate to provide the required functional and environmental conditions to 
              support scientific programs.  Renovations will consist of: structural
              improvements, upgrading the HVAC, plumbing, and electrical systems, installing
              casework, new light fixtures and wire racks for plants.  Once completed, the
              different functions of plant preparation, growth, and analysis will be
              physically separated.  The optimized layout of the centralized Plant Growth
              Facility will provide usable shelf space in the growth rooms, mainly for
              growing Arabidopsis plants.  Specific projects to be conducted in the upgraded
              facility include:  mutant screens under special light conditions,
              second-generation mutant screens using transgenic plants and weak mutant
              alleles of known regulatory genes, and large-scale activation-tagging screens
              to identify new regulatory genes through gain-of-function analyses.  In
              addition, the project will be used for general plant growth and maintenance as
              required for genetic analyses, mapping purposes and biochemical studies, for
              the generation of transgenic plants, and for disease-free growth of plants.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
