Title       : Modernization of Tissue Culture/Radioisotope Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9602605

Award Number: 9602605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hsin-Yi Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin B. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Q. Kreider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award will enable Rutgers University at Camden to renovate a tissue
              culture and radioisotope laboratory to accommodate junior faculty and their
              students engaged in neuroscience research.  Constructed in 1964, the facility,
              housed in the Science Building, has numerous structural deficiencies and
              requires substantial renovation to make possible state-of-the-art research
              involving the in vitro cultivation of cells.  Air supply lines and a fume hood
              for handling radioisotopes and biohazardous substances are absent from the
              tissue culture room.  Animal dissection is conducted in the same room where
              cells are grown for long term experimentation, thus creating a non-sterile
              environment.  Also the lack of adequate storage area for culture media and cell
              lines impedes research progress.  Funds will be used to upgrade the laboratory
              which will expand the variety and volume of research presently conducted
              utilizing tissue culture techniques in the Department of Biology.  Added to the
              increased research activity is the prospect of accommodating additional
              research faculty members whose work requires the growth of cell lines,
              hybridomas, or sensitive cell systems that need antibiotic-free media.  A
              modernized facility will also contribute to the training of students, including
              underrepresented minorities, who may pursue careers in biological and
              biomedical research.  It is anticipated that this project will assist in the
              establishment of a joint Ph.D. program in Cell and Molecular Biology and
              Neuroscience with neighboring medical research institutes.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
