Title       : Renovation of the Cornell University Environmental Engineering Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1996    
File        : a9602273

Award Number: 9602273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard W. Lion LWL3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard I. Dick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Bisogni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Gossett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Cornell School of Civil and Environmental Engineering is recognized as one
              of the top ten national programs in the training of environmental scientists
              and engineers. The orientation of study in the Environmental Engineering
              program is toward understanding the principles, phenomena, and engineering
              techniques that are applicable to the maintenance of environmental quality. 
              Research in the program focuses on pertinent biological, chemical, physical and
              engineering knowledge.  This scientific and engineering knowledge is used in
              conjunction with analytical, computational, and laboratory skills, in the
              planning, analysis and design of processes, facilities and systems that are
              essential to advancing environmental quality objectives.  Environmental
              Engineering research and training facilities are housed in Hollister Hall,
              which was constructed in the early 1950's. Existing conditions of laboratories
              in Hollister have become major impediments in the Department's research and
              training efforts. All fume hoods fail to meet current safety standards and none
              of the rooms have adequate ventilation, and are poorly designed.   As a part of
              its continuing commitment to research training in environmental engineering,
              Cornell University, with assistance from the National Science Foundation, will
              modernize a laboratory to house equipment and serve as a graduate research
              analytical facility.  The renovated facility will also be used as the site for
              a new undergraduate research training course.  In addition to resolving 
              utility, space, and fume hood inadequacies, the department will create an
              innovative research training facility that will serve as a national model for
              integration of faculty research with the training of students in research
              methods once renovations are completed.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
