Title       : FSML: Database Center at the Sierra Nevada Aquatic Research Laboratory (SNARL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9602510

Award Number: 9602510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Dawson dawson@icess.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Melack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott D. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Sierra Nevada Aquatic Research Laboratory (SNARL) is a  field station of the
              University of California, Santa Barbara  (UCSB), located in the eastern Sierra
              Nevada.  The station  is one of the most used and scientifically productive
              sites  in the University of California's Natural Reserve System  (NRS).  SNARL
              supports the full gamut of year-round field  research in habitats ranging from
              alpine watersheds to  alkali lakes, old growth forests to experimental streams.
               This project will create an office building and database  center at SNARL. 
              The center will make use of a recently  acquired building that has been moved
              to the site and is  being renovated.  The project will also support the
              creation  of the database center which will provide 1) networked  computers and
              peripherals for field station users, 2)  Geographic Information System (GIS)
              software and databases,  3) Global Positioning System (GPS) hardware and
              software, 4)  a dedicated Internet connection, and 5) staff to develop and 
              support research with emphasis on spatially-related data  sets.    The project
              will provide new opportunities for field  scientists to process and analyze
              data while "in the field."  The telecommunications link will allow visiting
              scientists  to stay in contact with staff and colleagues and to move  data back
              and forth from the field station to their home  institution.  The ability to
              move and store large data  files, such as remote sensing images, will be part
              of this  project.  There is substantial demand for the additional  space and
              proposed facilities and equipment.  Database  development and management will
              be emphasized to improve the  support for researchers at the field station. 
              National and  international access to these data sets will be available  via
              the Internet.
