Title       : A Consolidated and Enhanced Molecular Biology Facility for the Whitney Marine
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9602526

Award Number: 9602526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. V. Anderson paa@whitney.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                      The Whitney Marine Laboratory is a research institute of the  University
              of Florida.  It was  established in 1974 and dedicated to a traditional role of
               marine laboratories; the use of marine  animals as experimental models with
              which to address  fundamental questions in cellular and  neurobiology.  This
              particular approach to marine biology  has come to characterize the  Laboratory
              within Florida, the Southeast region, and  nationally.  In 1989, the Laboratory
              initiated  a program in molecular biology.  This program proved to be 
              enormously powerful and popular, so  much so that nine of the twelve resident 
              research groups at  the Whitney Laboratory now use  molecular cloning as a
              routine component of their research.  To accommodate this growth, the 
              Laboratory assigned additional space to molecular biology-  the facilities
              currently consist of 21/2  functionally separate rooms, occupying a total of
              630 ft2 ,  and a separate isotope lab.  However,  on given day, 12 individuals
              vie for bench space in any  given room, and during peak times,  visitors and
              students might raise this number to as many as  20.  This heavy demand
              inevitably  raises problems of scheduling and, most worrisome,  contamination
              of cultures and PCR by  extraneous DNA and RNA.  Moreover, several essential
              items  of equipment are already quite old,  and, in many cases (e.g.,) the
              autoclave, shaking incubator  and ice machine) they are the only item  of their
              kind in the Laboratory, making the whole program is  vulnerable to stoppage
              should one item break down.  Finally,  because the existing facilities are
              spread across four  widely spaced rooms, the use of the facilities is 
              inefficient.  To correct these problems this project will  support a
              consolidated molecular  biology facility, organized and equipped so as to as to
               maximize its usage and utility to the resident  faculty of the Whitney
              Laboratory and to visiting scientists  and students.  This consolidated
              facility would continue to  operate under the skilled s upervision of the
              Laboratory's  molecular biologist.
