Title       : Bridging the Gap: Equity in Systemic Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9602137

Award Number: 9602137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernice T. Anderson                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1170156            (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith L. Meece   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Butler Kahle  (Principal Investigator former)
              Steven Rogg  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Kenneth G. Tobin  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Kathryn C. Scantlebury  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7262      RESEARCH ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9602137  Kahle    This study proposes to analyze changes in student achievement
              in one State with five systemic initiatives.  Systemic reform efforts in the
              State of Ohio have been conducted for the past 5 years and are expected to
              continue for more years even without the NSF support that it has received.  The
              reform efforts attempt to provide equal access to science and mathematics
              classes.  The study focuses on the effectiveness of the reform initiatives to
              reduce learning gaps between students by race, sex, and socio-economic level. 
              The authors assert that the results will contribute to theory-based
              recommendations that will be applicable to individual schools, school
              districts, teacher professional development programs in colleges and
              universities, and to states involved in reforming mathematics and science
              education.  It will identify characteristics of school environments that
              support reform.    It addresses research questions regarding changes in the
              classrooms that enhance the learning of both science and mathematics and
              changes in attitudes and behaviors of teachers, administrators, parents, and
              students.  The study will use both a quantitative and qualitative research
              design with a large sample of schools for survey of achievement and a smaller
              sample of 14 schools where interviews, observations, and community support and
              student achievement data will be collected.  In addition 4 schools will be
              chosen for intensive case studies.  The schools will be selected from urban
              centers and extreme rural areas (Appalachia) where equity and opportunity to
              learn concerns will be addressed.
