Title       : U.S.-NIS Clearinghouse for Developing the Infrastructure of Science and
               Technology in the Former Soviet Union
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9602057

Award Number: 9602057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth J. Kirk EKIRK@AAAS.ORG  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beth Boswell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000904   Science Information                     
              0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    INT-9602057  Kirk    This award to the American Association for the
              Advancement of Science  AAAS  is for a "Clearinghouse for Developing the
              Infrastructure of Science and Technology in the Former Soviet Union".  For the
              past two years, AAAS, AAAS affiliated societies, and their counterparts in the
              newly independent states (NIS) of the former Soviet Union have been
              implementing a program to enhance scientific infrastructure-building activities
              in these states.  The goals of this program are to: (1) assist NIS counterparts
              in development of decision-making processes in science institutions which are
              based on competition, peer review, and democratic norms, and which promote the
              advancement of science and the public understanding of scientific issues; (2)
              encourage the development of nongovernmental scientific societies whose members
              cut across research, educational, and industrial sectors of the scientific
              community; and (3) enhance US scientists' understanding of NIS science and
              promote cooperation between US and NIS scientists including the open exchange
              of scientific information.  AAAS has also been acting as a clearinghouse of
              information about other US and European programs in NIS states to foster better
              coordination and understanding of these efforts.  Economic constraints and the
              closed culture of many of these new states have resulted in major divisions and
              difficulties in the scientific community and have impeded its progress toward
              institutions more akin to Western norms.  AAAS plans to continue and intensify
              its infrastructure-building activities in this region over the next year by:
              (1) Conducting two workshops on proposal-writing skills and two follow-on
              workshops on project management and evaluation; (2) Assisting in the
              development of nongovernmental scientific societies through five additional
              fellowships and by supporting some of these fellows on a longer-term basis to
              assist in the establishment of sustainable nongovernmental scientific
              societies; and (3) intensifying its cl earinghouse function by continuing to
              collect and disseminate information, in written and electronic form, on US and
              European scientific and technical programs in NIS states and on NIS science
              institutions and their activities.     This clearinghouse fulfills the program
              objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and the NIS to
              combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual
              interest and competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of
              benefit.      ??
