Title       : Renovation of Hughes Hall Chemistry Research Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a9602322

Award Number: 9602322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Novak   (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Cox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jan G. Jaworski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin W. Gung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn J. Cassady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Miami University, located in Oxford Ohio, is the recipient of ARI funds for
              the renovation of Hughes Hall,  home of the Department of Chemistry. 
              Constructed in 1970, the building's systems are inadequate to support research
              programs in analytical and organic chemistry and biochemistry.  Faculty are
              currently engaged in the following investigations:  utilizing mass spectrometry
              to explore the gas-phase chemistry of biomolecules;  Fourier transform ion
              cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) studies of peptide and protein ions; synthetic and
              physical organic chemistry, fatty acid biosynthetic pathways in plants;
              electrocatalysis, and microsporogenesis and nuclear-mitochondrial
              communication. The condition of the existing facility is now a detriment to the
              growth of the Department's research strength.   Laboratories limit the rate at
              which experimental work can be performed by researchers and, therefore, limit
              the productivity of faculty.  Research space does not comply with  modern
              safety standards, nor is it designed to accommodate more than two research
              students.  The project will consist of renovating twelve laboratories,
              representing four laboratories in each of the targeted fields, converting an
              exiting laboratory into a dedicated facility for the departmental FT-ICR, and
              modernizing an antiquated cold room.  New fume hoods and laboratory casework
              and benches, will be installed in addition to upgrading HVAC, electrical and
              plumbing utilities.  This project is critical to the continued development of
              the graduate program in Chemistry, and since 40% of women  are enrolled in the
              Program, the project will have a definite impact on the education of future
              women chemists.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
