Title       : Estrogen Synthesis in Brain and its Functional Role
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9602139

Award Number: 9602139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barney A. Schlinger schlinge@lifesci.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Schlinger  9602139      It is widely recognized that the gonadal steroid
              hormones have  profound effects on the developing brain and on the function of
              the  adult central nervous system.  Interestingly, in both males and  females
              of many species, estrogens exert some of the most dramatic  effects.  However,
              it is not always clear how estrogens reach  estrogen-sensitive brain regions
              nor is it clear how estrogens act  to influence neuronal growth or function. 
              In the brain of some  species, there is a remarkable neural circuit that
              controls the  organism's ability to learn during development and to translate
              the  learned information into behavior as an adult.  Estrogens are  implicated
              in the initial growth of this circuitry during early  development, in the
              neural mechanisms underlying learning, and in  the activation of adult
              behavior.  All estrogens are derived from  androgens, a reaction catalyzed by
              the enzyme aromatase.  In males,  circulating androgens are converted to
              estrogens locally in the  brain.  It is these estrogens that act to masculinize
              the  developing brain and then activate masculine adult brain function.   In
              some species, aromatase is present in the neural circuitry  underlying
              learning, which may be associated with the effects of  estrogen on learning. 
              Dr. Schlinger is continuing his  investigations into the role of aromatase and
              estrogen on  estrogen-dependent learning and behavior, and will conduct 
              cross-species experiments to characterize the effects of estrogen  more
              clearly.  By clarifying properties of steroid synthesis and  function in brain,
              we will gain a better understanding of how  activities of the neural and
              endocrine systems are coordinated in  regulating neural function.  In addition,
              these investigations  provide a mechanism to further foster species survival in
              natural  environments and gain a better understanding of events crucial to 
              reproduction in the wild.
