Title       : Renovation and Repair of the Chemistry and Microbiology Laboratory Facilities,
               University of Puerto Rico-Aguadilla
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1998      
File        : a9602626

Award Number: 9602626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152195             (Estimated)
Investigator: Osvaldo Martinez-Rivera   (Principal Investigator current)
              Aida L. Mendez-Cruz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sonia Rivera-Gonzalez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico-
	      
	      Aguadilla, PR  006040160    809/759-6061

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Established in 1972, the University of Puerto Rico - Aguadillia, is a public
              institution serving the educational needs of students in the Northwestern
              region of the island.  A large majority of the students enrolled at the
              university are first generation students with limited role models and support
              from home for their university experience.  The University is a beacon of hope
              to many in a community plagued by illiteracy and poverty.  Originally
              authorized to grant associate degrees, the university has expanded its
              offerings to include bachelors degrees, including biology and chemistry in the
              sciences.  Striving to become a model of excellence, the institution's
              strategic plan stresses the importance of research and research training
              activities.  In support of faculty and students engaged in the scientific
              enterprise, the university with assistance from the National Science
              Foundation, will provide financial resources needed to improve research
              training facilities.  Specifically funds will be utilized to consolidate
              research space that has been shared with instructional activities.  Renovations
              will encompass:  upgrading the electrical, plumbing and HVAC systems;
              installing fume hoods, benches, cabinets and security devices; and  ensuring
              the facility  complies with ADA regulations.  A dedicated laboratory will be
              created to allow faculty and undergraduates to conduct investigative work in
              microbiology, biochemistry, inorganic, organic, analytical and industrial
              chemistry.  The project will enhance the ability of the Natural Science
              Department to accomplish significant research and training endeavors, provide
              assistance to the professional development of the secondary school science
              community, and encourage students to pursue advanced levels of scientific
              study.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
