Title       : Studies of Nuclear Structure and Nuclear Processes at Intermediate Energies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a9602872

Award Number: 9602872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26250000           (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Cameron cameron@iucf.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hermann Nann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie C. Bland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P.Paul Singh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor E. Viola  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Snow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew D. Bacher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              K Kwiatkowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott W. Wissink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shyh-Yuan Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Sowinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Szymanski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Schwandt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Pollock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles D. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hans-Otto Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Romualdo T. deSouza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Stephenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1255      INDIANA UNIV (CYCLOTRON FACIL)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Research in intermediate energy, hadronic nuclear  physics will be carried
              out at the Indiana University  Cyclotron Facility (IUCF).  IUCF is a national
              user  facility, with research being carried out by faculty, staff,  postdocs,
              and students from Indiana University, as well as  from other universities in
              the US and abroad, from US  national laboratories, from other federal agencies,
              and from  industry.  Proposals are made to IUCF for use of accelerator  beam
              time and for other specialized resources needed to  carry out the research. 
              All such proposals are reviewed by  a national program advisory committee,
              which in turn makes  recommendations to award beam time or to decline a
              proposal.  The IUCF operations staff provides about 4000 hours of  accelerator
              beam time per year during a 6 to 7 month running  cycle.       The research
              program will center around the use of  proton and other light ion beams with
              energies up to 500  million electron volts, and has several broad themes:  the 
              study of the meson-nucleon basis for the nucleon-nucleon  force; the study of
              few-nucleon systems, in particular  searching for manifestations of many-body
              forces; the study  of modifications of the nucleon-nucleon force in the nuclear
               medium as a potential manifestation of the underlying quark-  gluon basis of
              the strong interaction; and tests of  fundamental symmetries.  The data
              produced will challenge  current theories of the nucleon-nucleon force, its 
              modification in nuclei, and the fundamental symmetries which  it obeys.  In
              addition, IUCF serves a strong user community  studying accelerator physics,
              specifically non-linear  particle beam dynamics and de-polarization phenomena
              in  cyclic accelerators.  These data will extend our knowledge  of particle
              accelerators and the limits of sustainable beam  intensities and beam
              polarizations.  Lastly, IUCF provides  beam to applied researchers in materials
              and biological  radiation effects.  Education of students and postdocs is a 
              strong component of the IUCF mission.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
