Title       : Renovation and Modernization of Plant Growth Facilities at the University of
               Missouri-Columbia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1997    
File        : a9602285

Award Number: 9602285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Walker WalkerJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas D. Randall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Missouri-Columbia has a long tradition of excellence in the
              plant sciences and one of the strongest research and research training programs
              in the nation.  This strength is derived from the activities of the
              Interdisciplinary Plant Group, which consists of 39 faculty representing six
              departments and two colleges. An interactive group of faculty with diverse
              research interest in basic plant research utilizes state of the art
              technologies in plant physiology, genetics, cell and molecular biology, to
              investigate fundamental biological questions.  However, existing conditions of
              the University's greenhouse facilities, built before 1925, are inadequate to
              support experimental work.   Funding from the Academic Research Infrastructure
              Program will be used to partially support the replacement and consolidation of
              six aged and inefficient greenhouses and their associated head houses into a
              modern facility for plant science research.  The new facility will consolidate
              existing research growth facilities, enhancing efficiencies and cooperation
              among users.  Included in the structure will be a centralized seed storage
              facility with temperature and humidity controls to ensure the viability of
              valuable genetic stocks. The existing ventilation and evaporative cooling
              systems will be improved to eliminate problems with stratification of air flow
              and non-uniform temperatures, and provide increased usability, and temperature
              control. This project will fortify and enhance interactions among research
              groups, assist in the institution's ability to recruit new faculty and research
              trainees, and expand the scope of research training for graduate students. 
              Improvements will increase opportunities for underrepresented groups to
              participate in basic research, and ensure accessibility for the physically
              disabled.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
