Title       : Modernization of Facilities for Geoscience Research at the University of Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1999 
File        : a9602707

Award Number: 9602707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Mueller Mueller@geology.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Florida is a land grant university with a student enrollment
              of more than 40,000, and is the largest university in the Nation's fourth most
              populous state.  It is a diverse institution with a primary obligation to
              educate future scientists. Research and graduate education in the Department of
              Geology are integrated activities,  and research is the critical component that
              provides the venue in which future professional geologists are trained.
              Turlington Hall is currently home to the Department where research performed is
              categorized in four primary areas: Paleo-environmental  studies; Chemical
              Geodynamics, Geomagnetism, and Environmental geology.  Investigations in these
              areas represent multidisciplinary efforts of faculty from Geology, Chemistry,
              Biology, Agriculture, and the Florida Museum of Natural History. The basis for
              collaboration is not only mutual scientific interests, but the need for high
              quality analytical data. Turlington Hall in its existing condition cannot
              support or  accommodate the growth of the research program.  Space, originally
              not designed for research, has been encroached upon for research purposes. A
              window of opportunity has been offered to the Department to relocate and
              consolidate programs in Williamson Hall, formerly the home of the Physics
              Department.  However, the 1953 structure requires major renovation in order to
              house the Geology program.  The NSF will participate with the University of
              Florida in renovating a portion of Williamson Hall by converting former physics
              research space to geology research space.  Specific renovations will consist
              of: replacing electrical, HVAC, plumbing, and mechanical systems, upgrading
              fire protection systems, installing fixed equipment, and removing asbestos
              containing materials.  Renovations to the building will ensure that  safety,
              health, and ADA standards are met. Development of the research infrastructure
              will  increase research capabilities needed to accommodate more affiliate
              faculty.  Since women and minorities are an under-represented group within the
              geosciences, it is anticipated that scientists and students will be attracted
              to the discipline.  Consequently, the Department will be able to extend
              relations with the private sector, and provide graduates who will be versatile
              and well-trained members of the nation's scientific and technical workforce.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
