Title       : The Faculty Associates in Science and Technology Leadership Corps Project for
               Enhancing Environmental Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9602365

Award Number: 9602365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Dickinson natlpete@worldnet.att.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Partshp for Env Tech Ed
	      2 Fort Road
	      South Portland, ME  04106    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Faculty Associates in Science and Technology Leadership Corps Project for
              Enhancing Environmental Technology Education    The Partnership for
              Environmental Technology Education (PETE) is a national non-profit
              public-private partnership designed to link the resources of federal
              laboratories, federal and state agencies, private industry and professional
              societies with community and technical colleges. The primary goal is to assist
              approximately 460 participating colleges in developing quality programs for the
              education of environmental technicians and transfer students to four-year
              institutions. Faculty development has been and remains a key element of the
              PETE program. PETE is a partner in the NSF/ATE Program-funded Advanced
              Technology Environmental Education Center (ATEEC). This proposal is closely
              linked with ATEEC's programmatic objectives.    This project is establishing
              within PETE a Faculty Associates in Science and Technology (FAST) program.
              Under this initiative, up to 60 community and technical college faculty are
              being placed annually in 4 to 8 week summer internships in private industry,
              national laboratories, DoD facilities, remediation sites and regulatory
              organizations. Four phases of this program are defined in the project,
              including providing environmental technology faculty with real world
              experiences which translates into improved community college curricula and the
              development of a nationwide network of experienced professional educators (FAST
              Leadership Corps) to serve as a resource to other community and technical
              college faculty delivering environmental programs. PETE provides the
              organizational framework for a national impact of program results.    The FAST
              Project is based upon four years experience with the faculty internship program
              developed in the Western PETE region.
