Title       : Renovation of the Environmental Engineering BioProcessing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9602662

Award Number: 9602662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Arnold arnold@engr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce E. Logan  (Principal Investigator former)
              Raina M. Maier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly L. Ogden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Guzman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The treatment of large quantities of water and wastewater has relied for
              decades upon the use of inexpensive biological reactors in centralized
              treatment facilities.  More frequently the treatment of contaminated soils is
              accomplished by microbial treatment technologies by developing conditions for
              microbial degradation of pollutants in soils, or by stimulating in-situ
              degradation of microbes capable of degrading target pollutants in contaminated
              soils, and ground water aquifers by injecting chemical or microorganisms. 
              Several groups at the University of Arizona are involved in basics and applied
              research in which new microbial- based techniques and processes are developed
              to reduce remediation costs and the time required for cleanup.   Currently
              groups participating in this research, representing the disciplines of Chemical
              Engineering, Environmental Engineering, and Soil, Water and Environmental
              Science, are dispersed among several locations.  Funds from the ARI Program and
              the University will be used to renovate an existing laboratory to consolidate
              support facilities into a single Environmental Engineering BioProcessing
              Laboratory (EEBL).  The targeted space for the EEBL is located in the basement
              of the Civil Engineering Building constructed in the early 1970's.  Existing
              conditions make the laboratory unsuitable to conduct modern research. 
              Renovations will consist of: installing lab benches, modifying electrical and
              plumbing systems, and improving the HVAC.  New built-in facilities will
              include: a fume hood, a walk in refrigerator,  a water softening system, acid
              and base storage cabinets, and a volatile chemical storage cabinet. 
              Centralizing environmentally related bioreactor work into a single facility
              will provide an important resource for researchers interested in microbial
              processes.  The project will be instrumental in promoting collaborative
              interactions among faculty and students interested in bioremediation and other
              microbial-based processes, and ultimately produce high quality research in
              environmental microbiology and bioprocessing and general biotechnology
              activities at  the University.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
