Title       : Technological Education for Advanced Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9602457

Award Number: 9602457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $608756             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick C. Schoenig fschoenig@csuohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland State University
	      East 24th and Euclid Ave
	      Cleveland, OH  44115    216/687-2000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Technological Education for Advanced Manufacturing    Northeast Ohio has more
              than 7,000 manufacturing firms and ranks as one of the largest concentration of
              manufacturers in the world. The region is experiencing a work force crisis;
              manufacturers are now struggling to find appropriately skilled workers,
              technicians, and engineers. On the other hand, the region has a large
              population of undereducated, underexperienced, unemployed or underemployed
              residents, predominately minority, who are ill prepared to take advantage of
              employment opportunities in manufacturing, primarily because of skill
              deficiencies. This team is developing the Technical Education for Advanced
              Manufacturing (TEAM) project which integrates the manufacturing education
              efforts of ten regional partners and establishes a seamless approach to
              manufacturing education that addresses the needs of a target audience of high
              school, community college, and university students as well as the unemployed or
              underemployed or undereducated residents of the region.    The heart of this
              project is the extension of Cleveland's Manufacturing Learning Center (MLC), a
              hands-on educational model which has been highly successful at the community
              college and university level, downward to include not only high school students
              and teachers but to the undereducated residents of the region.  MLC activities
              are being expanded to include two additional community colleges, Lakeland and
              Lorain County Community College, and their associated Tech Prep programs.
              Faculty and students from the partnering organizations team with MLC associates
              at Cleveland State and the community colleges to work on productivity-improving
              process and product development projects sponsored by more than fifty regional
              companies under the mentorship of industrial personnel or MLC associates.
              Additional goals are to:         1.  Design and implement a model for
              professional development of university and community college faculty and
              secondary teachers, especially math and science, that  focuses on
              cross-institutional mentoring relationships and hands-on team experiences in
              industry sponsored projects.         2.  Upgrade the manufacturing curriculum
              at all partner institutions and infuse it with real-world manufacturing
              applications and ensure seamless progression and articulation through the
              partner institutions.         3.  Evaluate the curriculum development and
              reform efforts in all partnering organizations and validate the best practices
              at additional sites among the partners. This includes the Urban Systemic
              Initiative within the Cleveland Public Schools.         4.  Create
              computer-simulation instructional materials that can be utilized at any level
              of learning--high school, community college, and university--by utilizing input
              and applications from industrial partners.
