Title       : A Planning Visit to Seoul, Korea, for Cooperative Research: Impact of Particle
               Transport in Soils on Filter Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9602188

Award Number: 9602188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3825               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lakshmi N. Reddi reddi@ce.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1038,5942,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                    9602188  Reddi    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Lakshmi N.
              Reddi,  Department of Civil Engineering, Kansas State University, to make  a
              short-term visit to Korea to finalize plans with Dr. In-Mo Lee,  Department of
              Civil Engineering, Korea University, for  cooperative research to assess the
              impact of particle transport  on filter performance under realistic in-situ
              conditions.  During  the one-week visit, the collaborators expect to (1) gather
              field  information on which to develop the experimental basis of future 
              research, (2) observe the placement of filters and overall  construction
              procedures as an aid to understanding discrepancies  between field observations
              and laboratory results, (3) formulate  assumptions for the modeling component
              of the proposed research  project, and (4) prepare an outline of the modeling
              and  experimental components of the proposed research for review by  tunneling
              industry consultants and by KOSEF prior to submission  of a formal proposal to
              NSF and KOSEF.    A number of soil structures, both above ground and
              subsurface,  require filters for protection against erosion and piping.  Fine 
              particle accumulation in filters leads to buildup of pore  pressure which can
              be large enough to cause damage to such  structures as retaining walls, dams,
              and tunnels adjacent to the  clogged filters.  Field conditions in the subway
              system in Seoul,  Korea, offer an excellent opportunity to test the fundamental
               particle transport models currently being developed by the PI.   The proposed
              collaborators have considerable experience in the  field of the proposed
              research.  This project is relevant to the  objectives of the U.S.-Korea
              Program which seeks to increase the  level of cooperation between U.S. and
              Korean scientists and  engineers through the exchange of scientific
              information, ideas,  skills, and techniques and through collaboration on
              problems of  mutual interest and benefit.  ***
