Title       : Research Laboratory Renovation for the Department of Physics at IUP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1997  
File        : a9602306

Award Number: 9602306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Marx bobmarx@grove.iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis W. Whitson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wallace L. Freeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Department of Physics at Indiana University of Pennsylvania (IUP) has
              historically placed great emphasis upon undergraduate teaching and the
              education of teachers.  In addition to the standard curriculum for these
              students, many faculty members have individually used research as a tool to
              broaden and enhance the educational process.  The Physics department is
              committed to providing a strong applied research experience for students and
              has done so by  involving undergraduate and graduate students in research
              activities.  In the Fall of 1991, the department implemented the undergraduate
              Applied Physics program, and when coupled with the masters program, students
              have many opportunities to participate in science.  To sustain this momentum,
              and ensure that research remains an integral part of the undergraduate
              experience, the National Science Foundation and IUP will provide funds to
              renovate a central laboratory and support facility in Weyandt Hall. 
              Constructed in 1965, this space is used to house investigations involving
              experimental nuclear and solid state physics, and is used for sample
              preparation in the study of electrical properties of semiconductor materials
              and the effects of ion bombardment damage on such materials.    Renovations
              will encompass modifying rooms into four separate spaces to create a
              non-classified clean room, a clean area, and mechanical room, and a room for
              maintenance and storage.  The clean areas will be used for the purpose of
              sample and test device fabrications associated with semiconductor material
              research.  Seven of nine research faculty members and their students will
              benefit from the renovations which will provide a state of the art clean room, 
              and a stimulating environment to work and learn.  It is anticipated that this
              project will aid in the recruitment of highly qualified students and help
              enhance the overall diversity of the department.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
