Title       : Renovation of the Water Supply and Treatment Facilities of the Great Lakes
               Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2001        
File        : a9602785

Award Number: 9602785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randal J. Snyder snyderrj@buffalostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Brandt  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gordon S. Fraser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Freidhoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Buffalo
	      1300 Elmwood Avenue
	      Buffalo, NY  142221004    716/878-4000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Great Lakes Center of Buffalo State College will receive funds from the
              ARI Program to renovate the laboratory water supply and water treatment
              facility for the Aquatic Research Laboratory  (ARL).  The ARL is the only
              modern facility located on the lower Great Lakes capable of supporting
              experimental aquatic research with lake water. Experimental work at the ARL has
              suffered from an inability to maintain water temperature and water quality at
              levels required for bioenergetics, behavioral and physiological experiments. 
              At present, the water system mixes all waste waters into a single septic tank
              system that does not meet OSHA standards.  This award will support the
              renovations of experimental facilities to provided filtered lake water with
              computer-directed temperature control. Thus enabling faculty and students to
              conduct experiments that will provide detailed species-specific data required
              for studies of freshwater ecosystems.  Improvements will provide facilities
              needed for experiments measuring fish and plankton physiological responses to
              changes in environmental conditions that occur naturally or result from
              anthropogenic effects on the ecosystems.  Experiments conducted with these
              renovated facilities will be coupled with the Laboratory's existing modeling
              program in fish bioenergetics, spatial modeling of habitat quality, 3-D
              foraging models and individual-based models of fish populations.   The Great
              Lakes Center has established the only Graduate Program in Great Lakes
              Environmental Sciences in the country.  This project will not only benefit
              research training for students, but for visiting scientists from other
              institutions and abroad who come to learn techniques integrating field sampling
              and spatial modeling programs.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
