Title       : Dissertation Research: Mayan Ideology and Power
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1996       
File        : a9602063

Award Number: 9602063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7160               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Leventhal rml@anthro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard Leventhal MS Julia Sanchez will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will study glyphs present at a number of
              Mayan archaeological sites. The Mayans were one of the few prehistoric New
              World societies to develop writing and their glyphs are preserved in stone and
              plaster in many places. Because they reached an advanced level of social
              complexity, built elaborate temples and survived in lowland tropical
              environments with few or no inhabitants today they constitute a focus of
              intense anthropological interest. Many archaeologists and eipgraphers have
              translated and studied Mayan writing for insight provided into the elite
              elements of the society which produced them. In her analysis MS Sanchez will
              examine not only the content of glyphic messages but also the physical context
              in which they are located. She has realized that contexts vary markedly and
              that some inscriptions are in public places and thus visible to large and
              diverse numbers of people while others are located in areas such as temple
              interiors where access was limited. She will visit five archaeological sites,
              plot inscription positions and categorize them in terms of public access and
              visibility. She will relate this variable to the message which these writings
              contain and determine how the message varies in relation to intended audience. 
              Archaeologists wish to understand how social hierarchies emerge and how, in
              traditional societies, elites and rulers maintain social control. The political
              organization of the prehistoric Maya is not well understood and MS Sanchez's
              study is important because it should shed new light on mechanisms of control.
              The work is also important because it will assist in the training of a very
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
