Title       : Research Training Group in Optical Biomolecular Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9602258

Award Number: 9602258
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1411000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal W. Woodbury NWoodbury@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew N. Webber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Devens Gust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent B. Pizziconi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Blankenship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1115      RESEARCH TRAINING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1024,9125,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The program of training envisioned by the ASU group involves  a comprehensive
              set of activities including formal  coursework, laboratory introductions, a
              seminar series with  strongly participatory elements, and an evaluation
              structure  for monitoring the progress of each individual student at  regular
              intervals.  Overall this portion of the team's  presentation was a strength of
              the program.  It is clear  that the group took the training function seriously
              and  spent considerably energy developing a highly ambitious  program of
              training with many innovative features.  Obviously they have collectively
              evaluated those factors in  the training of advanced students in
              interdisciplinary areas  which are likely to be most valuable and have
              attempted to  include those in the proposed  program..  Comments below on  the
              individual elements of the training program are meant to  help the team
              fine-tune the approach, rather than to detract  from the overall enthusiasm
              with which this portion of the  presentation was received.    The program of
              formal coureswork, consisting of a laboratory  and lecture course along with a
              seminar series with serious  participation by the students is very ambitious
              and highly  original.  The lecture course seeks to provide an overview  to all
              of the students  entering the program in a given year  of the broad issues in
              biophotonic devices from a top-down  reverse engineering perspective.  The
              strength of this  course is that it has the potential to provide a very broad 
              perspective to students at an early stage in their graduate  careers, before
              they have had time to develop disciplinary  prejudices, which limit vision in
              more traditionally trained  students.  The danger, and one which is explicitly 
              recognized by the team, is that any particular topic will be  very deep for
              most of the class and relatively shallow for a  small segment.  The inclusion
              of a section on intellectual  property issues  from a legal perspective
              introduces an  element of "real world" consideratio ns which is responsive  to
              currently popular concerns about the relevance of  traditional academic
              training.  The laboratory course,  designed to expose students to a broad
              survey of issues  important to biophotonic device manipulation, is very 
              challenging, perhaps too much so for a group of students  with the diverse
              backgrounds expected of students entering  the program.  If carefully designed
              this highly ambitious  experiment in graduate laboratory work could be a 
              cornerstone of a new way of thinking about interdisciplinary  training, which
              could be extended to other universities and  other programs.  However, it is
              clear that there are  practical issues, e.g., length of time of produce
              workable  mutants, familiarity with simple chemical synthetic  manipulations,
              etc., which need to be more carefully thought  out.  In both of these formal
              course experiences it is  important that the ASU administration has agreed to
              add the  proposed activities to the portfolio of courses currently  offered so
              that the assignment to either of these courses  does not come as an overload,
              which would detract from the  overall effectiveness of the faculty member
              involved.                The seminar program aims to place students in real
              contact  with a variety of external experts and should prove to be a  valuable
              addition to the formal training program.  Students,  under direction of the
              course director, are to carefully  read and discuss the work of a selected set
              of speakers  prior to their talks and should be well-poised to benefit  from
              the on-campus presence of the speaker.  In addition the  multidisciplinary
              project meetings should be extremely  positive experiences for the students in
              the program.  These  meetings which will have the character of an extended
              group  meeting promise to allow students from diverse backgrounds  to delve
              into details of a research problem on a common  footing but from their own
              different perspectives.  In short  they are, just the kind of experience many
              of them are  likely  to have as parts of research teams in the industrial 
              environment upon graduation.      Recruitment/Woodbury         This is an
              ambitious program that will need a very high  quality of students that have a
              broad background and much  curiosity, ambition, and drive.  Recruitment into
              the  program will occur at two levels.  In one, students will be  attracted to
              come to A.S.U. because they want to come into  this program.  However, students
              will also be recruited out  of the current pool of general applicants to
              science and  engineering.  The goal is to attract 6 students per year  from 5
              departments (3 in arts and sciences and 2 in the  school of engineering). 
              There is no provision for students  to transfer into the program after their
              first year in  graduate school.         Standard recruitment strategies are
              largely in place.  There are good, innovative programs for attracting minority 
              students.  The current enrollment has a high proportion of  students that are
              eligible for support by N.S.F.  There is  good faculty commitment to recruiting
              visits.  The college  makes an investment in bringing students in to visit the 
              college.  They have mechanisms to contact applicant that  they hope to attract
              by email during the time the students  are making their decision.  Current
              students talk of being  attracted to the university by coming on visits and
              meeting  interested faculty.  This program, by the excitement of the 
              intellectual offerings it provides should prove help them  ensure that the best
              students accept offers at A.S.U.         The difficulty is to find entry level
              students that are  interested in this particular program.  The average A.S.U. 
              graduate student might not be interested in this ambitious  program.  However,
              the faculty quality is more than  sufficient and there is a number of students
              in the existing  program who would meet the ambitious needs of the program. 
              They will need to get a few of the most ambitious students  from each of the 5
              departments to join the program.  One   challenge may be to make sure that the
              allocation of  training positions is spread out equitably among the 
              departments.          Thus, recruitment will require students to be directed 
              to this unusual and exciting program.  Recruitment of  students of students may
              be best achieved by word of mouth  within the scientific community.  The
              visiting scientist  component of the grant can also serve as a recruitment 
              mechanism, since when colleagues return to their home  institutions they will
              send their best students.          However, in order to maintain the right
              students it  will be important to maintain program's focus so that this 
              remains a high visibility offering at A.S.U.
