Title       : Materials Aspects of Manufacturing Technology Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1997    
File        : a9602360

Award Number: 9602360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Stoebe stoebe@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Rusin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Materials Aspects of Manufacturing Technology Institute       This Materials
              Aspects of Manufacturing Technology Institute is developing a set of
              instructors with sufficient background and understanding of the materials
              processing aspects of manufacturing technology to serve as leaders to enhance
              technology education in the U.S. It is also aimed at providing a model
              interactive program involving high school and community college instructors and
              students and industry.  This model is demonstrating successful interactive
              curricular, laboratory and project programs as well as assisting in the
              transition for technology students across the high school-community college
              boundary.    This Institute is being developed by the University of Washington
              in partnership with high schools, community colleges and industry in the
              Pacific Northwest. Over a three-year period, it will provide 60 instructors at
              the high school and community college level with an understanding of the
              principles and applications of materials as they are used in the manufacturing
              technology field.  It consists of a 15 day program intensive in materials
              science and technology, including lectures, labs, discussion sessions,
              independent research and projects for community college and high school
              instructors from the Pacific Northwest.  Each year of the 3-year program
              includes 20 new participants; of the 3-year total of 60, approximately 40
              participants will be from high schools and 20 from community colleges. 
              Generally, one community college instructor and two high school instructors
              from the same geographical area form a team for project and follow-up work. 
              Selected participants are allowed to return for a second year at their own
              expense.    Academic year follow-up programs consist of 2, 1-day meetings on
              campus.  Participants develop interactive high school--community college
              projects, performed jointly by a team of students from nearby schools with
              local industry involvement.  Evaluation tools are being developed, and
              evaluation data  is being collected annually and analyzed by the project team.
