Title       : Renovation of Temple's Psychology Department Animal Colony
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1996  
File        : a9602717

Award Number: 9602717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164773             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Lewis mjlewis@astro.ocis.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Overton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Temple University is the recipient of funds from the Academic Research
              Infrastructure for the renovation and upgrading of the Department of
              Psychology's animal housing and laboratory facilities.  Recognized as one of
              the nation's leading centers for research and research training in the field,
              its research programs are diverse addressing both clinical and basic science
              issues in comparative psychology, social behavior, neurochemistry of
              motivation, behavioral analysis of cognition, and effects of traumatic
              experiences along with work on the mechanisms and properties of classical and
              instrumental conditioning.  The majority of research is performed in Weiss
              Hall, a facility  that was constructed in 1973.  However, due to changing
              regulations and codes, the physical deterioration of the facility,  and
              unsuitable space, animal housing has decreased substantially. The  continuing
              absence of adequate space has negatively impacted individual faculty projects
              and programs.   Renovations will include removing asbestos containing doors,
              resurfacing walls, floors, and ceilings, improving lighting and HVAC systems,
              and installing a new cage washer. Upon completion, the renovated facility will
              increase efficiency and meet federal requirements. The upgraded facility will
              assist the faculty as they attempt to meet the research and educational goals
              of the University in the recruitment of new faculty and students pursuing 
              careers in psychology.  As an urban university, Temple's Department of
              Psychology  provides a route for under-represented minorities and women to
              obtain advanced degrees in science. This project will enhance the Department's
              endeavors to sustain research excellence and training for future scientists in
              the next century.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
