Title       : Fluorescent DNA Sequencer with Robotic Molecular Biology Workstation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1997     
File        : a9602945

Award Number: 9602945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159115             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald L. Forrest   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beckman Res Inst Cty Hope
	      1500 E. Duarte Road
	      Duarte, CA  910103000    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested to purchase an ABI PRISMTM 377 DNA sequencer  to  upgrade
              the DNA sequencing shared resource facility in the Beckman  Research Institute
              at the City of Hope Medical Center. The requested  equipment will provide
              increased output in both the number of samples  sequenced and in the amount of
              data derived from each sample.  The DNA  sequencing facility currently supports
              30 44 investigators with a  variety of basic interests and novel techniques in
              the field of  molecular biology. For example, the requested equipment will
              support  projects involved in:    DNA damage and the repair of the damage plays
              an important role in  disease and aging. A project to understand the mechanisms
              of W induced  damage and repair in human cells is underway. Gene products that 
              interact with DNA repair proteins are being studied using ligated  mediated
              PCR. Their role in binding to DNA domains will require the use  of DNA
              sequencing.    Oxygen free radicals play an important role in disease and
              aging. They  damage DNA and proteins and they alter gene regulation. Studies on
              the  structure, function and regulation of proteins that modulate free 
              radicals are in progress. Glutathione peroxidase, carbonyl reductase,  and
              DT-diaphorase are being studied to determine their role in free  radical
              modulation, mutagenesis, carcinogenesis and drug metabolism.  The cloning,
              expression, and structural analyses of these genes in  tissue culture and in
              transgenic animals will require the use of the  DNA sequencing equipment.   
              The Major histocompatibility region in chickens encodes for resistance  to
              several diseases. A family of genes within the Mhc is being studied  to
              understand the mechanisms by which resistance to disease occurs.  Polymorphic
              expression of genes in the Mhc is a key feature in  vertebrates. The reason for
              this polymorphic expression is not known in  humans. The chicken offers a model
              system to understand the  relationship between gene expression and disease.
              Characterization of  the genes with in the Mhc will require extensive DNA
              sequencing.    Cyclic GMP-inhibited cAMP phosphodiesterase (PDE3) has been
              extensively  studied for its important role in the antilipolytic action of
              insulin  in adipocytes. Recent data has shown that two different PDE3 genes 
              exist which are expressed in a tissue specific manner. One of these  genes is
              expressed in the cardiovascular system and may contribute to  diabetic vascular
              disease. The characterization, regulation and  structure of the genomic gene
              will be analyzed using the DNA sequencer.    The role of X chromosome
              inactivation, DNA methylation, and chromatin  structure will be studied in
              genomic imprinting. Genomic imprinting  results in the selective expression of
              either the maternal or paternal  alleles of a gene. The mechanisms of genomic
              imprinting are presently  unknown; however, genomic imprinting is implicated in
              several diseases  leading to mental retardation, cancer and behavioral
              problems. A basic  understanding of the mechanism(s) of genomic imprinting is
              essential to  understanding the timing and mechanisms of gene regulation during
               embryonic development. A new improved procedure for sequencing  methylated DNA
              will be used with the requested equipment.  Other projects types that will need
              the requested equipment include  protein-nucleic acid interactions, alternative
              splicing, ribozyme  construction and characterization, tissue specific
              transcriptional and  post translational regulation in Drosophila, the role of
              the  transcription factor TWIST in regulating early bone development, the 
              structure-function of genetically engineered antibodies, and the  regulation of
              aromatase in estrogen-dependent breast cancer.
