Title       : Exploring a Low-energy Frontier of Particle Physics Using Methods of
               Experimental Gravitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9602494

Award Number: 9602494
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $763380             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric G. Adelberger eric@npl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Blayne R. Heckel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1243      GRAVITATIONAL EXPERIMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goals of this project are to make more precise and more  general tests of
              the Universality of Gravitational Free  Fall.  The standard, classical theory
              of gravity, General  Relativity, incorporates the Universality of Free Fall as
              an  exact statement about gravity.  It is an experimental  question, however,
              if this principle holds exactly.  There  are two strong reasons for testing the
              principle.  First,  General Relativity is not a quantum mechanical theory and 
              some current ideas about possible quantum-mechanical  theories of gravity
              predict violations of the Universality  of Free Fall arising from additional
              `gravitational` scalar  or vector fields.  Second, by searching for violations
              of a  symmetry that classical gravity holds to be exact, one can  probe for
              new, ultra-weak, non-gravitational forces.  Because it is impossible to shield
              a gravitational field,  such ultra-weak forces would normally lie hidden
              `underneath  gravity`.  But any new force is expected to violate the 
              Universality of Free Fall and so can be detected even if it  is much weaker
              than gravity.  The proposed tests require the continued development of 
              improved instruments for measuring tiny differences in the  accelerations of
              different materials attracted toward the  earth, toward a massive Uranium
              laboratory source, or to  astronomical structures.  Three different
              torsion-balance  instruments will be employed.  Two of them, developed under 
              previous NSF support, will be upgraded for the proposed  tests, and a new more
              sensitive instrument will be  constructed.  The combination of these
              instruments will  permit tests of the Universality of Free Fall over length 
              scales ranging from 1 cm to infinity.  In particular, it  will be possible to
              test whether gravity is the dominant  long-range force between ordinary mater
              and the cosmological  dark matter; and, in conjunction with existing data on
              lunar  laser-ranging, to make a `loop-hole free` test of the  gravitational
              properties of gravitational binding energy.  This last test will be performed
              by comparing the  accelerations toward the sun of `scale models` of the Moon 
              and the Earth's crust.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
