Title       : Active Touch: Vibrissal Tactile Discrimination in the Rat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9602101

Award Number: 9602101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda M. Kennedy                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181732             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Carvell gcarvell+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Simons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Sensitivity to touch is known to be different between "passive" touch when
              an object simply touches the skin, and "active" touch when an object is felt by
              moving touch.  We know very little about the mechanisms in the brain that
              underlie these differences.  This project exploits a novel approach recently
              developed using rodent whiskers as a model system.  Rodents actively explore
              surfaces using characteristic "whisking" movements of their array of whiskers
              called facial vibrissae.  Recent work has shown that texture discrimination by
              rats using their vibrissae is excellent, comparable to primates using their
              fingertips, and that the behavioral strategies for discrimination are similar. 
              The rat whisker system is particularly well-suited for study because a lot is
              known about its elegant anatomical orderly projection to the brain, and because
              the whiskers are easily accessible for harmless manipulation and observation. 
              This project uses a novel combination of animal training, computer-assisted
              movement analysis, and electrophysiological recordings from single nerve cells
              to investigate this active touch.  The relationship between whisking contact,
              activity in peripheral neurons and activity in central cortical neurons is
              compared, and the role of multiple whiskers and of sensory experience is
              explored.     Results from this work will have an impact beyond somatosensory
              neuroscience toward better understanding how animals use actively driven
              sensory behavior in general, how sensory experience and learning enhance
              discrimination, and more generally how the brain acquires and processes
              information.
