Title       : Renovation of Molecular Beam Epitaxy Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9602336

Award Number: 9602336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Schaff schaff@iiiv.tn.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lester F. Eastman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Cornell University is the recipient of ARI funding for the renovation of the
              Molecular Beam Expitaxy (MBE) facility into a class 1000 clean room.  Located
              in the Department of Electrical Engineering, and housed in Phillips Hall, this
              laboratory is presently dedicated to compound semiconductor research using MBE
              for material synthesis.  The facility plays an integral role in engineering,
              and serves several departments in addition to other Universities. Compound
              semiconductor wafers from the facility are used for research into faster
              transistors, improved semiconductor lasers and new understanding of fundamental
              semiconductor physics. Interdisciplinary research is expanding due to thrusts
              into III-nitride semiconductors. The operation of the MBE machines is limited
              by the lack of proper temperature and humidity control, and poor air
              cleanliness due to irreparable failure of air-handling equipment and improper
              facility design and operation. Once renovated, the MBE facility will impact
              research by improving wafer yield, and higher material quality that will permit
              collaborations with industry that are presently not feasible. User safety will
              improve by removing the conditions of heat and humidity that currently serve as
              a dangerous diversion in a laboratory where hazardous chemical and machines are
              used.  Outdated facilities, including antiquated fume hood and safety showers,
              will be replaced and ADA compliant. The renovated research space will house
              more students and visiting scientists, and will be able to accommodate the
              growth in undergraduate research  and new graduate level research courses. This
              project will enhance the strong reputation of Cornell's MBE program as it
              continues to attract the interest of scientists throughout the country who need
              access to compound semiconductor materials to meet stringent research
              requirements.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
