Title       : Quantized Fields in Nonlinear Dielectric Media: A Microscopic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9602515

Award Number: 9602515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Hillery mhillery@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,5912,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9602515  Hillery     This is a collaborative project between Professor Mark  
              Hillery of the Department of Physics, Hunter College, and   Professor Peter
              Drummond of the Department of Physics,   The University of Queensland,
              Australia.  Over a three-   year period, Professor Hillery will make several
              trips to   Brisbane to work with Dr. Drummond on the study of the   propagation
              of the quantized electromagnetic field in   nonlinear dielectric media.  This
              is important from a   fundamental point of view because it provides an example 
               of an experimentally accessible quantum field theory.   From a practical point
              of view, the quantum noise in   these fields must be understood if they are to
              be used   for long distance communication in optical fibers as has   been
              proposed.  The models which have been used to treat   these phenomena are
              either phenomenological or based on   the quantization of the macroscopic
              Maxwell equations.  A   microscopic approach to the description of quantized  
              fields in a medium of two-level atoms has recently been   developed at Hunter
              College.  Dispersion, which can be a   problem in a macroscopic approach to
              quantized fields in   dielectric media, is naturally incorporated into this  
              theory.  This description will be extended to a medium of   3-level atoms. 
              This will allow the theory to encompass   nonlinear processes, such as
              parametric down conversion,   which were not described by the 2-level atom
              medium.  The   counterpart investigators will concentrate primarily on   the
              description of how a field propagates from free space   through a medium and
              emerges again into free space.  The   study of finite media should allow the
              collaborators to   examine the input-output theories which are used in  
              quantum optics at a more fundamental level and to address   some of the
              problems which arise in them. The analytical   and numerical techniques which
              the Australian counterpart   has developed on the macroscopic level will
              complement   what the principal investigator and  his colleagues have  
              developed at Hunter College on the microscopic model.
