Title       : Japan STA Program: Dynamical Robotic Walking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1996   
File        : a9602490

Award Number: 9602490
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Swanson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0522300   Man-Machine Communication               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9602490  Swanson    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency
              of  Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Peter Swanson at the 
              Mechanical Engineering Laboratory (MEL), Tsukuba, Japan.  Dr.  Swanson will
              work with Dr. Tatsuo Arai, Director of the  Autonomous Machinery Division,
              Department of Robotics, on a  research project entitled, "Dynamical Robot
              Walking."    The proposed research will explore the use of passive components 
              in dynamic robot walking.  Current robot walking strategies are  mostly
              statically stable:  the robot could stop at any time  without falling over. 
              However, recent advances in dynamics and  biology suggest that passive
              components such as springs and  dampers assist in dynamically stable walking
              without requiring  unreasonable control effort or static stability.  In the
              course  of the research project at the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory,  one
              of the existing legged robots at the site will be modified  with passive
              components, and a control strategy will be developed  to allow dynamical robot
              walking without static stability  constraints.  The new dynamical walking
              behavior will improve the  robot's ability to function in an autonomous manner
              and its  ability to interact dynamically with their environment will be 
              improved.  ***
