Title       : Workshop on Plant Growth, in Lewes, Delaware, on August 18-21, 1996.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9602184

Award Number: 9602184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Boyer boyer@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9602184  Boyer  This award provides support for a workshop to evaluate our
              understanding of how plants enlarge.  The enlargement of their structure is one
              of the most fundamental activities of plants: roots elongate as part of
              seedling establishment, stems extend and array leaves in the light,
              reproductive structures enlarge and allow gametes to move and fuse.  The
              central nature of this process has attracted considerable scientific attention.
               It is agreed from a structural point of view that plants enlarge by producing
              new cells and enlarging recently produced ones.  During new cell production,
              enlargement occurs as the cells approximately double in size before they divide
              again.  After division, cells that do not re-divide generally continue to
              enlarge and often become 10 to 15 times as large as they were originally. This,
              the increase in size of plant organs consists mostly of the enlargement of
              individual cells particularly after division, and the shape of the organs is
              determined mostly by the directionality of this enlargement.  The rate of
              enlargement controls how rapidly the plant grows.  Despite its central
              importance, we know little about the mechanisms underlying cell enlargement. 
              The goals for the workshop are to explore how a conceptional framework could be
              built.  Rather than an assessment of all the work in the field, this workshop
              will be devoted to where productive effort might be placed in the future.  In
              order to stimulate work, the organizer will ask one or two colleagues to join
              in writing a summary of the workshop.  A summary will be published in the
              Newsletter or The Plant Cell sponsored by the American Society of Plant
              Physiologists.  It is hoped that this would be only a first step toward
              increasing the interest in how plants enlarge and how the rate is controlled. 
              The long-term goal will be to make predictions of rate and size more easily
              than is now possible, which will make alternations to plant growth more easily
              accomplished.
