Title       : Goverance in an Information Age (Values, Structures and Alternatives for Public
               Agencies in Cyberspace)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1998   
File        : a9602007

Award Number: 9602007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128622             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris C. Demchak demchak@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In dramatic numbers, U.S. public organizations are embracing modern networked
              communications such as the World Wide Web.  In the process, they create the
              foundations for governance in an information age.  The U.S. public and its
              political leaders expect that these expensive changes will produce more open
              and more effective government.  Under some organizational configurations, these
              values may conflict however, and agencies may be forced inadvertently to
              emphasize one over the other, or to fail at both.  Currently little is known
              about the real operational effects of these new technologies in specifically
              public organizations, which may develop undesirable and difficult to change
              path-dependent directions.  U.S. policy makers and public managers need more
              comparative knowledge about the relationship between values, structures and
              environments in public organizations with networked, computer-mediated
              operations.  In particular, it is important to address two questions.  First,
              under what conditions of use are networked computer-mediated operations (CMOs)
              strongly correlated with some structures and values and not others?  Second,
              what structural and procedural alternatives exist for public managers to assure
              acceptable levels of both effectiveness and open government while implementing
              networked operations?  Using a modified organizational configuration approach
              enriched by focused policy analysis, this research will investigate an emerging
              natural experiment, the diffusion of networked CMOs across a wide set of public
              agencies.  Using the World Wide Web and field research, the project will
              develop a broad database which charts the diffusion and variations of
              structures, value hierarchies, and environments in network technologies across
              a wide set of public agencies in the westernized nations.  The project will
              also develop in-depth analyses of four to five exemplar agencies in
              appropriately selected countries, as they implement these networked
              computer-mediated operations.  Results will be presented in scholarly articles
              as well as in presentations to agency officials.  During and beyond the life of
              the project, the database will be continuously available on the Web for policy
              makers, public managers, and scholars pursuing these and other questions.  The
              work provides a foundation for near and long term public management research on
              the transformation and consequences of the information age for public
              governance.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
