Title       : Renovation of the North Pod Laboratory of Vivian Hall to Create the Center for
               Nanoscale Structure, Processes, and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1999   
File        : a9602695

Award Number: 9602695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Kaplan kaplan@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon Park  (Principal Investigator former)
              Steven R. Nutt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anupam Madhukar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Daniel Dapkus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aristides A. G. Requicha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Southern California is the recipient of ARI funds for the
              renovation of Vivian Hall to create the Center for Nanoscale Structure,
              Processes and Materials.  Constructed in 1965, the building formerly housed the
              Civil Engineering Laboratory, and an Anechoic Chamber used by Aerospace
              Engineering.  With the consolidation of Civil Engineering in another building,
              the North Pod of Vivian is now available to form the Center. Four laboratories
              supporting six professors, 25 graduate students, and eight post docs, whose
              synergistic and multidisciplinary research and training is connected through a
              common  theme  of nanoparticles, nanostructures, and nanophase materials, will
              be relocated.  The four laboratories to be relocated on the ground floor of
              Vivian Hall are: the Laboratory for Molecular Robotics, Laboratory for
              Engineered Nanostructures, Compound Semiconductor Laboratory for Nanostructure
              Photonic Devices, and Laboratory for Nanoscale Composites.  Current research
              programs are housed in several buildings on campus lacking supporting
              infrastructure necessary for conducting research. Space in Vivian Hall is
              ideally suited for this type of research because it provides a close to 
              vibration-free environment.  Possessing a high-bay area will permit the
              accommodation of instruments that are over eight feet tall. Establishing this
              facility will allow the School of Engineering to move towards more innovative
              research and education in new multi-and interdisciplinary focus fields.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
