Title       : Renovation of Gunter Hall Environmental Science Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1997      
File        : a9602743

Award Number: 9602743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $950000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Conrad Best cbest@frostburg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Howard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry W. Bullamore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth D. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Frostburg State University
	      East College Avenue
	      Frostburg, MD  21532    301/689-4000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Frostburg State University (FSU) is the recipient of ARI funds for the
              renovation of Gunter Hall.  FSU, a rural Comprehensive I institution, is
              located in mountainous western Maryland serving Appalachian residents from
              Maryland, West Virginia, and Pennsylvania,  and minority students from the
              Baltimore-Washington, DC metropolitan area.  As part of the eleven member
              University of Maryland System,  FSU has the distinction of being second  in the
              proportion of its students who succeed in doctoral studies.  The
              administration, recognizing the need to maintain its position, is committed to
              provide modern laboratories to facilitate the professional development of
              science faculty, and enhance training programs for the next generation of
              scientists.  FSU, with assistance from the National Science Foundation, will
              provide resources to renovate Gunter Hall.  Constructed in 1960, the facility
              originally housed the university's dining hall and student center.  As part of
              the overall facilities improvement plan, Gunter Hall when refurbished will
              become home to the Geography Department and the focus of environmental science
              programs that are currently dispersed among five buildings. Renovations will
              encompass: reconfiguring space, improving ventilation and utility systems, and
              installing fixed equipment.  Upon completion the following research programs
              will be enhanced: Environmental Geology and Hydrology, Soils Research,
              Environmental Chemistry, Engineering and Cartography, Forest Ecology, Mammalian
              and Avian Ecology, Aquatic Ecology, and Aquaculture and Toxicology. This
              project will unify students and faculty engaged in environmental science
              studies,  establish research collaborations, and increase the number of
              students pursuing environmental science as a career.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
