Title       : Replacement, Renovation, and Consolidation of Research and Research Laboratories
               in Biology and Physics Departments at Millersville University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9602669

Award Number: 9602669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward C. Shane edward.shane@millersville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert C. Hoffman  (Principal Investigator former)
              Daniel H. Yocom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Nolan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur C. Dickinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Stollenwerk  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3024

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Millersville University, located in Lancaster County, PA, is the recipient of
              ARI funds for the replacement, renovation, and consolidation of research and
              research training facilities for biology and physics. Current space is not
              designed for research and training activities and is dispersed in several
              locations on campus.  Despite these conditions faculty and students have
              actively engaged in independent research projects.  The University is committed
              to improving the research infrastructure on campus and is constructing a new
              science building.   As part of this infrastructure initiative, funds from the
              ARI Program will be used renovate space in the existing Roddy Science Center to
              house research focusing on ecology and plant biology, and experimental work in
              physics emphasizing gas effusion. In addition to reconfiguring space, fixed
              equipment consisting of fume hoods, growth and environmental chambers, and an
              autoclave will be installed. This project will enable senior personnel to
              function as a single unit in one building, thus increasing collegiality,
              communication and cooperation in all aspects of academic life, especially in
              research.  Renovations will provide for the sharing of instrumentation and
              facilitate new areas of research that are not feasible with present facilities.
              Modernized laboratories will comply with ADA and safety codes providing a
              conducive environment for research scholars to perform investigative work.  In
              addition to providing new research opportunities for all interested in pursuing
              research,  students who never considered science as a career option may be
              attracted to the field by observing research in progress.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
