Title       : South East Advanced Technology Education Center for Communications Technology
               (SEATEC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1998     
File        : a9602401

Award Number: 9602401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449594             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sydney U. Rogers rogers_s@nsti.tec.tn.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria L. Bogaty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neal F. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Barrott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ted M. Washington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Collin T. Ballance  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marguerite Jackson-Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ray McKnight  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Margie J. Hobbs  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nashville State Tech Inst
	      120 White Bridge Rd
	      Nashville, TN  372094515    615/353-3236

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Tennessee Exemplary Faculty for Telecommunications Technology                 To
              prepare faculty to create a work-based learning environment that supports the
              telecommunications industry, a consortium of six community colleges in
              Tennessee, together with industrial, four-year college and secondary school
              partners, implement a professional development project.  The project creates a
              network and a process that encourages faculty from different disciplines to
              develop and disseminate a communications technology curriculum framework.   The
              faculty obtain an  understanding of curriculum development techniques and
              practices.  The teams, at each college, consist of seven to ten members
              including faculty from different departments and representatives from industry,
              four year universities and secondary schools.   The teams encourage the faculty
              to consider cross disciplinary needs of the curriculum and provide direct
              access to industrial and four year college input.  In addition, the faculty
              members are provided industrial internships.  The outcomes include a system
              with strong linkages among secondary schools, colleges, industry, and
              government within the communications technology discipline that educates
              students in the future needs of the industries served.
