Title       : Instrumentation for Experimental Economics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1996    
File        : a9602151

Award Number: 9602151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon L. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,1327,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Vernon Smith will purchase 20 90
              mHz Pentium `IBM type compatible` micro computers, 27 16 MB RAM upgrades for
              existing machines and a portable high resolution projection system to upgrade
              and expand the University of Arizona Economic Science Laboratory. Dr Smith is a
              leader in experimental economics and he and his collaborators have worked to
              develop experimental situations in which human subjects make choices which have
              real potential economic rewards. Computerization has made it feasible to design
              various real time market institutions, to study their performance in the
              laboratory and thus gain insight into how markets function and how humans
              respond. Beginning about a decade ago laboratory experiments started to explore
              the performance of `smart` computer assisted markets. In these experimental
              markets the messages (bids) of decentralized agents are processed using various
              optimization algorithms applied to batches of bids or to bids arriving in real
              time. This has greatly expanded the demands on hardware capacity and software
              sophistication. As these experimental markets have become technologically more
              complex, and demanding of system design and support, they have also become more
              demanding on the ability of human subjects to articulate rational message
              responded based on judgment and calculation. Consequently the next generation
              of experimental markets will require `expert system` computer support at each
              station for the decision maker(s) at that station. The computers provided in
              this award will make such an advance possible.  In addition to increasing
              understanding of principles which underlie human economic behavior,
              experimental economics serves a number of practical functions. It helps
              regulators and government officials to design systems to allocate scarce
              resources such as radio wave space or airline gates and to design effective
              bidding processes. At Arizona the programs developed will also be incorporated
              into the teaching of economics on both a local and worldwide basis.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
