Title       : Renovation of Research Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1996 
File        : a9602827

Award Number: 9602827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385824             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erwin Fleissner fleissner.genectr.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shirley Raps  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Hunter College, the largest senior college of the City University of New York,
              is a public urban institution with a diverse student body.  The College plays a
              vital role in providing a quality education, both graduate and undergraduate
              for first generation college students in New York City.  One of the College's
              objectives is to increase the number of minority faculty who can serve as role
              models, since a large percentage of the student body consists of women and
              minorities. The Department of Biology has been very instrumental in developing
              young research scholars, and is emerging as a center of research excellence. In
              order to maintain this momentum, the research capabilities of the faculty must
              be enhanced, and this involves the renovating of laboratories and the creation
              of core facilities.    Funding received from the ARI Program will be used to
              assist Hunter College in this endeavor by renovating a faculty research
              laboratory, and establishing a Bio-Imaging facility for research training in
              the 1940 North Building.  The renovation of existing research and training
              space into an integrated Bio-Imaging facility and research laboratory is
              critical to current research involving studies of the molecular organization
              and the molecular interaction of cellular components, including nucleic
              acid-protein, protein-protein, and protein-ligand interactions.  These underlie
              ongoing studies for gene structure and function, signal transduction, nerve
              regeneration, immune cell differentiation, the cytoskeleton, and
              neuropharmacology.  The facility will  provide a centralized location for the
              consolidation of existing bio-imaging equipment, and will provide a dedicated
              area where students can receive invaluable training by learning modern research
              techniques.  This renovation project, in conjunction with Hunter's
              participation in the NSF Alliance for Minority Participation Program, will 
              contribute to the institution's mission in preparing qualified scientists for
              the 21st century.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
