Title       : U.S.-Austria and Germany Cooperative Research on Electrical Transport in
               Magnetic Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9602192

Award Number: 9602192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Levy levy@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 5955,9161,9179,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Peter Levy and junior members of  his research
              group at New York University to collaborate in solid  state physics research
              with Professor Peter Weinberger and his  research group of the Institute of
              Electrochemistry of the  Technical University of Vienna, Austria.  A third
              member of the  collaboration is Professor I. Mertig of the Technical University
               of Dresden, Germany. .  Through collaboration, they expect to  develop models
              and perform calculations that will provide new  insights into the factors that
              control the magnetotransport  properties of transition-metal magnetic
              multilayers.   While all  three groups are theoretical in their orientation,
              their efforts  are complementary.  The US group is focused on analytical and 
              model calculations while the expertise of the Austrian group lies  in the
              ab-initio calculation of electronic structure, magnetic  and transport
              properties of solids.  Professor Mertig of Dresden  has considerable expertise
              in the application of multiple  scattering theory to the calculation of
              impurity scattering in  ferromagnetic metals.  The `giant magnetoresistance` of
              magnetic multilayers is  interesting both for the fundamental physics needed to
              explain  its origins and for its applicability to emerging computer 
              technologies.  While there is consensus that this effect comes  from the
              magnetic field changing the spin-dependent scattering of  the conduction
              electrons, the there are many unresolved questions  about how this is achieved
              and which are the dominant factors at  different levels of the multiple layers.
               This trilateral  collaboration will address some of those questions, and 
              contribute some of the new understanding of this phenomenon  needed before any
              attempt can be made to manipulate and use it.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
