Title       : Renovation of J. M. Smith Chemistry Building at the University of Memphis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1996   
File        : a9602656

Award Number: 9602656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Cundari tcundari@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry A. Kurtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ying-Sing Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore J. Burkey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Memphis is the recipient of ARI funds for the renovation of
              four research laboratories and two support facilities in the JM Smith Chemistry
              Building.  Built in 1966, research space, originally designated as teaching
              laboratories, has not undergone any repair since that time. Although the space
              is sufficient, it is insufficient in terms of quality space required for
              conducting modern chemical research. Existing labs will be renovated for
              research and research training in computational chemistry and experimental
              chemistry. Support areas will be  modernized for sample preparation and for
              housing spectroscopic equipment.  ARI funds, along with University matching
              funds, will be utilized to upgrade, replace or install fixed equipment to allow
              faculty and students to maximize the utility of the space.  Specific
              improvements include the upgrading of air-handling, communications, electrical,
              and plumbing systems.  A walk-in fume hood will be installed in one laboratory
              to maintain a safe working environment and permit a wider diversity of
              experiments to be performed.  Handicap access to labs will be enhanced as part
              of the renovations.  Research projects to be pursued once renovations are
              completed include: modeling of catalysis, environmental remediation, and
              advanced material synthesis using quantum and classical mechanical methods. 
              Improved infrastructure will support the development and application of new
              computational methods for modeling non-linear optical materials, and support
              research programs engaged in spectroscopic study of chemical systems of
              importance in catalysis and biology, respectively.  This project is consistent
              with the goals  of the Department, by permitting productive faculty and student
              researchers to maintain their current level of scholarly activity. Modernized
              facilities will enhance the research aims of a young and growing department,
              and accommodate for future growth.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
