Title       : Renovation of the Chemistry and Biology Facilities in the Merkert-Tracy Science
               Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  1997    
File        : a9602276

Award Number: 9602276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492122             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis J. Liotta lliotta@stonehill.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria A. Curtin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maura G. Tyrrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Peabody  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra L. McAlister  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stonehill College
	      320 Washington Street
	      Easton, MA  02357    508/565-1069

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Stonehill College, a private undergraduate institution located in
              Massachusetts, and the National Science Foundation will establish a partnership
              to renovate research space in the Merkert-Tracy Science Center.  Constructed 48
              years ago, the building is home to the Departments of Biology and Chemistry and
              is currently unsuitable to support research efforts pursued by faculty and
              students in these areas of science.  Faculty must relocate experiments and
              materials to different rooms that impacts negatively on research and research
              training activities. Existing laboratories are ill-configured, have outdated
              heating and ventilation systems, and are not compliant with ADA regulations.  
              Renovations will consist of reconfiguring space, upgrading the HVAC system, and
              installing casework and fume hoods.  With redesigned laboratories to support
              research, faculty will be able to enhance the quality and quantity of research
              involving the interface of biology and organic chemistry, analytical chemistry,
              molecular biology, environmental biology and population genetics.  Having
              properly configured laboratories, with adequate climate control and
              communication lines, will create a natural science community in an environment
              that is supportive of active, investigative learning.  Improving research and
              training programs in Biology and Chemistry is critical to the success of
              Stonehill's plan to strengthen the sciences.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
