Title       : Project ComTech: A Curriculum in Technology and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9602404

Award Number: 9602404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373927             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Sadler psadler@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The need for innovative, technology education curricula for students at all
              school levels is now well documented. While the calls for reform in the science
              and mathematics communities have resulted in widespread changes in the way
              these subjects are taught. similar calls in the field of technology education
              are just beginning to take effect.   The Science Education Department (SED)
              proposes to develop, over a two-year period, a pilot unit on light
              communication for students in grades seven through ten. The goal of Project
              ComTech is to improve the quality of education for students taking either a
              required or elective course in technology. Specific learning objectives include
              having students: learn and master a limited number of powerful technology and
              science themes; sense the excitement, challenge. and career potential of
              technology; and develop critical thinking and reasoning skills.   Our
              alliance--technology educators, community and four-year colleges, public school
              administrators, private-sector partners, and state and national technology
              education advocates--represents a continuum of stake-holders in technology
              education. Our advisory panel and development team will include representatives
              from all partners. We will draw upon the experiences of our partners and the
              SED's success in curriculum development to complete a discovery-based
              curriculum unit built on contemporary learning theory. When completed, the unit
              will include activities that can be used in classrooms for four to six weeks. A
              teacher resource guide will be prepared for publication and kits of optical and
              electronic parts will be readied for commercial distribution.   We have three
              primary objectives for our evaluation plan: to develop a profile of an `ideal`
              technology activity; to assess changes in students' critical thinking and
              conceptual growth; and to assess changes in classroom teaching strategies of
              field-test teachers.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
