Title       : Biomedical Engineering Technology Program Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9602383

Award Number: 9602383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis Friedman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra Sanders  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Broward Community College
	      225 E Las Olas Boulevard
	      Fort Lauderdale, FL  333012208    305/761-7400

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Broward Community College (BCC) will lead a consortium composed of the U. of
              Miami, Broward County Schools, N. Broward Hospital District, Hewlett Packard,
              Advantage Medical Electronics, Motorola, ABC Computers, Asea Brown Boveri
              Corp., and the Biomedical Engineering Technology (BMET) Advisory Board in
              developing a program in BMET. BCC offers a well-established Electronics
              Engineering Technology program, in existence for more than 28 years, supported
              by industry, and very highly recognized throughout the state of Florida and
              nationally. BCC's electronics program is accredited by the Technology
              Accreditation Commission of the Accreditation Board for Engineering and
              Technology, and received the Secretary of Education's Award for the best
              technical program in the southeastern U. S. in 1992 The target audience will be
              students from public and private high schools, employees of Biomedical
              Engineering companies, and other persons seeking technical training/retraining.
              The goal of the project is to produce qualified Biomedical Engineering
              technicians who will provide a critical link between the clinical application
              and the electronic technology of today's medical equipment. Laboratories and
              laboratory practices will be developed to give the students state-of-the-art
              experiences with a wide range of biomedical equipment. The female principal
              investigator will serve as a role model as she promotes the program in the high
              schools and in industry. A `2+2+2` model will be created that could be
              replicated on a nationwide basis. The first two years will prepare the students
              at the high school level for a smooth transition to the community college
              program. The second two years will provide students with Associate of Science
              degree components with the necessary skills to enter the workplace. In
              addition, interested students will have access to a parallel track with higher
              levels of mathematics and science for a bridge to the final two years of a
              bachelor's degree program at the U. of Miami.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
