Title       : Replacement and Consolidation of Research and Research Training Facilities of
               the Department of Biology, University of New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9602270

Award Number: 9602270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $960000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Gosz  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry L. Yates tyates@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Roger B. Lujan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard L. Snell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Parmenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0602000   Facilities - Replacement                
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Department of Biology at the University of New Mexico is on the threshold
              of an historic advancement in the development of scientific team-approaches to
              multi-disciplinary, complex biological problems.  Over the last decade, faculty
              researchers have developed strategies to address complicated environmental and
              biological problems at local, regional, and national levels.  Having fostered
              an atmosphere for collaborative studies, as evidenced by the successes of the
              Sevilleta Long-Term Ecological Research Program (LTER), and the Museum of
              Southwestern Biology (MSB), the dispersal of researchers and students over
              three buildings has prevented the Department from benefiting from new advances.
                The National Science Foundation and the University of New Mexico will
              establish a partnership to provide a state-of-the-art research center in
              ecology, evolution and systematics.  Funds from the Academic Research
              Infrastructure Program and the State will be used to renovate space needed to
              create a multi-disciplinary program that consolidates the specimen-based
              research materials of the MSB with the ecologically based data of the LTER
              program.  In conjunction to providing the necessary infrastructure, the
              facility will conform to ADA, fire and OSHA standards.  A freezer room, fume
              hoods, and cabinetry will be installed in the renovated laboratories. Upon
              completion, the renovated facility will merge programs within a single
              building, thus raising the capabilities of the biology research group to a
              level that will permit and promote highly sophisticated, integrated analyses of
              complex problems by collaborating teams of scientists.  The facility will be a
              major asset to the department's research training programs, which includes an
              NSF Research Training Grant in Ecological Complexity, a Research Experiences
              for Undergraduates Site Program, and an Undergraduate Mentorships in
              Environmental Biology Program for minority students.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
