Title       : Renovations of Penn State's Intercollege Materials Research Laboratory (IMRL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1996  
File        : a9602694

Award Number: 9602694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Dougherty JXD6@PSUVM.PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9163,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Pennsylvania State University, one of the leading institutions in the
              field of inorganic ceramic materials research, is the recipient of funds from
              the Academic Research Infrastructure Program for the renovation of facilities
              of the Intercollege Materials Research Lab (IMRL). Located on the University
              Park main campus, the Materials  Research Laboratory Building, which houses the
              IMRL,was constructed in 1969 with assistance from the National Science
              Foundation.  Research conducted in the facility is diverse in content and
              scale, having both theoretical and applied investigations, including studies of
              ferroelectric, dielectric, optical, and thermomechanical properties of
              materials. Processing and materials synthesis experiments involve thin film
              deposition, high pressure synthesis, low temperature synthesis, and high
              temperature ceramic processing. The laboratory contains characterization
              facilities with special emphasis on ellipsometry, x-ray power diffraction,
              electron microscopy, and vibrational spectroscopy.  In addition to research in
              the core of materials science, there are many investigations that are
              interdisciplinary in the broadest sense, including design and synthesis of
              materials suitable for the encapsulation and immobilization of nuclear and
              chemical waste and other environmentally related problems.  Current conditions
              of the 27 year old facility makes it difficult for the department to compete in
              world-class materials research. New families of electronic analysis and test
              equipment require environmental controls that are beyond the capabilities of
              the present facility.  Because of environmental constraints, sensitive
              measurement operations have to be suspended several months. Funds will be used
              to install new fume hoods and renovate installations that will provide the
              required ventilation for both research efforts and compliance with OSHA and
              Clean Air Acts.  Research space will be renovated to provide 3-level clean room
              facilities for thin film, tape casting, and screen printing   operations for
              electronic materials.  Upon completion,  the project will enhance the role of
              IMRL as it continues its output of important research results and quality
              graduate students for the future of advanced materials and processing in the
              nation.  The renovations will help the Department maintain research excellence
              into the 21st century.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
