Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Ecological Stoichiometry of Pelagic Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1997     
File        : a9602466

Award Number: 9602466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17300              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Elser j.elser@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0521700   Marine Resources                        
Program Ref : 5983,9169,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9602466  Elser    This award supports U.S.-Japan collaborative research  between
              Dr. James Elser of the Department of Zoology at  Arizona State University and
              Dr. Jotaro Urabe of the Center  for Ecological Research at Kyoto University. 
              Dr. Elser will  be spending four months at Kyoto University in order to 
              develop a new perspective on ecological dynamics, ecological  stoichiometry. 
              Ecological stoichiometry focuses on the  relative elemental composition of
              participants in ecological  interactions in ecosystems.  Research in this area
              has  recently been applied in novel ways to a variety of  ecological phenomena
              in pelagic ecosystems, such as effects  of food-web structure on N and P
              availability in lakes,  links between consumer-driven N:P recycling and
              particulate  N:P and consumer N:P, stoichiometric constraints on animal  growth
              and production, contrasts between marine and  freshwater ecosystems, and the
              evolutionary ecology and cell  biology of body elemental composition.  Focus
              will be placed  on techniques and conceptual/theoretical frameworks for  study
              of the ecological stoichiometry of pelagic ecosystems.  The visit will build on
              the model that research cooperation  rather than competition yields synergistic
              benefits that  serve to advance understanding at an accelerated rate.    The
              U.S. researcher brings to this collaboration his  knowledge on large-scale
              field settings, including whole-  lake experimentation and patterns across
              large geochemical  and hydrodynamic gradients.  This is complemented by 
              expertise in the area of laboratory plankton culture and  physiological studies
              of growth by the Japanese researcher.  The project is expected to produce
              internationally  comparable data suitable for interpreting how stoichiometric 
              processes regulate ecosystem function across the world's  lakes.  This data
              will have direct application to areas of  domestic and international concern
              including fisheries  decline, eutrophication, loss of biodiversity and global 
              climate change.
