Title       : Instrumentation for Landscape-Oriented Human Origins Research at Olduvai Gorge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9602478

Award Number: 9602478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51433              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Blumenschine rjb@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fidelis T. Masao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,1327,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Robert Blumenschine and Fidelis
              Masao will purchase a new four-wheel drive vehicle to supplement existing
              vehicles used by their large, multidisciplinary Olduvai research project field
              team. They will also acquire a mirror stereoscope for interpretation of
              large-scale color aerial photographs to be obtained in the course of 1996
              research as well as a desktop mapping software and associated hardware for the
              production of high resolution topographic maps from digitized aerial
              photographs. For several years this team has conducted archaeological research
              at this site in northern Tanzania. This area has yielded important hominid
              fossils as well as paleontological and cultural remains and the goal of the
              research is to reconstruct the prehistoric landscape at just under 2 million
              years ago and determine how early hominids distributed their activities over
              it. The team has followed a distinct geological horizon in lower Bed II which
              represents a limited period of time and excavated small test units at carefully
              selected intervals both to determine variation in landscape and the pattern of
              hominid use of it. Because of the large size of the field team and the isolated
              and rough terrain dependable four wheel drive vehicles are necessary. Likewise
              an accurate map derived from aerial photographs will provide an essential basic
              research tool.  The research itself is important because it will shed important
              light on how early hominids behaved and help to determine the factors which
              shaped development of this species. The work will also yield new approaches to
              landscape analysis and the resultant techniques will be applicable in many
              archaeological situations in many parts of the world.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
