Title       : Instrumentation of New York University's Politics Data Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9602488

Award Number: 9602488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37973              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell Hardin hardin@is2.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander A. Schuessler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,1327,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Russell Hardin and Alexander 
              Schuessler will purchase a Sun Ultra 1 workstation, Model 170E with a 167 Mhz
              Ultra SPARC Processor for use by the Political Science Department at New York
              University. They will also acquire relevant software and the video machines and
              monitor required to perform specific experiments. This instrumentation will be
              used most immediately for two research projects. The first involves the role of
              public opinion in further shaping public opinion. In other words, is an
              individual's opinion influenced by the reported opinions of others? Public
              opinion specialists have long assumed that the publication of poll results and
              of other public opinion information in the media will in itself to some extent
              determine public opinion. While this claim is frequently made and agreed upon,
              social scientists have not been able to actually provide empirical tests to
              substantiate it. Since public opinion in this case constitutes both a dependent
              and independent variable, such a question is very difficult to address. Drs.
              Hardin and Schuessler have devised an experimental protocol in which subjects
              will be exposed to a controlled body of information as well as other's
              evaluations of this information; through the manipulation of relevant variables
              will be possible to collect relevant experimental data. A second project
              examines the impact of political regimes and political institutions on economic
              performance using a database of 135 countries between 1950 and 1990. The
              question to be addressed is whether democracy in the political realm, as well
              as its particular institutional arrangements, fosters or hinders economic
              performance and economic growth.  The impact of the instrumentation extends
              beyond these two immediate projects. It work with involve graduate students and
              thus serve a training function. Both projects will play a direct and
              significant role in the development of graduate and undergraduate curricula and
              the instrumentation will raise the level of ongoing statistical research by
              students and faculty who use social science data.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
