Title       : Renovation of Biology Research and Research Training Facilities at Loyola
               Marymount University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1998  
File        : a9602652

Award Number: 9602652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catharine McElwain mmcelwai@lmumail.lmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Marymount Univ
	      7900 Loyola Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  90045    213/642-2700

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Loyola Marymount University, located in Los Angels, CA, is the recipient of
              ARI funds for the renovation of selected biology research and training
              laboratories in the Seaver Hall of Science. Erected in 1963, the building is
              the principal laboratory building on campus, which houses the Departments of
              Biology, Chemistry and Biochemistry, and Physics.  No improvements have been
              made since it was built and many infrastructure systems and equipment, original
              to the facility, have reached their life span.  Poorly designed laboratories do
              not provide enough space for large instrumentation required for research
              activities.  Therefore securing equipment in small spaces create crowding
              conditions that are inefficient and potentially unsafe.  To rectify the
              problems, the National Science Foundation and Loyola Marymount University will
              jointly provide funds to modernize research and research training space for the
              Department of Biology.  The renovations are part of a major effort to enhance
              the laboratory-based research environment and expand student research training
              in the biological sciences.  The project will maximize the use of limited
              available space by establishing laboratories which can be shared by faculty
              whose research programs have common equipment needs and fundamental
              similarities in approach.  Renovations will include the reconfiguration of
              existing space, the installation of new fume hoods and laboratory benches, and
              the upgrade of the stockroom and preparation room.  Once completed, a shared
              genetics research facility, and a shared plant biology research facility will
              be created.  The increase in available research space and the increased
              efficiency of space is expected to significantly increase the productivity of
              research-active faculty and improve the quality and quantity of research
              training available in the Biology Department.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
