Title       : U.S.-Bulgarian Cooperative Research: Metastable States of Exotic Helium Atoms
               and Delayed Annihilation of Antiprotons in Helium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1996       
File        : a9602189

Award Number: 9602189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Krzysztof Szalewicz szalewic@brahms.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,5958,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      INT-96  Szalewicz    This U.S.-Bulgaria Cooperative Research award will
              study "Metastable States of Exotic Helium Atoms and Delayed Annihilation of
              Antiprotons in Helium."  The principal researchers are Dr. Krzysztof Szalewicz
              of the University of Delaware and Dr. Dimitre D. Bakalov of the Institute for
              Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences.  The
              purpose of the project is to provide a high accuracy of ab initio quantum
              mechanical description of the metastable states of antiprotonic helium and of
              the phenomenon of delayed annihilation of antiprotons in helium.  The project
              will give precise theoretical values for the energy levels of the few-body
              bound systems that are formed when stopping negative muons or antiprotons in
              helium, as well as the rates of various transitions (Auger, radiative, and
              laser stimulated) between these levels.  The Coulomb energy levels of the
              muonic and antiprotonic helium-like atom will be calculated with a relative
              accuracy of 10 to the -7 using variational methods.  The relativistic and
              quantum electrodynamics corrections -- including the fine and hyperfine
              splitting -- will be evaluated in the first order of perturbation theory.  The
              Zeeman splitting of the levels in external homogeneous magnetic field of
              intensity up to 10 to the 4th Gauss will also be evaluated.  Finally, the
              effect of molecular clusters will be estimated.  This work should answer very
              important current questions about antimatter which could not be accomplished
              without this collaboration.    This research in physics and astronomy fulfills
              the program objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and
              Bulgaria to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong
              mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and
              mutuality of benefit.      ***  ??
