Title       : U.S.- Egypt Cooperative Research: Particle Dynamics and Jet Noise in Two-Phase
               Supersonic Nozzles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1996      
File        : a9602128

Award Number: 9602128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Awatef A. Hamed ahamed@uceng.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Widen Tabakoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 5944,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award supports a collaborative research project between Dr.
              Awatef A. Hamed and Dr. Widen Tabakoff, both professors at the Department of
              Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics at the University of
              Cincinnati, with Dr. Reda Mankbadi, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at
              Cairo University in Egypt.  The research deals with the particle dynamics and
              jet noise of gas-particle flows in supersonic nozzles.  The U.S. team will
              conduct experimental studies and develop models for simulating the particle
              dynamics and their interactions with the high Reynolds number flow through the
              convergent-divergent nozzle.  The Egyptian scientist will develop the
              techniques for calculating the noise from the ensuing supersonic particle-flow
              jet.  Scope:  This project involves collaboration of a U.S. experimental fluid
              mechanics team with an Egyptian expert in computational fluid dynamics and
              acoustics research.  The complementarity in this cooperative research is
              expected to be beneficial to the two sides and should lead to a better research
              output.  Both teams have, independently, done extensive work in the field, with
              very strong records of publications.  This project is to have them combine
              their skills, competence, and facilities to advance the knowledge in an area of
              great importance in aerospace engineering, and in environmental engineering in
              various industries.  The beneficiaries in advances in this field include, in
              part, designers and manufacturers of aircraft engines, ground-based gas
              turbines and other propulsion and power plant systems.  This award is being
              funded jointly by the Division of International Programs and the Division of
              Chemical and Transport Systems.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
