Title       : Renovation of the Romberg Tiburon Center for Environmental Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9602721

Award Number: 9602721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1586944            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alissa J. Arp aarp@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Romberg Tiburon Center for Environmental Studies  is a marine laboratory
              operated by San Francisco State University.  The Center is the only academic
              research facility on San Francisco Bay, and one of the largest estuaries in the
              United States. Primarily a graduate facility, the Center's research mission is
              aimed toward a fundamental understanding of the physical and biological
              processes of the San Francisco Bay and its surrounding environments.   Current
              research projects, being conducted by  the Center's eleven senior research
              scientists, range from detoxification mechanisms of estuarine invertebrates to
              studies of bacterioplankton in Antarctica.   Presently research is conducted in
              the main laboratory of Building 36 that was constructed approximately 50 years
              ago.  The antiquated infrastructure is so deficient that  the laboratory cannot
              adequately support research and research training activities.  To rectify the
              inadequacies, the Center  will embark upon a renovation project to modernize
              the facility.   In order to accomplish this  goal, funding from the Academic
              Research Infrastructure Program, combined with resources from the San Francisco
              State University, will be used to carry out a comprehensive renovation of the
              Center.  Specifically, NSF funds will be used for Phase I of the project  that
              entails  the complete renovation of the first floor. General refurbishments 
              will consist of:  upgrading  the physical plant, improving vertical
              circulation, and bringing  the facility  in compliance with safety and ADA
              regulations.   Enhancements  to individual research laboratories  will include
              utility upgrades,  improved emergency egress, and the installation of new
              counters  and fixed equipment.  Upon completion, the new facility will enable
              scientists to conduct  state-of-the-art research, and promote the growth of the
              Center into a leading environmental and educational institution.  Modernized
              facilities will allow researchers  at the Tiburon Center to continue their work
              on the complex biological, chemical, and physical environments of estuaries, 
              and will serve to help ensure the future recruitment of quality senior staff
              and students.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
