Title       : Characterizing Uncertainty in Coupled Deterministic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1999       
File        : a9602201

Award Number: 9602201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin J. Green green@ocean.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry T. Valentine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1317,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9602201  Green  This study will investigate a method for characterizing
              uncertainty in coupled mechanistic models.  In order to study the possible
              impacts of global climate change on a living system, it seems intuitively
              obvious that investigators should pursue models which are well grounded in the
              science underlying the system. This is because by exploring the possible
              effects of climate change, one is necessarily extrapolating beyond the range of
              the data. Hence there is little reason to believe predictions from empirical,
              data-interpolation models. An unfortunate consequence of relying on models
              developed in accord with scientific understanding of the system is that it is
              often problematic to place any sort of confidence bounds on the estimates, or
              provide measures of the uncertainty of the estimates. Since the estimates are
              almost surely biased, this is a serious problem. This project will address this
              problem and demonstrate a solution by means of a case study, in which two
              mechanistic models will be linked, and estimates of the uncertainty of the
              outputs will be provided.  Most current work on global change involves the use
              of coupled mechanistic models. Raftery et al. (1995) have presented a method of
              characterizing uncertainty for mechanistic simulation models. This project will
              extend their method to coupled models. This will be accomplished via a case
              study involving MAESTRO, a carbon flux model, and Pipestem, a carbon balance
              forest growth model. The project team will specifically study the growth of
              loblolly pine stands under several scenarios for atmospheric carbon dioxide and
              weather. The result will be estimates of loblolly pine stand development under
              the assumed scenarios complete with statistically defensible measures of the
              uncertainty of the estimates. The latter are unavailable with current methods.
              This approach to characterizing uncertainty in coupled mechanistic models
              should be readily generalizable to other integrated assessments of potential
              global change.
