Title       : Improvement of the Seawater System for the University of Guam Marine Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1999  
File        : a9602530

Award Number: 9602530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kendra L. Daly                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174390             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Richmond richmond@uog9.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven S. Amesbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Guam
	      UOG Station
	      Agana, GU  96910    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The University of Guam Marine Laboratory will expand and  upgrade the seawater
              system in support of the growing demand  for space to support research by both
              resident faculty and  students as well as visiting investigators.  Prior 
              facilities improvements have included an upgrade of the  seawater pumps,
              installation of a redundant system that  allowed  for pump maintenance and
              repairs without  interruption of seawater flow and the addition of a back-up 
              generator with an automatic transfer switch which has  enabled the system to
              run continuously during periods of  power outrage.  The dependability of the
              present seawater  system will enhance experimentation and increase use of the 
              laboratory facilities for manipulative experiments under  controlled
              conditions, and for longer term growth and  physiological studies.  With the
              recent completion of a  visitors housing facility there is also an increasing
              demand  for the use of the water tables by visiting researchers.  In  order to
              ensure the facility can meet the research needs of  both resident and visiting
              scientists, the University of  Guam Marine Laboratory will expand and upgrade
              the present  facilities.  The specific improvements include the seawater 
              intake, expansion of the outdoor enclosed space, addition of  more seawater
              tables and tanks, and addition of a back-up  well to allow continuous seawater
              availability during  tropical storms and typhoons.    The University of Guam
              Marine Laboratory supports the  research of eight full-time faculty, numerous
              graduate and  undergraduate students, as well as visiting investigators.  The
              research demands on the facility have increased due to  the addition of new
              faculty at the laboratory, the recent  establishment of collaborative programs
              between the Marine  Laboratory and the University of Hawaii and the University 
              of the Ryukyus (Okinawa, Japan), and the awareness of the  Marine Laboratory as
              a resource for coral reef research by  over 550 scientists who attended the 7th
              International Coral   Reef Symposium on Guam in June 1992.  The improvements to
               the seawater system will allow the support of the increasing  number of
              visiting scientists that wish to conduct research  at the laboratory, which
              will in turn enhance the research  environment.
