Title       : Renovation of the Eric Johnston Science Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9602684

Award Number: 9602684
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $660349             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lois M. Kieffaber lkieffaber@whitworth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Finn R. Pond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tony L. Mega  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitworth College
	      300 W. Hawthorne Rd.
	      Spokane, WA  99251    509/777-3701

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award will be used to partially support the renovation of research and
              research training laboratories in the Eric Johnston Science Center on the
              campus of Whitworth College.  Constructed in 1966 and never renovated, the
              building houses the departments of Biology, Chemistry and Physics.  Primarily
              configured as a classroom facility, the science center can no longer support
              current or future research programs due to the poor design of and the limited
              amount of adequate space.  In view of this, the College has embarked upon a
              long range plan that encompasses the construction of a new addition to the
              existing structure in conjunction to renovating the building.  ARI funds will
              be used to renovate space currently used for research and research training
              activities in Johnston.  Renovations will consist of:  reconfiguring space,
              upgrading HVAC, plumbing, and electrical systems, and installing new fume
              hoods, casework and safety systems. The project will aid biology faculty and
              their students as they investigate problems in the areas of cell and molecular
              biology, freshwater microbial biology, plant genetics and plant ecology. 
              Improvements to chemical research space will allow faculty to conduct research
              in organic, physical and biochemistry in a safer environment.  Renovating
              physics laboratory space will not only provide dedicated space for research
              investigations, but will also provide space for two student projects: night
              airglow and postural stability studies. It is anticipated that the improved
              infrastructure will  increase faculty productivity and training opportunities
              for students to  partner with faculty in scientific research.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
