Title       : A Partnership for Computer-Based Curriculum Development in Atmospheric
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1998     
File        : a9602351

Award Number: 9602351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melanie A. Wetzel wetzel@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randolph D. Borys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Title:  A Partnership for Computer-Based Curriculum Development in Atmospheric
              Technology               The objective of this project is to develop
              computer-interactive training modules in Atmospheric Technology, which are
              designed to significantly involve environmental technology degree curricula at
              community colleges nationwide. The project addresses each of the three
              activities described for an ATE Project (a) Curriculum and Instructional
              Materials Development, (b) Teacher and Faculty Enhancement, and (c)
              Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement. Project goals are:  (1) Provide
              training in Atmospheric Technology which adequately prepares students for
              employment in careers such as air quality monitoring and meteorological data
              applications; and (2) Develop a summer workshop program to train community
              college teachers to incorporate the computer-based training modules with field
              and laboratory instrumentation for environmental technology applications.   The
              project is a collaborative effort of the Desert Research Institute (DRI), of
              the University and Community College System of Nevada, the Colorado Mountain
              College (CMC), and the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR).
              The DRI operates a mountaintop research laboratory on a 10,500 ft. peak, within
              5 miles of the CMC Alpine Campus, which will serve as a field and classroom
              location for the development of instructional graphics, video and datasets for
              the training modules. The laboratory and co-located community college campus
              will also host the teacher workshops. The partnership between the CMC, DRI and
              UCAR scientists and faculty includes the design, development, assessment and
              dissemination of the computer-based training modules. A minority population
              group, Native Americans, is specifically identified for enhanced outreach
              activities. In addition, an Advisory Committee with members representing
              industry, government agency, and environmental education groups will provide
              guidance on the technology curriculum content and empl oyment targets.
