Title       : Modernization of the Pohl Conservatory, a Vital Resource for Plant Biology
               Research and Research Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1996 
File        : a9602284

Award Number: 9602284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan F. Wendel jfw@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Mahoney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven R. Rodermel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,9184,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The Richard W. Pohl Conservatory is a resource facility that is central to the
              research and research training mission of the Botany Department and to basic
              Plant Biology programs at Iowa State University.  Located on the roof of Bessey
              Hall,  the Conservatory provides the primary plant growth facilities for
              research in ecology, evolutionary biology, molecular biology, and
              biotechnology. In addition, the facility houses the second largest greenhouse
              collection of plant species west of the Mississippi River. Funding from the
              National Science Foundation will be used to convert an outdated greenhouse
              containing inadequate and decaying facilities into a state-of-the-art research
              plant facility.  A portion of the space will be modified specifically for
              biotechnology and transgenic plant research.  Obsolete environmental controls
              and utility infrastructure will be updated with integrated regulators.  The
              leaky and precarious glass roof and side panels will be replaced with modern
              materials and will be reglazed.  A renovated facility will enhance the
              Department's ability to conduct transgenic plant research and training in a
              conducive and safe working environment.  The significance of this project
              extends beyond Iowa State to national and international levels by the numerous
              and varied research programs that involve collaborations which directly or
              indirectly use the facility.  It is anticipated that these collaborations will
              continue to increase as unique genetic plant materials are created and grown in
              the renovated greenhouse.  In conjunction to genetically engineered plants, the
              conservatory collection represents a unique source for plant species that is
              not available anyplace else in the world. Plant materials are regularly
              supplied to research laboratories around the world and this project will
              maintain this vital scientific resource and enhance the role of the
              conservatory in future years.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
