Title       : Renovation and Modernization of Eight Research and Research Training
               Laboratories in the Biology Department at St. Joseph's University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1996  
File        : a9602778

Award Number: 9602778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Tudor jtudor@sju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Joseph's University
	      5600 City Avenue
	      Philadelphia, PA  191311308    215/879-7300

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The National Science Foundation, in a joint effort with Saint Joseph's
              University of Philadelphia, will provide funding for the renovation of eight
              laboratories for the Biology Department.  The laboratories, some outfitted with
              furnishings removed from a previous facility built in 1927, are housed in the
              Science Center and have never been renovated since its original construction in
              1971.  In spite of inadequate space, the Department has maintained a quality
              undergraduate research program for the past twenty years.  Opportunities for
              research are broad, including the following areas:   microbiology, molecular
              biology, genetics, behavior, environmental biology, plant pathology,
              development, cell biology and anatomy.  Renovations will consist of removing
              antiquated and worn laboratory furniture and replacing it with modern
              laboratory benches and cabinets installed in configurations appropriate to
              individual research labs.  New and increased electrical service will be
              provided as well as new flooring, ceiling panels, and overhead lighting.  Two
              rooms will be outfitted with separate heating and air conditioning systems to
              meet environmental requirements, and five laboratories will be equipped with
              new natural gas fixtures located safely in convenient areas.  Once renovations
              are completed, faculty, undergraduate and graduate students will continue to
              engage in present research activities, as well as conduct research that is
              currently not feasible due to poor infrastructure.  In addition to increase
              efficiency in space utilization, and establishing a safe working environment,
              the renovated labs will attract and accommodate more faculty and students,
              allowing for continued growth and increased productivity.   This project will
              enhance the Department's ability to successfully train and prepare students,
              including women and underrepresented minority students in an urban environment,
              for careers in the life science.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
