Title       : Renovation of an Isotope Geochemistry Laboratory for North Carolina Triangle
               Universities Consortium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1996   
File        : a9602629

Award Number: 9602629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Fullagar fullagar@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen F. Glazner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Bralower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This ARI award will provide funding for the renovation of an obsolete Isotope
              Geochemistry Laboratory at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
              (UNC-CH) on behalf of The North Carolina Triangle Universities Consortium. 
              Housed in Mitchell Hall,  the 32 year old lab is used to support analytical
              procedures  including acid digestion of samples, elemental chromatographic
              separations, mineral leaching and purification, and sample loading preparation
              for mass spectrometry. Faculty and students of three Geoscience Departments,
              UNC-CH, Duke University, and North Carolina State University,  use the facility
              to prepare samples for isotopic and chemical analysis using the  VG Sector 54
              thermal ionization mass spectrometer.  However, the instrument cannot be used
              to full capability because the laboratory lacks modern, clean facilities
              required to prepare  small, low-level samples for high-precision analyses.  An
              inordinate amount of time has been spent discovering and eliminating sources of
              contamination, therefore impeding progress. Corrosion of metallic light
              fixtures, ceiling grids, fume hood casings, and pipes contribute significant
              contaminating particles, especially since air in the lab is not filtered.  Air
              flow is low, and acid fumes are not adequately vented from work areas, thus
              creating a potential hazardous health environment for research personnel. 
              Current space design limits the training opportunities for additional students
              and limits the range of research and analytical experiments that can be
              performed.    Laboratory renovations will consist of: installing new fume
              hoods, including four Class 100 laminar flow hoods; installing benchtop
              workstations, and providing HEPA filter evaporating boxes. Corroded electrical
              outlets, gas and water pipes will be replaced as well as ceiling grids. 
              Renovations will enable research personnel to: analyze a wider variety of
              samples, and smaller quantities of a sample at very low concentrations;
              decrease errors associated with isotopic measurements, and accommodate
              additional users.  This will allow research growth  in  areas that require
              accurate Pb abundances and isotopic ratios; perform source apportionment
              studies to assess relative contribution of trace pollutants for natural and
              anthropogenic sources, perform exposure assessment of humans to atmospheric
              pollutants, and expand isotopic tracer studies to plant and animal research. 
              More students, including students from Historically Black Colleges and
              Universities in North Carolina, will learn a broader range of scientific
              procedures of geologic and environmental importance.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
