Title       : Metals and Metallurgists in Sub-Saharan Africa: Three Case Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9602033

Award Number: 9602033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88035              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Killick killick@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. David Killick and his colleagues
              will pursue three related anthropological projects which will shed new light on
              past and present metal working practices in sub Saharan Africa. What links the
              three is the examination of the relationship between metalworking technology
              and the ability to use such information to sidelight on social organization.  
              In a first study Dr. Killick will examine the techniques used to work iron in
              the Mandara region of Cameroon and Nigeria. While prehistorically many
              sub-Saharan peoples smelted and worked iron to produce a range of artifacts, in
              very few instances have these practices continued into modern times. In the
              Mandara region anthropologists have observed and videotaped two instances of
              iron smelting and collected information about many more. Dr. Killick will
              coordinate and synthesize the data which has been collected. He will also
              conduct metallurgical analyses of the slags which were produced and the
              finished products. One major goal of the work is to examine the relationship
              between ethnic affiliation and metallurgical technology and the extent to which
              specific techniques are ethnically determined. Because archaeologists work 
              primarily with the material byproducts of human behavior and attempt to
              reconstruct social organization through such remains, the insights which Dr.
              Killick will provide will be a great methodological interest.  Secondly, Dr.
              Killick and colleagues will analyze a body of data collected at archaeological
              sites in northern South Africa. These include finished metal products and slags
              which date to the last 2,000 years. Archaeologists wish to reconstruct the
              social organization of such Iron Age societies which gave rise to the Zulu
              empire and other ethnographically known groups. Because the geology of the
              region is well known and iron ore deposits vary in chemical composition, it is
              possible to examine the results and byproducts of smelting and match
              archaeologically recovered objects with ore source. On this basis it is then
              possible to reconstruct trade networks and gain insight into large scale social
              and economic organization. The research team will undertake such an analysis
              and also reconstruct prehistoric southern African metal working techniques.  In
              a third part of this project the research group will examine a series of
              materials recovered from archaeological contexts on the East Coast of Africa.
              Swahili culture which is dominant in this region consists of a mix of African
              and Islamic elements and it appears that several thousand years ago traders
              from the Near East settled in this region. Anthropologists are very interested
              in the mechanisms which underly culture contact and interaction and in the
              Swahili case several models have been proposed. It is unclear to what extent,
              over millennia, interaction has occurred and whether the `immigrants` remained
              culturally and materially distinct. Through the analysis of metal objects Dr.
              Killick hopes to gain insight into this question. Since the smelting
              technologies of the Near East and Eastern Africa are quite distinct, and it
              should be possible to determine whether they are blended or remain separate on
              the East African coast.  This research is important for several reasons. It
              will help to develop a robust methodological tool which will help scientists to
              gain insight into past social behavior. It will help to answer a series of
              interesting areal questions and provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
