Title       : Microscopic Theory of Quantum Fluids and Nuclear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9602127

Award Number: 9602127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Winston Roberts                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381364             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Clark jwc@wuphys.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Willem H. Dickhoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This research program has the primary goal of microscopic  prediction and
              explanation of the properties of strongly  interacting quantum many-body
              systems crossing several  disciplinary boundaries but with an emphasis on
              nuclear many-body  problems.       Some activities and expected results include
              the study of  high-momentum nucleons in nuclear ground states by applying 
              Green's function techniques to quantitative prediction of the  (e,e'p) cross
              section.  A corresponding study will assess the  potential of two-proton
              removal experiments as a probe of the  nucleon-nucleon interaction in the
              nuclear medium.  Calculations  involving self-consistent determination of
              nuclear-matter  spectral functions will establish the density dependence of 
              medium modifications of nucleons and their effective interactions  and generate
              in-medium phase shifts and cross sections relevant  to the analysis of
              heavy-ion collisions.       Fundamental features of pairing by predominantly
              repulsive  interactions will be studied in the framework of a new separation 
              transformation of the gap equation.  Correlated basis functions  (CBF)
              calculations of superfluid pairing gaps in neutron-star  matter will furnish
              critical inputs for models of the rotational  dynamics and thermal evolution of
              neutron stars.  Variational-CBF  and correlated density matrix theories adapted
              to inhomogeneous  environments will be applied to pairing in non-uniform
              nuclear  systems, resonant vapor modes of the helium liquid-vapor  interface,
              Bose-Einstein condensation phenomena in trapped atomic  clouds, and phase
              transitions in lattice spin systems and lattice  gauge models.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
