Title       : Renovation of Research Space in Molecular and Cellular Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1996 
File        : a9602796

Award Number: 9602796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $722000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Millhorn david.millhorn@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                During the past several decades work on prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell
              systems have provided significant insights on basic mechanisms that regulate
              the expression of the gene.  Little is known about how specific genes regulate
              physiological function in the whole animal.  Recently, investigators studying
              in the area of Molecular and Cellular Biology have witnessed the development of
              exciting new technologies that allow manipulation of the mammalian genome in
              the intact animal.  The University of Cincinnati is recognized as a national
              leader in the development and experimental use of transgenic and gene targeted
              mice.  These animals provide unique models for studying the physiological
              significance of expressed genes on organ systems function.  The development of
              experimental approaches and techniques to determine the functional phenotype
              and study the physiological performance in gene manipulated animals is a
              primary institutional and national need.   Funding from the National Science
              Foundation, in addition to resources from the institution and the State of
              Ohio, will be used to renovate existing research space located in the Medical
              Science Building for the Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology. 
              Renovations will consist of: upgrading electrical, plumbing, HVAC systems,
              reconfiguring space, and installing benches, fume hoods, and other fixed
              equipment. The Department has strong programs in membrane biophysics, molecular
              endocrinology, signal transduction, gene regulation, neurophysiology, muscle
              energetics and metabolism, membrane transport, and cardiovascular/pulmonary
              physiology.  The renovations will strengthen these programs by providing modern
              faculty research laboratories, a molecular biology core facility, a transgenic
              physiology core facility, and shared research support facilities. 
              Modernization of this space will significantly augment the Department's efforts
              in recruiting new faculty with research expertise in molecular physiology, and
              attract outstanding graduate students interested in using molecular biological
              approaches to study organ system physiology.  This project will enhance the
              ability of the Department to have an impact on biology-oriented research at the
              University and in the nation.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
