Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Non-Perturbative Approaches to the Many-Body Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9602499

Award Number: 9602499
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David Lidsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9602499  Lidsky    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of  Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  David Lidsky at
              the Institute of Solid State Physics at the  University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
               Dr. Lidsky will work  with Dr. Mahito Okomoto, Professor of Physics, on a
              research  project entitled, "Non-Perturbative Approaches to the Many-  Body
              Problem".    The proposed research will elucidate the quantum mechanic  origins
              of  yet unexplained states of condensed matter,  specifically high-temperature
              superconductors. It will  analyze the Coulomb interactions between electrons
              and the  explicit effect of the scattering rate of microscopic  charged
              particles and temperature dependence on materials,  both of which significantly
              influence the resistivity and  effectiveness of superconductive activity.  The
              traditional  theoretical approach to studying the effect of electron-  electron
              interactions has been perturbation theory, in which  one starts with
              non-interacting theory and treats the  interaction as a correction.  One of the
              main goals of the  proposed research is to develop non-perturbative techniques 
              in which one does not start from a free theory, but rather  emphasizes
              electron-electron interactions and their effect  at the outset on the
              experiment.  ***
