Title       : Renovation of the Bartol Research Institute Computing Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1997   
File        : a9602788

Award Number: 9602788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100078             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Matthaeus   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Seckel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chang-Hua Tsao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacques L'Heureux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bartol Research Institute
	      University of Delaware
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of Delaware-Bartol Research Institute (BRI), a non-profit
              research  organization, is located in Sharp Laboratory with the Department of
              Physics and Astronomy at the University of Delaware. BRI is engaged in
              fundamental areas of research in theoretical and experimental physics, as well
              as participation in the University's Joint Graduate Program in Physics and
              Astronomy.  Research interests and activities span a wide range of disciplines
              and include both theoretical studies and in-house investigations, as well as in
              situ and remote observations of space, the Sun, and the interplanetary and
              interstellar mediums.  Most of the research activities are supported by the
              Computer Facility consisting of the Main Computer Room and the Computer Room
              Annex.  Research conducted in the facility is connected with computer
              simulations and analysis of data from experiments and from simulations in the
              broad field of space physics, fluid dynamics as applied to astrophysical
              plasma, and high energy air showers.  Computational components of these
              projects are limited by inadequate CPU power, data storage, and visualization
              and graphics capabilities.  Increased research needs have placed a strain on
              the central Computing Facility, which impedes on the ability to conduct
              research.  Funding from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program, combined
              with resources from the Bartol Research, will be used to modernize and enhance
              the mechanical, electrical and environmental aspects of the 12 year old
              facility.  Renovations include replacing  an air conditioning unit with one
              that possess environmental controls, installing new ductwork associated with
              the air conditioning system, and installing environmental monitoring
              capabilities.  The electrical power and distribution equipment will be
              upgraded, including the addition of an Uninterruptible Power Supply system.
              These improvements will allow the Bartol Computing Facility to operate more
              safely and efficiently and accommodate for future growth, and, therefore,
              enabling the Institute to provide high quality computational support for
              various research efforts.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
