Title       : North Central Collaboration for Education in NDE/NDT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a9602370

Award Number: 9602370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $673705             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lester W. Schmerr lschmerr@cnde.iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David K. Holger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald O. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              North Central Collaboration for Advanced Engineering Technology Education in
              NDE/NDT    Increased requirements for improved reliability of machines and
              structures in a wide spectrum of industries have created a growing demand for
              educational and training opportunities in non-destructive evaluation and
              non-destructive testing (NDE/NDT).  NDT technician programs have developed in
              various parts of the country, largely in response to specific and urgent
              technical requirements of local industries.  The Center for Non-Destructive
              Evaluation at Iowa State University in collaboration with five community
              colleges, together with industrial partners, is developing materials and
              providing professional development for faculty to improve the education of
              technicians with specialization in NDE/NDT.  The primary activities include the
              development and dissemination of new curriculum materials for use in new and
              existing courses as well as the redevelopment of existing materials to increase
              their mathematics, science, and engineering content. Simulation of ultrasonic,
              radiographic and eddy current NDE techniques, previously developed at Iowa
              State University, are being transferred to personal computers for use in
              technician programs to allow students to develop a physical feel for how
              parameters of interest influence inspection results.  Community college faculty
              are being provided enhancement opportunities to enable them to better implement
              the new industrial and research developments in NDE.  Workshops provide
              professional development for two year college faculty in development of
              frameworks, assessment, and upgrading the mathematics, science and engineering.
               Industrial partners are participating in the workshops and providing guidance
              to the project.
