Title       : Renovation of Research and Research Training Laboratories at City College of
               CUNY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9602296

Award Number: 9602296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Weiss   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Founded in 1847, The City College of New York is nationally and
              internationally recognized as an institution with a diverse student body and
              strong graduate and undergraduate programs in basic and applied research in
              science and engineering. To maintain research excellence, the City College has
              made a commitment to improve the scientific infrastructure by renovating and
              refurbishing 40 research laboratories and support facilities in the Marshak
              Science and Physical Education Building, home to the Departments of Biology,
              Chemistry, and Physics.  With assistance from the NSF, laboratories and support
              facilities utilized by two highly successful research centers, the Center for
              Analysis of Structures and Interfaces  (CASI) and the Center for the Study of
              the Cellular and Molecular Basis of Development will be modernized.  CASI
              scientists are currently  interested in three areas involving the usage of
              light and its properties to study the structure and dynamical processes of
              molecules adsorbed on surfaces of materials; the development of new materials
              composed of small numbers of elements; and the usage of ultrafast laser
              techniques for light based, optical computers of the future.  On going research
              in the Center for the Study of the Cellular and Molecular Basis of Development
              focuses on biological structure and function, gene expression and regulation,
              and cell and organism function.  Current infrastructure conditions negatively
              impact research and research training activities by creating an environment
              incompatible with quality research, thus limiting the prospect of expanding
              research opportunities. Renovations will include redesigning space for greater
              utility,  replacing and installing lab benches, fume hoods, storage cabinets,
              and other fixed equipment.  Upon completion, the renovations will provide an
              environment conducive to academic and scientific pursuits and one that is
              attractive to researcher scholars.  In addition to enhanced productivity,
              students underrepresented in science will be better trained and therefore able
              to compete in an increasingly competitive job market.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
