Title       : Endomembrane Calcium Control and the Regulation of Cell Division
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9602056

Award Number: 9602056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Silver   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-02056  Silver    The role of Ca2+ in controlling various cellular processes
              presents an enigma in its ubiquity and selectivity. One process, mitosis,
              requires interactions among many serial and parallel biochemical pathways that
              are coordinated by the cell cycle. Intracellular free Ca2+  (Ca2+i) regulates
              specific biochemical and physiological aspects of mitosis, for example, nuclear
              envelope breakdown (NEB). Prior to NEB there are highly localized pulses of 
              Ca2+i within discrete domains which are called quantum emission domains (QEDs).
              These QEDs were detected using aequorin luminescence to report Ca2+i and a
              multispectral video microscopy combined with a high performance computational
              image and signal analysis system. The analysis of various QED-patterns suggest
              that Ca2+i prior to NEB are evoked by an intracellular chemical signal that is
              generated proximal to the QEDs, contradicting models that evoke diffusible
              agonists or of Ca2+-activated Ca2+ release. The spatial and temporal resolution
              of this multispectral approach far exceeds that obtained by other methods; This
              approach also avoids perturbations that are associated with many fluorescent
              Ca2+ reporters that cause problem with Ca2+-buffering or cause UV toxicity. The
              observed Ca2+i-QEDs patterns are highly structural, non-random, and are
              apparently of a digital frequency modulated format. These patterns could
              explain how Ca2+i control many cellular processes, a particular frequency
              controls a particular event.  These early studies will be extended in order to
              correlate spatial and temporal patterns of the Ca2+i-QEDs within microdomains
              with events in mitosis that are known to be Ca2+-dependent. These studies will
              be conducted in sand dollar (Echinaracnius parma) blastomeres. Computational
              analyses using sophisticated pattern analysis algorithms and high performance
              computing should result in identifying and in classifying a type of cellular
              semantics and syntax. A library of Ca2+i-QED patterns will be collected from
              normal mitotic c ells and from cells whose Ca2+ regulation mechanisms has been
              altered. This collection of patterns should allow a deciphering of the language
              of Ca2+i signaling.  Leukotriene B4 (LtB4) evokes Ca2+i-QEDs in sand dollar
              eggs and in mitotic cells. Inhibitors that interfere with the production of
              LtB4 inhibit mitosis in a time and dose dependent manners. The cell cycle
              pattern of LtB4 metabolism as well as the expression of enzymes of the
              arachidonic acid pathway will be determined in an attempt to correlate these
              events with Ca2+-dependent mitotic events. Analogous studies will be conducted
              with a class of luminescent 02- sensitive fungal compounds to monitor 02-
              production during lipid metabolism.  The general goal of these studies is too
              learn how cells make decisions that are a function of Ca2+i. The identification
              of Ca2+i-QEDs as a type of cellular language with lipid metabolites controlling
              the expression of this language should bring us closer to understanding how
              certain decisions are made as well as where and when these decisions are made. 
              %%%  The role of Ca2+ in controlling various cellular processes presents an
              enigma in its ubiquity and selectivity. One process, mitosis, requires
              interactions among many serial and parallel biochemical pathways that are
              coordinated by the cell cycle. Intracellular free Ca2+ regulates specific
              biochemical and physiological aspects of mitosis, for example, nuclear envelope
              breakdown. As yet little is known about how the cell make decisions involving
              intracellular free Ca2+.  ***
