Title       : Occidental College Science Center (Replacement of Research Facilities)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2002    
File        : a9602701

Award Number: 9602701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret E. Rusmore rusmore@oxy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Y. Goldberg  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Occidental College
	      1600 Campus Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900413384    213/259-2500

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0602000   Facilities - Replacement                
              13        Physics                                 
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Occidental College, located in the northeastern sector of Los Angeles, is a
              private college of the liberal arts and sciences.  The College has received
              national recognition for sustaining its traditional commitment to high
              achievement while embracing the changes necessary to serve an increasingly
              diverse community.  This is evident by its science programs that highly
              emphasize both research and student development.  Occidental has recognized the
              need to integrate scientific research and education programs, and has made a
              commitment to provide the programs in Physics, Geology, and Environmental
              Sciences with new laboratories. Active research programs include the following
              areas:  plasma physics, low temperature physics, atomic physics, laser physics,
              structural geology, mineralogy, paleomagnetism, paleontology, geochemistry, and
              environmental analysis. Currently these programs are housed in Fowler Hall, a
              structure that was built in 1931. The building's original utilities are
              inadequate to support the research programs of 10 faculty members and 44
              students.  The facility does not comply with ADA regulations and is in need of
              seismic upgrading.  However, despite poor facilities, the department is able to
              maintain a high level of productivity.    As the third part of a four phase
              program, funding from the National Science Foundation  will be used to replace
              laboratories in Fowler Hall.  All existing conditions impeding research will be
              corrected with the construction of the new building. Upon completion, this
              project will increase student participation in the research activities of their
              professors earlier in their undergraduate careers.  The new structure will
              provide equipment and facilities for students and faculty to do more varied and
              more extensive experimentation in all three disciplines. Thus faculty research
              will be expanded, research training and education will be improved, and
              students will be better prepared for professional and civic leadership.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
