Title       : An Innovative Approach for Advanced Technological Learning in Distinctive
               Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1997     
File        : a9602390

Award Number: 9602390
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick R. Allison   (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Cavanaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Title:  An Innovative Approach for Advanced Technological Learning in
              Distinctive Manufacturing    For employers to compete successfully in the
              increasingly complex, technological, entrepreneurial global competition, they
              must have an ample supply of high-performance technicians. The traditional
              educational approach does not supply sufficient numbers of qualified employees
              to meet the demand. In response, OSU-Okmulgee and its partners are
              reengineering technological education to prepare technicians to add customer
              value in world-class, competitive distinctive manufacturing firms. To build a
              larger base of more competent technicians, the program is recruiting  members
              of underrepresented groups and other students who typically overlook career
              opportunities in advanced manufacturing.    The partnership consists of
              advanced technological employers, educational institutions, national resource
              organizations, and Native American tribes. The innovative approach  infuses the
              content of a 90-semester-credit-hour Associate in Applied Science degree into a
              set of systematic learning experiences that occur in a real-world manufacturing
              environment to form a holistic, simultaneous, synergistic learning program; 
              demands mastery of rigorous competencies in mathematics, science, and
              technology;  ensures a competent faculty by selecting capable candidates and
              professionally preparing them to implement their roles in the new approach; 
              recruits and capacitates members of underrepresented groups;  articulates the
              program across secondary and vocational schools, associate degree and bachelor
              degree granting institutions; and  disseminates and communicates the project's
              deliverables and lessons learned. The depth and breadth of this
              90-semester-credit-hour Associate in Applied Science degree program will
              prepare high-performance technicians for distinctive manufacturing.
