Title       : Renovation of Harrington Hall Annex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1996  
File        : a9602302

Award Number: 9602302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Sternberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott F. Korom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Newell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Hoffmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas K. Ludlow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will be used to
              renovate laboratory facilities at the University of North Dakota, for high
              performance computing, material science, and environmental systems research
              related to transport and adsorption in heterogeneous materials.  Space
              dedicated to the Multiscale Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering Research
              (MISER) group, consisting of members from the Chemical Engineering, Physics,
              Chemistry, Geology and Geological Engineering Departments, and the Energy and
              Environmental Research Center will be renovated.  Current projects focus on
              environmental research related to groundwater monitoring, modeling and
              remediation, and the removal of toxic metals from flue gas by adsorption. 
              Other faculty use high performance computing to complement this work by
              developing algorithms that partition local and global interactions using novel
              procedures to obtain  optimal performance from vector and parallel
              architectures.    Located in Harrington Hall, the research laboratory as it
              currently exists, is inadequate to support the operation of high precision,
              scientific research equipment.  There is poor ventilation, and inoperable fume
              hoods that do not meet current safety standards. Once renovated, the lab will
              have a new drop ceiling, computer cabling, chemical resistant floor, storage
              cabinets, and laboratory benches.  Modernizing the research space will rectify
              deficiencies and make the laboratory ADA compliant. Establishing a central
              laboratory will result in significant cross disciplinary interactions between
              student researchers. This project will enhance the ability of MISER to attract
              additional extramural funding, increase the number of students, particularly 
              Native American students, involved in research, and  improve the quality of
              research and training available for all students.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
