Title       : Japan JSPS Program: First-principles Investigation of Quantum Diffusion in
               Alkali Halides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9602520

Award Number: 9602520
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Tina M. Briere   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              10        Physical Sciences                       
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9602520  Briere    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of  Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Tina Marie Briere
              at the Institute of Solid State Physics,  University of Tokyo in Tokyo, Japan. 
              Dr. Briere will work  with Dr. Shinji Tsuneyuki, professor at the Institute, on
              a  research project entitled "First-principles Investigation of  Quantum
              Diffusion in Alkali Halides".    The proposed research will utilize theoretical
              first-  principles techniques in order to study quantum diffusion of  muonium
              in alkali halides.  Recent experiments using muon  spin relaxation have mapped
              the diffusion rate as a function  of temperature. The curve of the diffusion
              rate is quite  different in the high and low temperature regions,  indicating
              two different types of diffusion: incoherent and  coherent quantum. The goal of
              the proposed research is to  describe the diffusion rate in the low-temperature
              region  from a theoretical viewpoint whose basis does not depend on 
              experimental parameters.  Muonium (Mu), a light atom  consisting of a muon and
              an electron, has been chosen for  the analysis because its light mass has
              allowed for clear  experimental observation of quantum diffusion.  The Car- 
              Parinello first-principles method will be used to map the  potential energy
              surface as the muonium atom diffuses  through a KCl crystal.  The wavefunction
              of Mu will then be  determined numerically, followed by calculation of
              diffusion  parameters which can then be compared to earlier experiments  (e.g.
              Mu diffusion rate).  ***
