Title       : U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Guided-Wave Polarization Sensitive Couplers
               and Polarization Converters in GaAs/AlGaAs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1998   
File        : a9602161

Award Number: 9602161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29185              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nadir Dagli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0206000   Telecommunications                      
              13        Physics                                 
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award is to support a collaborative project between Dr.
              Nadir Dagli, Department of Electrical and Computer Science at the University of
              California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) and Dr. Atilla Aydinli, Department of Physics,
              Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey.  The purpose of this research is to develop
              guided-wave polarization sensitive couplers and polarization converters in
              GaAs/AlGaAs material system, and eventually to use these components in the
              realization of polarization independent ultra fast traveling wave electrooptic
              modulators.  Current work at UCSB has produced traveling wave electrooptic
              modulators with electric bandwidth in excess of 40 GHz.  These modulators have
              relatively high switching voltages, excessive loss in coupling with optical
              fiber, and work only for TE polarization.  The planned work will seek the
              production of devices with low switching voltage and low fiber coupling losses.
               The work proposed includes transfer of software developed at UCSB to the
              Bilkent team to use it in producing the modulator devices.  These devices, and
              others produced at UCSB, will be subjected to optical tests such as loss
              measurements, and DC electrooptic tests such as the DC modulation response. 
              Scope:  This award allows for collaboration by two laboratories with
              complementary capabilities who are currently carrying out similar research
              independently.  The award will allow visits by Dr. Dagli to Bilkent U. to
              provide the software and the required initial training and to help the Turkish
              scientist and a graduate student start the fabrication process.  In the second
              year Dagli will again visit Bilkent U. to work on the testing process and to
              transfer the technology developed and the experience gained to his laboratory
              at UCSB.  This award is funded jointly by INT and the Division of Electrical
              and Communication Systems.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
