Title       : U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Testing of Software With an Operational
               Profile
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9602081

Award Number: 9602081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Refik Soyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0108000   Software Development                    
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award is to support a cooperative research project
              involving Dr. Refik Soyer, Department of Management Science at George
              Washington University (GWU) in Washington, D.C., and Dr. Suleyman Ozekici,
              Department of Industrial Engineering at Bogazici University (BU) in Istanbul,
              Turkey.  The aim of the proposed research is to enhance the state of the art in
              software reliability, especially those that are germane to the software
              testing.  The research involves development of failure models that consider
              operation profiles that describe the environment in which the software is used.
               These models are based on stochastic processes that reflect the dynamic nature
              of the environment.  The research also involves analysis of these models and
              their use for developing optimal software testing strategies.  The models will
              have various degrees of complexity and will require computer-based techniques
              for their implementation.  In particular, in determining the optimal software
              release time, the sequential nature of the decision problem makes computer
              intensive-solutions and Monte-Carlo based techniques inevitable.  Thus the
              proposed work will involve development of such methodologies to implement these
              models in optimal software testing.   Scope: This award is to fund the travel
              of the U.S. P.I.,  the Turkish P.I., and a third scientist from GWU, Dr.
              Singpurwalla, Professor of Operations Research and Statistics.  In addition, a
              professor and a graduate student at GWU, as well as a professor at BU, will
              participate in the project, but will not require grant funds.   This award
              allows two teams with complementary skills to work jointly to solve a problem
              in production of a highly technical product with wide applications.  The
              result, if successful, would have a number of applications with possible
              significant benefits to the software industry.  The project also involves the
              training of a graduate student in a binational collaborative research.  This
              award is funded jointly by the Division of International Programs and the
              Division of Design, Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
