Title       : Renovation & Replacement of the UC Davis Core Greenhouse Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a9602790

Award Number: 9602790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1398975            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andre Lauchli aelauchli@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Lucas  (Principal Investigator former)
              Arnold J. Bloom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kent J. Bradford  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
Program Ref : 0000,1312,9155,9184,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The University of California at Davis has one of the most extensive research
              and training programs in plant biology worldwide.  Research programs, conducted
              by over 130 faculty, range from plant cell and molecular biology, development
              and genetic regulation, germplasm enhancement and conservation, environmental
              physiology, population biology and ecology  to plant pathology and pests. 
              These investigations are performed in greenhouses, the fundamental tool for
              plant biologists.  Existing greenhouse space on campus is in poor condition and
              is limited in its usefulness during certain periods of the year.  Problems
              include: inadequate temperature control, insufficient supplemental lighting,
              dilapidated infrastructure, noncompliance of state and federal codes,
              deficiencies in structural design, and the lack of pure water for cooling and
              irrigation.   This ARI award will support UC-Davis in its endeavor to provide
              modernized greenhouse facilities for the Department of Plant Biology. The
              project  includes the renovation of most greenhouses, and replacement of four
              greenhouses by a Core Greenhouse Facility.  Renovations will rectify the
              critical problems that impede upon research in many of the greenhouses that
              lack controlled environments.  Renovated facilities will allow researchers to
              use powerful molecular genetic and transgenic tools dependent on controlled
              environments for research.  In addition to its specific impacts on the
              institution and on the state of California, the new core facility will have a
              profound impact at the national level.  Many pressing problems identified at
              the national level, such as global climate change, protection of the
              environment, and improvement of agricultural competitiveness through
              biotechnology, have long been recognized as important priorities, and their
              solutions involve a thorough understanding of plant biology.  Faculty at
              UC-Davis are highly productive, and research results are widely distributed
              both nationally and internationally.  This project will catalyze this research
              potential, greatly enhancing the productivity and contribution of the large and
              diverse contingent of plant biologists at the institution.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
