Title       : Learning to Cooperate in Repeated Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9602082

Award Number: 9602082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182019             (Estimated)
Investigator: In-Koo Cho   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                A primary reason for studying repeated games is to understand how selfish
              players can coordinate their actions to achieve improvements without a
              collusive agreement.  Unfortunately existing game-theoretic models admit so
              many outcomes that it is impossible to predict whether coordination will
              emerge.  Also analysis postulates a rational agent who has unbounded
              computational capability and perfect foresight.  These assumptions are critical
              for equilibrium models but also rather unrealistic.  This project explores
              alternative models in which perfectly rational agents are replaced by
              `boundedly rational` agents who have only limited computational capabilities,
              and who cannot perfectly foresee the strategy of other players, which they have
              to learn from the past experiences.  This approach is shown to capture learning
              dynamics and to permit applications to a wide class of repeated and dynamic
              games which have a `big` player who can influence the long run outcome of the
              model.   Applications include international debt   and optimal growth with
              moral hazard.  More specifically, the project examines two person repeated
              games where each player learns the opponent's strategy according to the
              gradient method by assuming that the opponent is playing according to a linear
              strategy.  In addition, each player artificially adds random noise that
              disappears slowly in order to experiment against the opponent's strategy.  No
              restrictions are imposed on feasible strategies, but the forecast of each
              player must be a linear function of past observations.  The reason for
              selecting this particular class of strategies is that these strategies are
              simple enough to be parameterized easily.  Then, each player can learn the
              opponent's strategy using least squares estimation.  The agent's preference is
              also modified slightly so that he is selecting a best response while minimizing
              the complexity of the decision making process.  then, a recursive least squares
              learning model is obtained, where each player updates his belief as well as his
              operated game strategy as the game proceeds.  The learning dynamics converges
              with probability 1 and in the limit, both players have an identical estimator. 
              Consequently the behavior of the two players is highly correlated, and the
              limit frequency of outcomes can be sustained by some Nash equilibrium in linear
              strategies.  In the prisoner's dilemma game, for example, the limit frequency
              of outcomes must be a strict convex combination of cooperation and defection,
              which implies that the players must learn to cooperative with positive
              probability.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
