Title       : JSPS Japan Program: Redox Control of Conductivity in Intelligent Polymer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9602505

Award Number: 9602505
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6100               (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott C. Paulson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Paulson  9602505    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science Postdoctoral Fellowship (JSPS) for Dr.  Scott C. Paulson
              at the Tokyo University of Agriculture and  Technology, Tokyo, Japan.  Dr.
              Paulson will work with Dr.  Noboru Oyama, Professor of Applied Chemistry, on a
              research  project entitled, "Redox Control of Conductivity in  'Intelligent'
              Polymer Systems."    The primary goal of the proposed research is to develop a 
              multi-purpose sensor, for use in aqueous solutions, that can  detect changes in
              temperature, solvent composition, ionic  strength, and/or pH.  The sensor is
              based on a N  alkylacrylamide polymer gel modified with an electrically 
              conducting polymer and works on the principle that changes  in solvent
              environment will produce volume changes within  the polymer gel.  Since the 
              conductivity of an electrically conducting polymer is  related to the distance
              between polymer chains, any volume  changes exhibited by the bulk polymer would
              be directly  translated into a change in conductivity across the polymer. 
              Interest in environment responsive polymer gels has  generated proposed
              applications ranging from temperature  dependent drug delivery systems to light
              activated memory  devices.  Development of these diverse applications requires 
              a fundamental understanding of the volume changes exhibited  by polymer gels in
              response to external stimuli.  The  proposed research is designed to generate
              data on these  issues, as well as data on how volume changes affect the 
              electrochemical behavior of modified polymer gels.  *  *  *
