Title       : Interaction of Light with Cold Atoms and Ions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2002   
File        : a9602888

Award Number: 9602888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47061              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy J. Glauber glauber@huhepl.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This is a collaborative project between Dr. Roy Glauber,  Department of
              Physics, Harvard University, and Dr. Daniel  Walls, Department of Physics,
              University of Auckland, New  Zealand, of a number of theoretical problems that
              arise in  connection with the behavior of slowly moving atoms, and  atoms and
              ions that have been trapped into quantum states of  low excitation. 
              Observation of light scattering and of  light emission from such atoms offers a
              systematic way of  analyzing the structure, that is to say the position and 
              time correlations, present in atomic systems.  They also  offer the possibility
              of analyzing the quantum states of  trapped atoms and ions through novel
              interference effects.  Among the problems to be investigated are: the detection
              of  statistical correction effects both of the BoseEinstein and  the
              Fermi-Dirac forms in cooled but free atomic beams.  The  extension of the same
              techniques to the treatment of Bose  Einstein condensed gases will be
              undertaken as well as  analysis of the Bose condensation more generally for 
              imperfect and trapped gases.  A critical examination will be  carried out of
              the nature of the forces exerted on atoms by  the quantized radiation fields in
              order to find corrections  to the present semiclassical theory.  Present
              studies to be  continued include further attempts to project the design of  a
              device that would produce a beam of neutral bosonic atoms  in the form of a
              steady coherent wave, i.e., an `atom  maser`. Analysis of the single-atom laser
              or `microlaser`  developed by a group at Massachusetts Institute of  Technology
              will also continue.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
