Title       : FSML: Enhancing Harvard Forest's Study of Forest Response to Disturbance: A
               Research and Education Program Investigating Ecosystem Dynamics in New England
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9602528

Award Number: 9602528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100546             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Over the past ten years the Harvard Forest has developed an  integrated and
              cross-disciplinary research and educational  program involving researchers and
              students from across the  northeastern U.S. that focuses on the response of
              forest  ecosystems to disturbance and stress resulting from natural  and
              anthropogenic processes.  This program is structured  around six approaches: 
              (1) reconstructive studies; (2) long-  term measurement and observation; (3)
              experimental  manipulations; (4) controlled environment studies; (5) 
              integration of results within our research group and  collaboratively with
              other research groups; and (6)  application of results to policy issues in
              natural resource  management, conservation biology, and human health and 
              environment.  The pressing need for expanded new facilities  to accommodate the
              growing numbers of visiting scientists  and students led to the development of
              a ten-year plan for  the renovation and construction of additional
              laboratories,  office space, archival facilities, housing, and computer 
              telecommunications and networking systems.  With support  from Harvard
              University and NSF, this plan has been  substantially accomplished.  The
              remaining major project is  the development of housing and meeting space for
              visiting  students and researchers.  A recent gift of property  directly
              contiguous to the main Harvard Forest buildings  presents the opportunity to
              complete this final element in  our ten-year plan.  The property consists of
              one large house  (the Fisher House with 13 bedrooms and 5 baths), a 
              caretaker's cottage, outbuildings and 20 ha of forest land.  due to its large
              size, ideal location and solid  construction, the Fisher House represents a
              perfect  opportunity for the development of free-standing  accommodations that
              are desperately needed for our large  visitor and collaborator groups.  This
              project will renovate  and restore this facility for educational and research 
              purposes using joint funding from Harvard University and  NSF>  The comp leted
              structure will greatly enhance science  and education in ecology by increasing
              our capability to  serve and to integrate the diverse array of students, 
              researchers, and visitors who comprise our extended  community.  This
              facilities development will also directly  improve research operations for
              collaborating scientists by  removing non-research uses (i.e. housing) from our
              main  office, laboratory and administrative building (Shaler Hall)  and freeing
              up approximately 2300 sq. ft of new office and  work space in ten rooms in
              Shaler Hall.
