Title       : Industrial Scientists: New Challenges with Restructuring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9602200

Award Number: 9602200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roli Varma   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since the mid-1980s, industrial R&D has been going through major changes,
              including a decline in industrial R&D expenditures and restructuring of
              centralized corporate R&D laboratories.  With these changes have come changes
              in the models used to describe and explain the relationship between corporate
              goals and industrial science.  Formerly, corporate R&D managers and analysts
              viewed economic gains as a by-product of research, under an autonomous model. 
              Currently, a new linkage model of corporate R&D, which directly links research
              to the needs of business divisions of the company, is being put into practice. 
              These developments bring new relevance to the following two questions:  How
              does restructuring in corporate R&D affect scientists?  How are scientists
              accommodating changes brought by restructuring?  This project proposes to study
              both questions by conducting interviews with approximately 96 subjects:  80
              scientists and 16 managers working in 8 corporate R&D labs that have recently
              experienced restructuring.  The focus in the investigation would be three
              aspects of the impact of restructuring on scientists:  research conditions,
              research types, and research environments.  This research has theoretical and
              practical relevance.  It will show the strengths and limitations of the
              existing literature on industrial research scientists by presenting scientists'
              understanding of their careers and the ways in which they are affected by
              structural and organizational changes.  It will identify key features of the
              new research culture and values evolving in corporate R&D to which scientists
              have to adjust.  By considering these factors in relationship to the autonomous
              and linkage models, a new partnership model may be proposed that can address
              concerns and issues overlooked by both the other models.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
