Title       : Research Training Group: Gene Expression in Bioremediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a9602247

Award Number: 9602247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1547515            (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline S. Harwood   (Principal Investigator current)
              Everett P. Greenberg  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gene F. Parkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1115      RESEARCH TRAINING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a new, multidisciplinary research  training program focused
              on understanding microbial gene  regulation in bioremediation.  A group of 16
              faculty drawn  from the departments of Microbiology, Biology, Chemistry, 
              Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Civil and  Environmental Engineering, and
              Medicinal Chemistry at the  University of Iowa will provide education and
              training for  graduate students in the fundamentals of molecular genetics, 
              microbial metabolism, biochemical engineering, and  environmental engineering. 
              In addition to normal  departmental requirements, the training will include a
              set  of four required courses in biology and engineering,  required laboratory
              rotations in both areas, and  participation in an RTG-sponsored  symposium and
              seminar  series.   Multidisciplinary thesis research, during which  students
              will be advised by two graduate mentors, will also  be required.  Undergraduate
              and postdoctoral students  sponsored by existing institutional and external
              funding  sources are expected to participate, but are not directly  supported
              by the award.   Students trained by this program  will have an unusual
              combination of training in basic and  applied aspects of both biology and
              engineering, and will  have a new perspective on environmental regulation of
              gene  expression and the metabolic diversity of microorganisms.
