Title       : Teamed Internships: Innovative Education Program for Environmental Technicians
               and Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9602368

Award Number: 9602368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory E. Ogden gogden@pimacc.pima.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pima County Cmty College
	      District Central Office
	      Tucson, AZ  857091010    602/884-6666

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Teamed Internships: Innovative Education Program for Environmental Technicians
              and Engineers             The project will create multi-disciplinary
              internships encompassing regional industries, federal research facilities, and
              two and four year educational programs. Teams of technicians from the
              Environmental Science Department at Pima Community College and engineers from
              the Department of Chemical & Environmental Engineering at the University of
              Arizona will work on industrial and academic projects under the direction of
              full-time faculty from both institutions. The project will foster teamwork and
              communication skills for technician and engineering students, include the
              development of instructional materials, provide a basis for upgrading
              curriculum on both the two- and four-year levels as well as teacher and faculty
              enhancement. Perceptions and insights and educational modules developed during
              the project will be disseminated to local secondary schools to foster interest
              in environmental technology/environmental science. High schools with high
              percentages of minorities in particular will be targeted. Dissemination on a
              regional/national level will be accomplished through participation in
              engineering, environmental and educational conferences and educational forums,
              publication of results, and collaboration with other NSF sponsored ATE centers
              or programs. Formative and summative evaluation tools will be used to direct
              the course of the project and demonstrate its effectiveness on student
              outcomes,   The project is designed to bridge the gap between technicians and
              engineers to facilitate smooth introductions of new technologies and foster
              teamwork between operations and management. The project will also stress
              industrial educational needs including students capable of working in teams,
              aware of their community and possessing excellent written and oral
              communication skills. The increased cooperation and understanding between
              engineers and technicians should lead to increased industrial product ivity and
              personal development.
