Title       : Renovation of 5th Floor Southeast Wing Chemistry Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1996 
File        : a9602802

Award Number: 9602802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1996   
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell P. Eyman darrell-eyman@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Buckman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award provides support for the renovation of research space in the
              Chemistry Building at the University of Iowa.  Laboratories located on the 5th
              floor of the southeast wing of the building, that were constructed in 1922,
              will be renovated for  students and four productive faculty members who have
              established national and international reputations for excellence and
              innovation in synthetic chemical research. Existing laboratories lack the
              essential infrastructure required to conduct modern chemistry.  There is
              currently no provision for ventilation, central air-conditioning, or make-up
              air in any of the rooms.  All have poor lighting, and cannot house any research
              operation that involves extensive use of volatile materials or any potentially
              toxic gases.  Targeted research space is devoid of the appropriate laboratory
              benches, sinks, fume hoods, electrical service, and HVAC facilities. Moreover,
              the crowded conditions under which these groups operate include numerous
              potential serious safety hazards to research personnel.  This project will
              correct these deficiencies and make unsuitable space into a safe and conducive
              research environment.  Improvements will allow these scientists to expand their
              research operations, and facilitate the accommodation of visiting scientists
              from industry and academic institutions in the US and abroad.  The upgraded
              facility will contribute to the research and educational goals of the
              University of Iowa by assisting the institution in its efforts to recruit
              future faculty hires.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
