Title       : Renovation of Science Research Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1999  
File        : a9602219

Award Number: 9602219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1469846            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred L. McKinney amckinne@pilot.lsus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald A. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia Sisson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dalton R. Gossett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharelle Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana State Shreveport
	      8515 Youree Drive
	      Shreveport, LA  711152301    318/797-5000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Louisiana State University at Shreveport (LSUS) is the recipient of funds for
              the renovation of the Science Building.  Constructed in 1967, the building
              houses the Departments of Biological Sciences, Chemistry, and Physics.  All
              faculty in biology are involved in research that concentrates on utilizing
              molecular approaches to solve systematic and other biological problems. 
              Research interests in the biology include: genetics, cell biology, animal and
              plant physiology, microbiology and molecular biology.  Senior faculty in the
              Department of Chemistry and Physics maintain research specialties in
              biochemistry, organic chemical ecology, radio-organic and polymer chemistry,
              environmental chemistry, isotopic kinetics, and computation physics.  Recent
              additions of programs in biochemical science and environmental science, shared
              masters programs in molecular biology with LSU Medical Center, and a new
              graduate course in Environmental Science have exacerbated research and training
              facility needs.  In conjunction, when the research facilities were designed,
              LSUS was only a two year institution.  Renovations will encompass: the
              provision of adequate electrical outlets, vacuum, and water to all labs and
              instrument rooms, the installation of an autoclave system, and the upgrade of
              the air-handling system.  Several new fume hoods will be installed; existing
              fume hoods will be modified to improve efficiency of operation and safety.  The
              project will bring facilities into compliance with ADA requirements and State
              building standards.  Renovations will accelerate new directions for faculty
              research programs as well as significantly enhance multidisciplinary, research
              opportunities.  Renovation of the targeted facilities will insure greater
              capacity and safety for student research and encourage more students to
              consider science careers.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
