Title       : Renovation of Media Research Laboratory at Courant Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1997      
File        : a9602625

Award Number: 9602625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375407             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Perlin perlin@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis E. Shasha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacob T. Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph Grishman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Founded in 1993, the New York University's Media Research Laboratory (MRL) was
              established with the goal of developing new ways for people to interact with
              computers and information.  Affiliated with the Department of Computer Science,
              research performed by MRL personnel addresses a diverse set of problems in
              human computer interaction, intelligent agents, tracking devices, animation,
              computer graphics, micro-robotics, programming language, distributed
              interactive systems, language recognition and generation, display devices, and
              vision algorithms.  Investigative work of this type is best conducted in
              rapidly adaptable computing environments.  However, currently research is
              performed in space originally constructed in 1982 for an industrial-scale
              manufacturing and robotics program and has never been renovated.    ARI funds
              will be utilized to transform the facility into a tailored multimedia space
              that will make research more effective. Renovations will encompass:
              reconfiguring space, upgrading HVAC, electrical and lighting systems,
              installing safety devices and security systems, and network infrastructure, and
              making ADA improvements; all required to create a state of the art facility. 
              Three new laboratories will be established: an Immersive Environment Lab will
              respond in complex ways to the presence and actions of human beings; a
              Multimedia Project Lab will accommodate testing for new interaction,
              presentation, and computation paradigm; and a Collaborative Project and Human
              Factors Lab used for developing and testing research applications with
              collaborators from industry and academe. This project will enable the MRL to
              build on its past success as it moves into the future.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
