Title       : The Midwest Center for Advanced Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2001     
File        : a9602355

Award Number: 9602355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1348391            (Estimated)
Investigator: Don K. Gentry dkgentry@tech.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis R. Depew  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Midwest Regional Consortium for Advanced Technology Education supports a new
              focus for promoting excellence in faculty development in technology education.
              This focus enhances America's competitive position as world-class in
              manufacturing and industrial distribution technology by developing the
              technical and pedagogical skills of faculty members from high schools,
              community colleges, and universities. This project is providing an opportunity
              for faculty development through workshops and seminars offered at numerous
              locations in the Midwest. The faculty involved in these seminars benefit from
              the existing laboratories and facilities available in Purdue's School of
              Technology. Faculty and teachers are learning new technologies and pedagogical
              skills which benefit students in advanced technology fields from high school
              through graduate study. This provides an opportunity to better educate the
              future industrial work force and develop technology faculty members for the
              future.    In addition to the faculty development, the project is creating and
              adapting innovative curriculum and instructional materials to benefit advanced
              technological education.    Project partners with Purdue include Cincinnati
              State Technical Community College in Ohio, Macomb Community College in
              Michigan, Parkland and Triton Community Colleges in Illinois, St. Louis
              Community College in Missouri, and Vincennes University in Indiana as well as
              numerous secondary schools and industries.
