Title       : Renovation of Environmental Fluid Mechanics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1997      
File        : a9602651

Award Number: 9602651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Koseff koseff@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Z. Jacobson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Street  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen G. Monismith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Stanford University's Environmental Fluid Mechanics and Hydrology Program, in
              the Department of Civil Engineering, has long been recognized nationally and
              internationally in the general areas of hydraulics, hydrology, fluid mechanics,
              and water resources research.  Within this program, the Environmental Fluid
              Mechanics Laboratory (EFML) is the centerpiece for research activities in
              experimental and computational fluid mechanics.  Current research in the EFML
              includes: turbulence and mixing in natural water bodies; stratified flows in
              various bodies of water; natural and forced convection flows in energy systems;
              energy and mass transfer across the ocean-atmosphere interface; and transport
              and mixing of pollutants at regional and global scales in the atmosphere. 
              Presently the laboratory is housed in the south wing of Building 2-520, a
              facility that was constructed in 1912.  Existing laboratory space, antiquated
              with limited utility, impedes on research experimentation requiring clean
              conditions and/ or controlled environments.  Thus certain procedures cannot be
              performed in the present environment.  Funding from the ARI Program will 
              provide partial support for the renovation of the EFML into a modernized
              facility.  Renovations will entail the reconfiguration of existing research
              space; upgrading communications, electrical, and mechanical systems; and
              improving space for safety and ADA compliance. In addition to furnishing proper
              drainage and sewage facilities for laboratories, a clean room will be
              constructed to permit investigations in biological and geochemical fluid
              dynamics to be conducted.  The creation of a high-speed fiber-optic network for
              communications within the laboratory is critical for Stanford's NSF Grand
              Challenge project.  Not only will the renovated facility provide many research
              opportunities, but it will encourage greater diversity  and facilitate the
              growth of multidisciplinary efforts.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
