Title       : U.S-Egypt Cooperative Research: Effect of Longitudinal Vortices on Heat Transfer
               Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9602043

Award Number: 9602043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29231              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph T. Liu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              51        Engineering-Aeronautical                
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 5944,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This project supports collaboration by Dr. Joseph  Liu,
              Professor of Engineering at Brown University, and an Egyptian scientist: Dr.
              Reda Mankabadi, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Cairo University.  The
              research deals with the various facets of heat transfer under longitudinal
              vorticity systems.  This includes the effect of various manifestations of
              vorticity systems when faced with different leading edge structures or
              fine-grained turbulence in the boundary layer.  The effect of fluid injection
              as well as compressibility due to large temperature load effects will also be
              studied.  Applications are directed at flow and heat transfer configurations in
              independent experimental efforts elsewhere.  The methods used will include
              analyses and numerical computations including spectra and finite-difference
              schemes.  The proposed research should provide a better understanding of heat
              transfer enhancement, resulting from the appearance of streamwise vortices,
              that is essential in the heat (and material) transfer control and augmentation.
               It should provide improvement in design of new devices in applications such as
              heat transfer problems in turbomachinery and heat exchangers.  Scope:   This
              project brings together two scientists with long experiences and capabilities
              in research in the field of turbomachinery analysis.  The collaborative project
              seeks improvements in the design and manufacture of heat exchangers,
              particularly those used in power stations, and thus contribute to the loss
              reduction and energy savings in both countries.   The work will involve
              participation of graduate students and dissemination of research background and
              results to undergraduate students.  The project meets the objectives of the
              Division of International Programs.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
