Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Investigation and Optimization of an Observed
               Metal-Organosulfide Interaction in a Composite Cathode Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9602481

Award Number: 9602481
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Gaw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510304   Electron & Energy Sources               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9602481  Gaw    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the  Promotion
              of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Kevin Gaw at the Tokyo
              University of Agriculture and  Technology, Tokyo, Japan.  Dr. Gaw will work
              with Dr. Noboru  Oyama, professor of chemical engineering, on a research 
              project entitled, "Investigations and Optimization of an  Observed
              Metal-Organosulfide Interaction in a Composite  Cathode Material".    The
              proposed research will attempt to improve upon the  electrical characteristics
              of a lithium rechargeable battery  by incorporation of metal ions into a novel
              polymeric  cathode material.  More specifically, it will investigate  the
              properties of a novel rechargeable lithium battery to  improve its charging and
              discharging characteristics. The  research will try to alter the PAn/DMcT
              cathode material of  lithium batteries through the incorporation of metals that
               catalyze or assist the reactions that allow for rapid and  repeated discharge.
               Using a (PAn/DMcT) cathode supplemented  with metallic ions, the researchers
              hope to improve upon the  safety of the cathode, increase the desired
              characteristics  of the rechargeable lithium battery, and facilitate the 
              intermolecular reactions that occur during use.  The  reactions that occur will
              be fully characterized and the  results used to improve upon lithium batteries
              that are  currently commercially available.  ***
