Title       : Renovation of Research Facilities in Geology/Biology, Brooklyn College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1996   
File        : a9602595

Award Number: 9602595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188885             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Chamberlain johnc@brooklyn.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen U. Aja  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Brooklyn College of The City University of New York is the recipient of ARI
              funds for the renovation of the science building, Ingersoll Hall.  Constructed
              59 years ago and never renovated,  the structure is home to the Departments of
              Biology and Geology.  This  project is the second phase of the College's
              renovation effort to improve research facilities focusing on environmental
              science. Specifically research laboratories in the Geology Department, devoted
              to the study of clay minerals and of benthic invertebrate ecology and
              paleoecology will be renovated to help link the functioning of the Aquatics
              Institute and Environmental Sciences laboratory.  The bridge will  provide a
              basis for mounting a unified research position within both departments with
              respect to important  local and national environmental issues.  This linkage
              will also improve the departments' research position in the more traditional
              areas of paleobiology and clay mineralogy.   Renovations include modernizing
              three laboratories by upgrading electrical and plumbing services,  installing
              new fume hoods, and replacing lab benches with new ones.  An old preparation
              room will be converted into a clean room, and the rock and sediment processing
              lab will be upgraded.  Once completed,  the renovated space will contain
              aquarium facilities for investigating Hudson River benthic ecology; areas for
              cleaning, preparation, study, and storage of invertebrate specimens and
              sediments; and a satellite room housing computer and analytic tools. This
              project accomplishes several goals: 1) provides an infrastructure for novel
              research interconnections between geologists and biologists; 2) improves
              effectiveness and efficiency of research; 3) provides facilities needed to
              support studies on Hudson River benthic environments: and 4) consolidates the
              ability to support meaningful graduate student research and research training. 
              Located in an urban setting, the institution serves a large population of
              minority students. Providing first class research  facilities for such students
              constitutes an effective means of attracting the best of these students,
              promoting higher quality, and ensuring their competitiveness in the evolving
              marketplace in the earth and environmental sciences.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
